Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would like to
start by apologizing for my absence at the beginning
of this open debate, since I left the Chamber to go to a
remembrance service for the 100th anniversary of the
end of the First World War. It is very good - and I
thank China - that we are having this debate today
so close to that anniversary, which started the march
towards multilateralism in earnest even though some
foundations had been laid in the previous century.
Of course, the end of the Second World War saw
the establishment of the United Nations and the
Organization as the apex of a system that has, on the
whole, kept us all safe and prosperous since 1945.

At the outset, I would also like to say how
grateful we are to the United States for giving the
United Nations its home here in New York and for its
contribution, without which many of the gains of the
preceding almost 70 years could not be made. I would
like to speak on three themes today: the collective
challenges; the special role of the Security Council;
and what, in our view, we now need to do to strengthen
multilateralism. Public debate on foreign policy issues
in my own country nearly always features a reference to
the need for a solution to be pursued through the United
Nations, no matter where on the political spectrum the
comment is made from. Post-Brexit, members will find
the United Kingdom an even more active participant in
the affairs of the United Nations, and in global affairs
more generally.

Seventy years ago, no one could accuse the founding
fathers of the United Nations of a lack of ambition. But
since its foundation, the United Nations has faced an
almost unbridgeable gap between its ambition and our

ability to help it deliver. Important gains have been
made. Kofi Annan spoke of pushing heavy rocks to the
top ofthe hill, even though some have eluded our grasp,
and that we need to keep going. What I want to stress
is that, regardless of a country's economic or security
model, all the evidence shows that countries thrive best
if they have open societies and pursue open trade, open
speech, open association and open information. A rules-
based international system that preserves stability is in
the interests of the vast majority of the States Members
of the Organization.

But as many have pointed out today, we face the
proliferation of threats from many quarters. We have
heard a lot of references to those today: some of them
have been the cause of great dispute in the Council,
but they are all relevant to the entire membership,
whether a Member State is a member on the Council, an
elected member of the Council or standing for election
themselves. No nation can protect its people without
engaging positively in the crises that affect the world.
I cannot see a single major threat that can be solved by
one nation alone. Whether it be migration, cybercrime,
modern-day slavery, terrorist threats, disease or
climate change, all those threats challenge security and
prosperity at home and challenge collective security on
the world stage. They can be resolved only by collective
action.

But effective collective action cannot mean only
action by consensus. Threats to international peace
and security, by their nature, often involve a challenge
to international law and norms. It logically cannot be
the case that action to uphold international peace and
security must always be by consensus: that will not
be sufficient. You, Mr. President, spoke of the need
for the Security Council to act with unity, wisdom
and courage. Our collective wisdom tells us that
inaction in the face of gross abuses of human rights
and violations of international law, acts of genocide and
acts of using prohibited weapons leads to disastrous
outcomes. Hence, we fail to uphold international peace
and security. Because we lack the courage to act on the
wisdom we display, we end up being disunited.

From Rwanda and Srebrenica to current conflicts
in Myanmar and Syria, we are failing the cause of
multilateralism by failing to act in line with the Charter
of the United Nations. The Security Council was
invested with powers under Chapter VII of the Charter
in order to fulfil its duties to maintain international
peace and security. But if we are blocked by one or
two members from using those powers, that is not a
legitimate expression of the Charter but an abuse of the
power of the veto.

We completely share the views of those Security
Council members who spoke about the importance of
Chapter VI and Chapter VIII of the Charter, relating to
the Security Council. To that I would also add Article
99, which we believe is underused: the ability of the
Secretary-General to draw matters to the Security
Council's attention. But I want to stress that, under
Chapter VI, the Security Council may investigate any
dispute or any situation that may give rise to a dispute,
and may determine whether or not it constitutes
international friction and endangers the maintenance
of international peace and security. The Charter does
not require the Security Council to already agree that
such a threat exists. It is our view that some countries
try to stop and stifle Security Council discussion of
such situations under Chapter VI - for example, when
a Government is attacking its own people or abusing
its neighbours. The more that Chapter VI is stifled, the
more likely it is that dramatic action will eventually be
needed under Chapter VII. That is an irony that I think
the Security Council would do well to reflect on.

A rules-based international system must of course
adapt to thrive. It must also adapt if it wants to survive.
A number of speakers today have called attention to the
importance of supporting reform. I would like to add
the United Kingdom's voice to that as well. I would say
that includes Security Council reform. But I think we
must also redouble our efforts to defend the rules-based
international order. We need multilateral organizations
that are fit for purpose, and we need to reform outdated
and bureaucratic structures. That is the best way to make
sure that the institutions they serve do not collapse. We
need reform of the World Trade Organization, so that
we succeed in warding off the dangerous temptations
of protectionism. And we need World Bank reform so
that its governance reflects the changing balance of the
global economy. We need to strengthen the invisible
chain that links democracies. We must also ensure, at
the same time, that we are better at acting in concert
when we face real and present threats.

We would therefore attach the highest importance to
a renewed and stronger commitment from all members
of the Council, as well as all members of the General
Assembly, to responsibility and partnership among
both State and non-State actors, civil society and the
private sector. It is all about what we can do together as
we move towards the seventy-fifth anniversary of the
United Nations in 2020. The Sustainable Development
Goals are the most supreme manifestation of that
objective. And it is all the more important as we grapple
with new and disruptive technologies, such artificial
intelligence or cybertechnology, which will change the
way Governments interact with each other and with
their own citizens.

While the United Kingdom strongly agrees with
the premise of this debate, we know that we must be
vigilant against the tendency of this subject to become
an exercise in mutual adoration. In conflicts, atrocities
are committed and international laws are breached. An
increase in the use of multilateralism should never be
coded language for negotiating agreements with those
who have violated the rules of our international system.

