Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): Allow me to add
the United Kingdom's voice to those of colleagues
welcoming Mr. Schwarz-Schilling today and thanking
him for everything he has done in Bosnia. The United
Kingdom has long been a supporter of Bosnia and is
very proud to count itself as a friend of that country. It
is especially gratifying to welcome Prime Minister
Terzie to the Council, and to hear his account of what
has been achieved in Bosnia under his stewardship.

I think there is much to be proud of in Bosnia in
the years since Dayton. The Office of the High
Representative, the Bosnian authorities and the
international community provided the common identity
of purpose since Dayton that has brought about
success. There is a lot to be proud of there. I think it is
all the more disappointing, therefore, that we still see
in some of Bosnia's leaders - in particular in
Republika Srpska - a harking back to the days of
division and discord. Their efforts to align themselves
with certain leaders in Belgrade to spoil the prospects
for Bosnia's future in Europe is extremely
disappointing. We appeal to all those leaders to refrain
from such actions and to take their responsibilities to
build not just a stable and prosperous Bosnia but also
to do everything possible to put Bosnia on an
irreversible course towards Euro-Atlantic institutions.
That is not to say that we must not recognize that
everybody has a responsibility to build one nation in
Bosnia based on the equality of all its people and on
reconciliation with justice.

We thank the High Representative for his report.
We agree with him that local ownership must remain
the overall objective of the international community.
But we also believe that it is important to strike a
balance. It is right that the international community
should encourage Bosnian politicians to take
responsibility. But in doing so we have to ensure that
the key reform processes do not stagnate and that those
leaders and sections of each community that want to
spoil Bosnia's prospects have no opportunity to do so.
Continued international support and engagement will
be especially important as we try to develop
momentum behind the reform processes.

Geoff Hoon, the British Minister for Europe,
visited Sarajevo yesterday. He said what many
members of the Council have said today, that progress
on the reform agenda this year has been disappointing.
We were very pleased, under the United Kingdom
presidency, to open stabilization and association
negotiations with the European Union. It is
disappointing that the political priorities have not been
satisfied. The lack of progress on police reform
remains a matter of particular concern for us, as it did
for many members around this table. More also has to
be done to demonstrate full cooperation with the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia. A number of speakers drew attention to
that very eloquently, and I would like to support what
they have said. The stance of Republika Srpska is
going to be absolutely critical in both contexts.

We also heard from many speakers today about
constitutional reform. It is not a condition for the
stabilization and association agreement, but it is
extremely important. The April package may not
satisfy everyone, but it does provide an important first
step in a more gradual process. As Mr. Schwarz-
Schilling said, Dayton stopped a war; it has a
constitution that brought an end to that conflict. But it
is time for that to evolve and enable Bosnia to join
other countries in the Balkans in getting closer to the
European Union and to NATO. We therefore hope that
as the political parties now work to build governing
coalitions, they pay due attention to those priorities.

A number of speakers drew attention to the
preparations for the closure of the Office of the High
Representative. We too see that as the only way to
overcome the culture of political dependence that has
developed in Bosnia. On that basis, it remains our
preference that the closure go ahead next June, pending
final review and confirmation by the Peace
Implementation Council in February 2007.

We also welcome the High Representative's
efforts towards finding a solution regarding the issue of
decertification. We look forward to seeing the matter
resolved, but it is important that a review does not cut
across the provisions of the presidential statement of
June 2004.

A number of speakers mentioned the European
Union-led peacekeeping force (EUFOR). Many nations
around this table today are kind enough to provide
contingents to EUFOR, which has done an extremely
good job in handling dramatic improvements in the
situation in Bosnia on the security side. We have also
seen very welcome evidence from the Bosnian
authorities of their ability to handle public disorder. We
therefore support the EU operational commander's
conclusion that the time has come to reconsider the
size of EUFOR and the nature of its presence. That is
an important part of the gradual process towards
normalization.

I would like to conclude, if I may, by just picking
up on the point of Kosovo, which a number of speakers
have raised. We have noted that some in Bosnia are
attempting to make a link between the future of
Republika Srpska and the future of Kosovo. We would
like to take this opportunity to state very clearly that
Republika Srpska is part of the Dayton settlement and
part of Bosnia. That settlement and that constitutional
framework have to remain. There is no link between
the future of Republika Srpska and the future of
Kosovo. We are confident that the Council will take
every opportunity to repudiate those who try to exploit
one.

