Mr. Ladsous (Spoke in French): At the outset,
I should like to express our great gratitude to you,
Madam President, for having taken the initiative to
convene this first Security-Council debate devoted to
all issues associated with United Nations policing. I
also thank you for your initiative on draft resolution
S/2014/828 - a first, I believe, in United Nations
history - which is quite in line with all the efforts
we at the Secretariat have deployed, especially in the
recent period, to better integrate the development of
United Nations police within what we call the strategic
guidance framework. I think all of this will contribute
trememdously to strengthening both the doctrine and
the way we try to resolve the problems that come before
us.

As you have said, Madam, President, it is true that
there has been unprecedented growth in United Nations
policing in recent years - from a few thousand police
at the begiing of the 2000s to exactly 12,352 deployed
police today, from 91 Member States, throughout
13 peacekeeping operations and 4 special political
missions. That exponential growth illustrates the
challenges we face in the contemporary period. Changes
in the nature of the security situation, including changes
in the type of needs, along with an increasing number
of threats that include traditional problems related to
basic security as well as the fight against terrorism,
transnational organized crime and corruption - all of
this is part of the current reality experienced by our
police. I wish to pay tribute to United Nations police for
the courage and creativity they display in those often
difficult circumstances.

I always say that United Nations police are often
the daily face, as it were, of a mission, whether
peacekeeping or political. It is therefore very imporant
that this first impression be convincing and make an
impact. But allow me also to refer to a saying in the
language I know best. It is often said in my country
that fear of the policeman is the beginning of wisdom. I
think that is quite true, and it illustrates the major role
our police must play in all of our tasks - beginning
overall with stabilization.

However, those tasks are spread out across three
areas. The first is to provide assistance to host countries
in the areas of the rule of law via police services. In
some cases, such as in the weakest countries and those
with the least infrastructure, it is a matter of temporarily
carrying out police duties, including law enforcement.
And finally, their role is to support efforts at reform,
restructuring and, sometimes, simply creating a
national or other police service to be responsible for
enforcing the law.

Ultimately, all of that calls for increasingly
sophisticated capacity. Above and beyond the
traditional distinction between individual police and
formed police units, we are daily seeing a growing
need for specialized police, including in scientific and
technological terms - and by that I am referring to
twenty-first century technology, not that of 100 years
ago or longer. Once again, this touches on ensuring
domestic laws and combating organized crime. And all
of that requires growing sophistication.

Member States are providing us significant support
in all those areas. From here at the Council, I should
like to appeal for additional language capabilities.
We are operating in places that necessarily require, at
least for basic training, a mastery of the most prevalent
language in the country. Specifically, I have in mind
the Arabic language and French.

However, we also always have a need for more
women. That is because we have set ourselves the
goal i one that may perhaps be too ambitions - of
reaching the target of 20 per cent women police for this
year. I humbly admit that we are far from meeting that
goal, but I would add that this also reflects the situation
as it exists in national police services. Although some
may be quite ahead when it comes to gender issues,
others are not quite that advanced. And clearly, we
reflect what the Member States provide us.

However, we are increasingly deploying all-
women police units. And that is because, as we must
acknowledge, law-and-order problems often include
a level of danger and impact that is more pronounced
on women. Our experience with such units - in the
Congo, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in
Haiti and in Liberia - leads us to be convinced of that
fact.

I should like once again to thank you for this
initiative, Madam President, which I think all ofus will
find very useful. I also want to say that we will continue
to work with United Nations police chiefs to constantly
adjust to the needs, in terms of quantity and quality
alike, given the contribution of United Nations police

to our shared values of peace, security and respect for
human rigths.

