Mr. Al-Jarman (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in Arabic): The United Arab Emirates expresses its deep
satisfaction with the recent decrease in acts of piracy as
a result of the coordinated efforts of the international
community to combat the phenomenon. Combating
piracy and fighting impunity are indeed important, and
we appreciate the leading role that the Security Council
is playing, especially by encouraging efforts to close
security gaps in the maritime areas most affectedthrough
naval counter-piracy operations, legal procedures to
detain and try pirates and multilateral cooperation, in
particular among concerned Governments.

The phenomenon of piracy has a great negative
impact on national economies and on the shipping and
insurance industries. It also impedes the delivery of
humanitarian assistance, thereby exacerbating human
suffering. Those impacts necessitate coordination
and the engagement of the Security Council to face
the phenomenon. We must not only enhance military,
judicial and legal procedures but also make fundamental
changes in the security and stability conditions on land.
Moreover, we need to address the root causes of piracy,
such as civil conflicts and humanitarian crises in the
coastal countries, which make for vulnerable security
situations that encourage acts of piracy.

As with the successes in international efforts in
Somalia, we must help affected countries manage
their internal crises, demarcate their maritime borders,
defend their exclusive economic zones, re-energize their
national economies and build their national capacities.

The United Arab Emirates has taken all necessary
legislative steps to reject and criminalize acts of
piracy, smuggling, kidnapping and money-laundering.
Organized crime has also been eager to increase its
operations in the region. Our national efforts to combat
piracy and armed robbery at sea include the adoption
of a comprehensive national strategy that focuses
on several important factors, such as participation in
military operations to combat piracy and international
commitment to track, detain and try pirates and to
suppress their financiers and cut off their resources, in
accordance with international law.

The United Arab Emirates has been active in
regional and international arrangements to strengthen
the international response. It chaired the eleventh
session of the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast
of Somalia and participated actively in the London
Conference on Piracy and Somalia and the counter-
piracy conference in Perth, Australia, along with several
other activities to strengthen international efforts to
combat piracy. We organized the first and second high-
level conferences in Dubai on a regional response to
piracy in order to coordinate the regional response with
international efforts to combat piracy and to strengthen
public-private partnerships. That initiative has raised
$2 million for the Trust Fund to Support Initiatives
of States Countering Piracy off the Coast of Somalia.
There are also initiatives to improve judicial systems to
try pirates detained in various countries, especially in
Somalia, Kenya and Seychelles.

The United Arab Emirates has also increased
its direct financial, development and humanitarian
assistance to several countries where piracy is
flourishing, notably Somalia, so as to enable them to
achieve economic recovery. We provide financing for
projects to contain unemployment and to provide decent
work for young people so as to dissuade them from
engaging in piracy. Following the end of the transitional
period in Somalia in August, those initiatives included
assisting the Government by providing ships, stations
and other necessary equipment, as well as funds so that
their national forces, especially the coast guard, could
develop their capacities to fight piracy off their coast.

In conclusion, while we think that piracy constitutes
a great threat to regional and international peace
and security, we also look forward to strengthening
partnerships in international efforts to totally eradicate
it. We hope that our deliberations today will advance
the vital role that the Security Council plays in
strengthening the comprehensive international strategy
to combat piracy.
