Mr. Skinner-Klee (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I wish at the outset to thank the delegation of
the Slovak Republic for organizing this open debate,
which enables those States that are non-members of the
Council to express our Views on this important issue. I
also wish to thank you, Mr. President, for the lucid
concept paper (S/2007/72, annex) circulated to
delegations.

First, the delegation of Guatemala wishes to
associate itself with the statement made by the
representative of Cuba on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

Guatemala supports the idea of involving the
United Nations system in formulating a concept of
security sector reform. We are mindful that no
agreement has yet been reached on a single or
systematic approach to this issue. However, in
discussing the concept, we should seek a consensus
regarding the elements that constitute it, determine the
contexts in which it should be implemented and
identify the actors that should participate in its
development.

We recall that the issue of security is only one
part of the processes of peacekeeping and
peacebuilding in a conflict. In helping States to
overcome the consequences and examine the
underlying causes of conflict, we should be aware that
there is an entire series of related issues, ranging from
support for the administration of justice, the
strengthening of institutions within the rule of law, and
the protection of the human rights and fundamental
freedoms of all citizens to national reconciliation and
rebuilding the social fabric and productive networks
that make a nation's economic life viable as it emerges
from conflict.

We note that human security is inherent to that
process. In accordance with paragraph 143 of the 2005
World Summit Outcome Document (resolution 60/1),
the Member States have committed themselves "to
discussing and defining the notion of human security".
We should not set that commitment aside; on the
contrary, we must take it into account in this context.
Indeed, we believe that both concepts are closely
linked, and we are therefore pleased to note in the
reference document (S/2007/72) that the principal
objective of security sector reform is precisely to
promote human security.

My delegation feels that the security sector
cannot replace effective national leadership. It should
be human-centred, broad, inclusive, long-term and
implemented case by case. The issue is very sensitive
from the perspective of national sovereignty and local
traditions. If the necessary foundation for political
agreement at the national and international levels does
not exist, any United Nations participation will face
severe obstacles to achieving success and ensuring
security.

At the same time, we must ensure the greatest
possible integration of capacities within the United
Nations system. Responsibilities and clear
competencies must be assigned with respect to various
activities and effective coordination established to
harmonize the efforts of the Organization with bilateral
and other efforts, even with regard to the mobilization
of resources.

Furthermore, as with many aspects of
peacebuilding, international security sector efforts are
often not coordinated or are isolated and dispersed. For
one thing, bilateral donors at the United Nations and
other participants follow their own objectives and do
not agree on a common framework or approach. Given
the competition for access to donor funds, those
interested often do not announce their projects, leading
to uneven distribution or an unnecessary duplication of
assistance.

In that context, we note the important practical
advice set out in the reference document with regard to
the need to establish recommended best practices based
on experience acquired in the various activities
undertaken to date by different United Nations
operations. We need to recognize that poverty,
underdevelopment, the lack of opportunities and
marginalization pose the greatest threat and challenge
to security sector reform. Moreover, we believe that the
component of prevention must be included to ensure a

comprehensive and integrated approach to preventing
violence and criminality, thereby making coercion less
necessary.

We also need to stress that efforts in the security
sector have generally been pushed by peace
agreements, which address such issues in the context of
the end of a conflict. The Guatemalan peace accords
are a clear example of that, containing as they do many
of the necessary tools for the complete reform of the
sector, appropriately named "democratic security".

With regard to the role played by the Security
Council through its mandates to its missions in the
establishment of parameters for security sector reform,
we recall that this is not the only body competent to
discuss the issue. We believe that any strategy
developed by the United Nations must be multifaceted.
However, when United Nations peacekeeping
operations are deployed, it is important that security
aspects be appropriately integrated into a mission's
mandate and realities on the ground. One example of
excellent work done by the United Nations is its
security support through the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti, in particular its
provision of concrete support for reform of the Haitian
national police.

We believe it necessary to stress that any security
sector reform must include the gender perspective.
Guatemala supports the full implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) on women, peace and security
because of its three elements stressing the protection of
human rights, the participation of women in
peacekeeping operations, and the role of women in
conflict prevention, mediation and peacebuilding.

With regard to the role of the Peacebuilding
Commission in security sector reform, we believe that
it can help national Governments to identify their
needs and priorities in that field from a broad
perspective, coordinating assistance from the
international community.

My delegation has followed today's debate
closely, and we hope to continue to consider these
ideas in the framework of the General Assembly, the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and
the Peacebuilding Commission, in addition to the
results of the work of the United Nations inter-agency
working group on security sector reform.
