Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): Let me begin by thanking
you, Madam President, for convening this open debate.
I would also like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his comprehensive briefing this morning.

Indonesia associates itself with the statements
delivered by the representatives of Iran and Saudi
Arabia on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation,
respectively.

I would like to focus my statement on the question
of Palestine. The last time that the Security Council
convened an open debate on the situation in Middle East,
including the Palestinian question, was in mid-July,
at the height of the Israeli aggression against Gaza
(see S/PV.7222). Now that the aggression is over, the
international community is preoccupied with the issue
of the reconstruction of Gaza. To that end, Indonesia
expresses its support for last week's International
Conference on Palestine "Reconstructing Gaza", which
was convened at the initiative of Egypt, Norway and
Palestine. We also commend the generosity of countries
that have pledged their assistance to Palestine.

Nonetheless, we must be clear. The success of the
Conference, in our view, should not blind us to the root
of the problem, which is none other than the continued
Israeli occupation. The international community's view
has been very clear and consistent on this particular
matter - the status quo ante is unacceptable. The
occupation must end, and it must end immediately.
Unless we focus on bringing the occupation to an end,
the situation in the occupied Palestinian territory is
destined to remain volatile, and violence will erupt
with the least provocation.

Against that backdrop, Indonesia again voices its
call on Israel to heed the demands of the international
community to resume peace negotiations and allow
the establishment of an independent State of Palestine,
with East Jerusalem as its capital. We also take
this opportunity to remind the Security Council of
its responsibilities under the Charter of the United
Nations. By allowing Israel to continue with the
occupation, the Council not only fails to uphold those
responsibilities, but it also calls into question the
very principles of justice and humanity that are the
foundations of the United Nations. It is therefore high
time that the Security Council fulfil the demands of the
Government of Palestine to set a deadline for Israel to
end its occupation.

It is also very disturbing to see Israel's persistent
policies aimed at frustrating the peace process. The
blockade on Gaza remains in place, and in the West
Bank the construction of illegal settlements continues.
Earlier this month, the Israeli Government announced
its intention to construct more than 2,600 housing units
in East Jerusalem. To add to our dismay, Israel has also
been continuing its practices of desecrating religious
sites. Again last week, several Israeli politicians,
protected by soldiers, entered the Al-Aqsa Mosque. We
also take note of the recent incidents in which Israeli
soldiers stormed the Al-Aqsa Mosque and evicted
worshippers. Those deplorable developments clearly
underline the proposal that Palestine be put under a
United Nations protection mechanism. It is also one
more reason for the international community to support
the work of the Human Rights Council commission
of inquiry. It is our hope that the commission will
contribute to the efforts to end Israel's culture of
impunity.

I will conclude by reiterating Indonesia's steadfast
support for the Government and the people of
Palestine in their pursuit to strengthen unity among all
factions. We believe strongly that Palestinian national
reconciliation is an encouraging factor in the quest for
lasting peace, and not an obstructing one. In that regard,
I underline Indonesia's suggestion that this courageous
move of Palestine receive the sustained support of
the international community, including through the
recognition of the State of Palestine. The struggle of
Palestine is the just and legitimate struggle of a people
under foreign occupation. That is a fact that should not
be ignored by members of the international community.

