Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): The
Kingdom of the Netherlands would like to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Zewde
and African Union Commissioner Chergui for their
briefings. I would also like to join African colleagues
in congratulating Ms. Zewde on her recent appointment
as Head of the United Nations Office to the African
Union. I wish her every success in her new endeavours.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands attaches great
value to closer collaboration between the African
Union (AU) and the United Nations. We are a staunch
supporter of the intentions enshrined in resolution
2320 (2016). A strong partnership enables both the
United Nations and the AU to respond more swiftly
and decisively to threats of international peace and
security. As we look for ways to further strengthen the
partnership between the United Nations and the AU, we
would like to highlight the following three important
aspects: practical cooperation, complementarity and
financial support.

First, with regard to practical cooperation between
the AU and the United Nations, the Kingdom of the
Netherlands welcomes the practical progress made,
in particular the increase in the number of joint
briefings by Special Representatives and Envoys. It
also welcomes the enhanced collaboration between the
United Nations Secretariat and the AU Commission,
as well as the joint field visits by senior officials. We
welcome in particular the joint Visit of Commissioner
Chergui and Under-Secretary-General Lacroix in April
to Darfur and the Central African Republic.

In addition, we encourage more joint AU-
United Nations analysis, early warning, planning
and decision-making and increased issuance of joint
statements. To that end, we would welcome closer
alignment between the agendas of the Security Council
and the AU Peace and Security Council, especially
when addressing African issues. In that same vein, we
believe that joint meetings between the Peacebuilding
Commission and the AU Peace and Security Council,
such as the one taking place today, are important.
Lastly, we strongly support the intention, as expressed
by members of the two Councils, to conduct joint field
missions so as to facilitate the formulation of common
positions and recommendations.

Secondly, concerning complementarity between
the two organizations, we should do all in our power
to ensure that United Nations and AU approaches to
peacekeeping and conflict resolution are mutually
reinforcing. The AU's ability to act as first responder and
move in much more quickly than the United Nations is
widely recognized and should be facilitated. Similarly,
political processes being positively fuelled or facilitated
by the AU or regional economic organizations deserve
the Council's full support.

On the other hand, the report of the Secretary-
General on strengthening the partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union on issues of
peace and security in Africa, including on the work
of the United Nations Office to the African Union
(S/2018/678), rightly observes that regional interests
and proximity can also complicate matters. Cooperation
between the United Nations and the AU must rest on
comparative advantage and complementarity. An
organization's willingness to act should be decisive in
that regard.

Thirdly, I would like to address the importance of
increased financial support for AU peacekeeping. The
role of the AU in peace operations in Africa is essential.
However, the AU cannot do it alone. We must step up
our efforts. Resolution 2320 (2016) clearly indicates
the need for increased support for AU peacekeeping,
which includes discussions on a different mode of
financing between the United Nations and the AU. We
must translate words into action. As highlighted in the
Secretary-General's report, the AU has made important
steps forward, including through the African Peace
Fund. Such steps must be recognized. Sustainable,
predictable and flexible financing would enhance
the effectiveness of AU peacekeeping, as would its
required compliance to the relevant agreed standards
on human rights and strategic and financial oversight
and accountability. We support the Secretary-General's
intention to explore financing options in greater
technical detail with the General Assembly.

In conclusion, today's complex security challenges
require an efficient relationship between the United
Nations and regional organizations, in particular the
African Union. A good example is the Secretary-
General's Action for Peacekeeping initiative. Regional
organizations will play a central role in tackling the
existing challenges to peacekeeping. I would like to
underscore that the AU will find a constructive partner
in us on efforts that take the strategic partnership with
the United Nations forward.

