Mr. Tanin: At the outset, I would like to
congratulate all the new Member States that have joined
the Security Council in 2018. In particular, I would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, and Kuwait on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
this month. Today I will update the Council on new
developments, some of which are well documented in
the Secretary-General's report (S/2018/76) before the
Council, while focusing on key facts that have dominated
the reporting period and the days that followed.

The new enlargement strategy of the European
Union (EU) for the Western Balkans was launched
yesterday. It is the most ambitious and far-reaching
framework for engagement since the Thessaloniki
Summit of 2003. The new strategy paves the way for
enlargement linked to political and socioeconomic
reform, as well as reconciliation and a lasting resolution
of the disputes. There was mixed reaction in Kosovo
but most Pristina leaders emphasized the importance
of the new strategy for the realization of Kosovo's EU
perspective. Within the new framework, it is clear that
dialogue and the normalization of relations between
Belgrade and Pristina is a prerequisite for Kosovo's
EU aspirations.

While there have been a number of formal and
informal high-level contacts of leaders from Pristina
and Belgrade, for more than a year, the dialogue has
produced little substantive progress at the technical
level. A number ofstanding agreements are yet to be fully
implemented. Among those, the establishment of the
association/community of Serb-majority municipalities
is essential. The year 2018 can provide new momentum
for that dialogue. As the EU High Representative for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy herself highlighted
yesterday, the dialogue could be positively concluded
with the sufficient will of the leaders and the adequate
encouragement of the international community.

The recent attempt to abrogate the law on the
Specialist Chambers by a number of members of the
ruling coalition in the Kosovo Assembly drew attention
and raised grave concerns among all stakeholders about
Kosovo's commitment to justice and the impartial
application of the rule of law. The establishment of
the Kosovo Specialist Chambers and the Specialist
Prosecutor's Office, endorsed by the Assembly in
2015, was a major achievement for Kosovo. Yet, in
contradiction to that advancement, on the evening
of 22 December 2017, some Kosovo members of
Parliament launched an effort to revoke a key law
supporting the work of the Specialist Chambers. Nearly
all regional and international partners of Kosovo made
it clear that such a move, if successful, would be deeply
damaging to Kosovo's aspirations and reputation.
Some political leaders withdrew their support for that
proposal. However, for now, the motion to repeal the law
remains on the Assembly's agenda. The President ofthe
Assembly of Kosovo assured me that leaders in Pristina
would stand by their international commitments. I
take this opportunity to reiterate that the court does
not target any particular community or group but only
the criminal responsibility of individuals. That is well
known by many people in Kosovo who understand that
repealing the Specialist Chambers is simply not an
option. The only way forward is by accepting justice.

The murder, on 16 January, of Oliver Ivanovie, the
prominent Kosovo Serb politician, in broad daylight
sent shockwaves throughout Kosovo and across the
region, raising concerns about the prospect of another
wave of political instability. Hours after it took place,
I condemned the murder, calling for calm and for swift
and decisive work by the investigating authorities. All
representatives of the international community were
united in that view. Moreover, I have urged all parties
to work together to ensure that the perpetrators of that
brutal act are brought to justice.

It is important to note that the leaders in Belgrade
and Pristina have reacted to the event in a prompt
and responsible manner. Since the Kosovo Police are
leading the investigation, Pristina and Belgrade have
come to an understanding on sharing information and
supporting the process. Serbian President Aleksandar
Vucic' visited Kosovo shortly after the crime and told
the Kosovo Serb communities in the north and the south
of Kosovo that peace was of paramount importance. I
would also like to underline the constructive role of the
Pristina officials in facilitating that visit.

In my meetings with leaders in Pristina, they
made it clear to me that they are doing whatever is
necessary to find the perpetrators of that crime and
the motives for the killing. Belgrade is cooperating
with the investigation but concerns remain, including
about the efficiency of information exchange. Failure
to identify the perpetrators would not only be a terrible
miscarriage of justice but also undermine confidence
on all sides.

In 2017, Kosovo underwent parliamentary and
municipal elections and the formation of a new
Government. The people of Kosovo have high
expectations of their Government andthe Assembly given
their needs and the promises made to them. The harsh
realities of everyday life in Kosovo - unemployment,
challenges to good governance and economic and social
development, as well as corruption and organized
crime - all require political actors to come together,
transcend their differences and achieve unity of purpose
for the good of the people. They will be assisted in
that by ensuring a positive and productive relationship

with the international community and all institutional
presences on the ground.

A welcome example has been the unified efforts
of political parties to adopt the goals of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. I commend the
Government's commitment to strive to end poverty,
improve education, prioritize gender equality, protect
the environment, promote a just and peaceful society
and ensure prosperity for all. Those commitments
are fundamental to overcoming the challenges
facing Kosovo.

The international community continues to assist the
Kosovo institutions in promotingjustice, the rule oflaw
and human rights. The Government of Kosovo adopted
four draft laws on the functioning of the judicial system
aimed at increasing its efficiency and transparency.
I would like to mention that judicial integration is
moving forward, with officials at the Basic Court and
Basic Prosecution Office of Mitrovica working as part
ofa unitary Kosovo justice system. The United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
is working hand in hand with the other international
presences in order to enable the full functioning of that
integrated system, following up on issues such as full
compliance with language rights.

At the same time, we take note of the decision of
the Government of Kosovo to recognize and verify the
status of victims of conflict-related sexual violence,
including the allocation of monthly pensions for
survivors. Additionally, I acknowledge the appointment
by the Prime Minister of Kosovo, Ramush Haradinaj,
of the Deputy Chair of the Kosovo Government
Commission on Missing Persons.

Despite those important steps, many challenges
remain on furthering the rule of law and strengthening
human rights in Kosovo. Efforts in those areas must be
guided by international best practices. Among a number
of setbacks to the rule of law, the use of presidential
pardons for three individuals convicted of murder
in the so-called Hajra family case was particularly
concerning. Human rights protections should not
be diminished by political considerations or ethnic
dimensions; such attempts would cast a dark shadow
over the promises ofa rules-based society.

UNMIK and its partners have assisted in
strengthening the role of women and youth, as well as
in helping consolidate their essential contribution to
peace, security and trust-building across communities.
The annual international campaign 16 Days of Activism
against Gender-based Violence took place throughout
Kosovo during the reporting period. The campaign
highlighted actions on international, governmental and
civil society levels that contributed to public awareness
of the drivers and consequences of violence against
women and girls. Women still face an uphill challenge in
electoral politics. Of 204 mayoral candidates across all
of Kosovo's municipalities, only eight were women. A
concerted effort is required to achieve a more balanced
representation and provide women with a more level-
playing field.

Similarly, the youth and peace and security
agenda remains important in Kosovo. The youth of
Kosovo, despite their understandable frustrations with
the status quo, provide hope for a better present and
future. UNMIK continues to engage young people from
across Kosovo through initiatives such as the United
Nations Youth Assembly in Kosovo. I am inspired by
the strength of character of the young leaders I have
met - leaders who have the courage to join hands
across societal divides and develop a common strategy
and vision for a successful, multi-ethnic society.

Building trust between communities remains
essential for the Mission. Sustainable peace cannot be
achieved without the engagement of all institutions and
the assistance of the international community to build
bridges for long-term trust. Our Mission has undertaken
a number of initiatives focused on supporting grassroots
trust-building and using the know-how of the United
Nations to help achieve that end. There are many
Kosovo leaders, at all levels across society, who are
committed to that agenda and actively supporting it.

This moment represents an opportunity for both
progress and moving the political dialogue forward.
I completed a series of consultations just before
this Council meeting with leaders and officials in
Pristina, Belgrade and Tirana. Despite the significant
differences voiced, I am convinced that those leaders
also have a broader understanding of the nature of the
challenges that need to be overcome and equally, not to
continuously postpone action to another day. I would
like to underline that despite all the disagreements,
the potential for trust and more forward-looking
decision-making should not be underestimated.

