Mr. Diallo (Guinea) (spoke in French): This
meeting on the situation in Central Africa, in
connection with the report of the multidisciplinary
assessment mission, is extremely timely. It
complements the views and observations we heard just
four days ago, on 20 November, on the situation in the
Great Lakes region, of which several countries of
Central Africa are part.

I should like to compliment the Secretary-General
on the high quality of his report before us and to thank
Mr. Kalomoh for introducing it. The report clearly
shows that the situation in Central Africa is made
extremely unstable by local, external and transborder
issues; the solution to which will require a regional
approach. Illicit arms and drug trafficking and the
proliferation of militias are just some of the elements
that rightly put peace and security at the very heart of
the concerns of the States of the region. According to
some estimates, seven of 11 countries are either in
conflict or in post-conflict situations.

To deal with security problems in general, Central
Africa now has the Protocol on the Council for Peace
and Security and the Mutual Assistance Pact, signed in
Malabo on 24 February 2000. We are pleased to see
that the countries of the region have increasingly
committed themselves in recent months to the peaceful
settlement of their disputes. I wish to note a few
examples of this.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Government of National Unity and Transition is
addressing the urgent tasks of recovery. The Central
African Republic is pursuing, albeit not without
problems, the crucial process of national reconciliation.
The recent agreement between the Government of
Burundi and the Forces pour la defense de la
democratie is part of that same dynamic of peace. Such
considerable progress follows on the success in
Angola, which suffered many years of conflict and
their incalculable consequences. Thus, the prospects
for political change in Central Africa are good. That is
why we believe it necessary, if these prospects are to
be realized, to maintain and strengthen the international
partnership with the region.

My delegation believes that the efforts of the
States of the region undoubtedly reflect their political
will to build a secure environment conducive to
development. A regional approach to recovery must be
further consolidated and supported by an international
mechanism for assistance. We believe that a common
multidisciplinary structure with sufficient resources
would best meet the needs of the region. We note with
interest the Secretary-General's intention to appoint a
special envoy for Central Africa to address political
issues and relations with the United Nations system
and to support with concrete measures the capacities of
the Economic Community of Central African States
and other existing mechanisms. We also welcome the
thorough review requested by the Secretary-General of
the programmes of the United Nations with a View to
enhancing their effectiveness and coherence.

In conclusion, we appeal to the States of the
region to maintain their efforts to eliminate threats to
peace and security by pursuing their courageous,
essential and often painful efforts to promote human
rights, combat impunity, reorganize their judiciary
systems and liberalize their economies, especially
along the borders.

