Mr. Briz Gutierrez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me at the outset, Sir, to welcome your
presence and to congratulate your country for having
begun its term of office as a non-permanent member of
the Security Council in the exercise of the presidency,
and for having taken, in this first month of the new
year, the initiative of convening an open meeting to
discuss the situation in Haiti. Guatemala wishes you
every success.

We would like also to express our appreciation to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Juan Gabriel Valdes, for his comprehensive
presentation on recent developments, and for the work
he has been doing as head of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).

Since the very beginning of the Haitian crisis, my
country has expressed its solidarity with the people and
the authorities of that country. Our Government has
also publicly expressed its sincere wish that all
political sectors in Haiti find a way of preserving
democracy and of creating a favourable environment
that will help ensure the sustainable development of
the country. We know that this objective can be
accomplished only if the international community
promotes a cooperative long-term effort that is not only
generous in nature and well coordinated but also goes
beyond merely putting an end to violence and
confrontation.

The security situation in the country, the
weakness of the judiciary and the ongoing problem of
impunity are but a few of the major obstacles that the
Haitian people face. That is why Guatemala deems it
important that the international community and
relevant regional organizations continue to support
Haiti in the promotion and protection of fundamental
rights, particularly of women and children, assisting in
the investigation of abuses and seeking to end impunity
through the reform and strengthening of institutions
charged with the administration of justice. As we know
from firsthand experience, that is not an easy task.

We also appeal to the Transitional Government to
take concrete measures to prevent such abuses through
the effective investigation of reported cases and the
prosecution of those responsible. We reiterate the need to
follow procedures that have proved to be fair and
effective and that are consistent with international norms
and the corresponding right of all to due process - in
particular the right to be heard by a competent,
independent and impartial court without discrimination of
any kind.

The delegation of Guatemala believes that
another fundamental problem is the extreme poverty
prevailing in the country as well as the high rate of
illiteracy and malnutrition that continue to deprive the
Haitian people of their basic economic, social and
cultural rights. That in turn aggravates the
consequences of the lack of observance of their basic
civil and political rights.

We are aware of the fact that this represents a
tremendous challenge to the Transitional Government.
We urge it, in collaboration with all sectors of society
and the support of the international community, to
design and implement the development plan that will
enable it to meet the fundamental economic and social
needs of every Haitian citizen.

It is also important to take into account at all
times the country's vulnerability to natural disasters, as
we saw with tropical storm Jeanne, which struck the
country a few months ago.

Accordingly, we believe that the Ad Hoc
Advisory Group on Haiti set up by the Economic and
Social Council and reactivated by a decision adopted
on 15 November 2004 is a mechanism that has
contributed to revitalizing the link between the
Economic and Social Council and the Security
Council. It has also provided a tangible framework
within which the United Nations and the Bretton
Woods institutions have deepened their cooperation in
support of Haiti.

In keeping with its policy of promoting
multilateral solutions to conflicts, the Government of
Guatemala has reaffirmed its commitment and its
willingness to participate in MINUSTAH, established
by the Council pursuant to resolution 1542 (2004). In
that framework, a contingent of Guatemalan military
police officers constitutes our current contribution to
MINUSTAH.

Guatemala reaffirms its support for the
Stabilization Mission, which is working tirelessly to
carry out its mandate to consolidate stability in the
country, support the constitutional and political
process, help the Transitional Government to hold
elections and assist Haitian institutions in ensuring
respect for human rights, among other tasks.

Thus, it is important to recognize that a military
presence alone cannot ensure the political stabilization
of Haiti. It is worrisome that prevailing conditions
make it difficult to bring about solid and lasting
national reconciliation. Coordination among the
regional organizations, agencies, programmes and non-
governmental organizations in support of the
Transitional Government's establishment of a secure
and stable environment is a crucial element for fully
taking the most efficient advantage of all the work
being carried out on the ground.

Guatemala stresses the importance of the
elections scheduled to take place in Haiti at the end of
2005. We believe that they will provide an opportunity
to create greater stability for the country's future.

Finally, in connection with that challenge and all
the other challenges that Haiti and its people face, my
delegation renews its appeal to the international
community to provide Haiti with the support and
assistance needed to overcome the difficulties of the
past and enable the country to advance towards a future
that will witness the full realization of the rule of law,
democracy and respect for human rights.

