Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mr. Mark Lowcock for his enlightening
briefing of the situation of the inhabitants of eastern
Ghouta. Mr. Lowcock has said it all - the torrent of
fire that is indiscriminately falling eastern Ghouta is
relentlessly pushing the limits of horror and human
suffering. There are no words to describe what is taking
place in eastern Ghouta as we speak.

The regime is not merely bombing its own
people. It is methodically targeting hospitals and vital
infrastructure for the population with the macabre aim
of ensuring that the injured who have not perished
during the shelling do not survive the wounds inflicted
upon them. We must insist that the attacks against
hospitals and health-care personnel constitute war
crimes, and the perpetrators must be held accountable.

The reports we have received from non-governmental
organizations and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights are unbearable.
Twenty eight attacks struck 20 hospitals in eastern
Ghouta since January. More than 700 individuals are in
need of urgent medical evacuation. Those evacuations
are systematically blocked by the Damascus regime,
which has been the case for months. More than 400,000
people, including 130,000 children, have been besieged
for months by the regime as part of a siege that is
reminiscent of the Middle Ages.

We should make no mistake: the Syrian regime
and its allies are brandishing the fight against jihadist
fighters, the need for which no one is disputing, as
justification of an offensive aimed at entirely different
goals. Its real intentions are indeed to annihilate any
and all opposition and break the morale of civilians
by indiscriminately massacring them. The offensive
against eastern Ghouta, which has seen an unbridled
acceleration in recent years - the worst of which is
undoubtedly yet to come - has added to both the
methods and consequences of the new Aleppo. Let us
recall that in that city the intensification of bombing
preceded a reconquest operation and unknown levels of
violence that never sought to shield civilians or rule out
the use of chemical weapons. We shall be particularly
vigilant on the latter.

Yesterday, through President Macron, France
emphatically condemned the indiscriminate shelling of
residential areas and civilian infrastructure. We called
for the immediate establishment ofa ceasefire to enable
medical evacuations and humanitarian access to the
people. The Secretary-General also spoke resolutely
along the same lines. As was recalled this morning by
the French Foreign Minister, Mr. Jean-Yves Le Drian,
any lack of action is an indication of guilt. We must act
swiftly, for the Council has the means at its disposal, if
the willingness is put forth.

Sweden and Kuwait, the commitment of which
France commends, have proposed a draft resolution
demanding an immediate cessation of hostilities to
enable humanitarians to evacuate the wounded and
gain access to the people. The draft resolution before
us does not seem to me to be a political judgement.
It conveys the humanitarian imperative that, as such,
must bring us together. Accordingly, we have noted
Russia's intention to propose changes to the draft
resolution. We will consider them, but it is crucial that
we quickly adopt the draft resolution so that a cessation
of hostilities takes place immediately, as addressing the
situation on the ground is of the utmost urgency.

A cessation of hostilities is not a concession. It is
the minimal form of response to the repeated requests
of the United Nations and humanitarian actors, which
have been communicated by members of the Council.
Subsequently, it is up to the regime's supporters to
ensure full respect and to respond to all calls for access to
humanitarian assistance and medical evacuations under
international humanitarian law. It is inconceivable to us
that a Council member could be opposed to that.

At the same time, we must - and France stands
ready to - redouble our efforts to establish a neutral
environment that will allow for a credible political
process and the holding of elections in Syria. Since the
beginning of the Syrian crisis, France has consistently
advocated for the priority of achieving a negotiated
solution to the military situation and of finding a
political solution that satisfies the aspirations of
the Syrian people, ensures lasting peace and stops
terrorism in its tracks. France will not deviate from
the road map adopted by the international community.
We have already said, and will say once again, that
only a political, inclusive solution, established under
the auspices of the United Nations through enabling
a political transition within the framework of the
Geneva process and resolution 2254 (2015), will end
the suffering of the Syrian people in a credible and
lasting manner.

I should like to conclude with both a warning and
an appeal. Not only has the situation in Syria reverted
to the tragic darkest hours of the crisis, but, if we fail
to react robustly and immediately - let us make no
mistake - the worst is yet to come. The worst is the
endless escalation of the humanitarian crisis that is
crushing the people, any semblance of humanity and
the very values underpinning the United Nations. A
widespread ground campaign directed against eastern
Ghouta might well be the next deadly stage. The worst
is also the expansion of the conflict. The combination
of circumstances before us today might lead to a
potentially major regional or even international
confrontation. That risk must be taken very seriously.

In the name of our shared values and interests, I
call on every member of the Council to join and act
together. We owe that to the civilians who are dying
by the hundreds in the hell in eastern Ghouta. We owe
it to the security of the region and of the world, which
we have the collective responsibility to protect. We owe
it to upholding the credibility of the United Nations,
which is our shared heritage. Let us beware that the
Syrian tragedy does not also become the grave of the
United Nations.

