Mr. Spatafora (Italy): As the first Council
member to speak at this meeting, let me address a very
warm welcome to the High Representative, Mr.
Schwarz-Schilling, and to the Chairman of the Council
of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Nikola
Spiric'. I wish to thank both of them for their
statements, which have provided us with a very clear
and lucid assessment of the latest developments in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and an indication of the
priorities - the right priorities - that the country
must address in the coming months and years.

Allow me to quote a few lines from Mr. Schwarz-
Schilling's statement that I believe say it all:

"Bosnia and Herzegovina has a unique chance
and a historic window of opportunity to move an
important step closer to Europe. Its leaders must
seize this moment." (supra)

I think that this will be key for the future.

Italy fully aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the Permanent Representative of
Germany on behalf of the European Union (EU). I
would therefore like to add just a few remarks drawing
on our national experience.

On 3 May 2007, the EU member States approved
the text of the Stabilization and Association
Agreement. The Agreement is now ready for
conclusion, and Bosnia and Herzegovina has the
opportunity to take a tangible step forward, as has been
said before, on the road to its European integration.
However, the signing of the Agreement is dependent on
the achievement of concrete progress in the fulfilment
of outstanding commitments, first and foremost in
implementing police reform, as well as on full
cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal
for the former Yugoslavia.

Italy expects the leaders of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to deliver quickly on their commitments,
particularly in the area of police reform, in compliance
with the three guiding principles set out by the
European Union at the beginning of negotiations,
which are reflected in the final report of the Directorate
for Police Restructuring Implementation. We call on
the political leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
shoulder their responsibilities and to take action to
keep the country on its path towards European
integration.

Constitutional reform is not only the greatest
challenge facing Bosnia and Herzegovina but also the
top priority in terms of creating more functional State
structures and enabling the country to prepare for
integration into the Euro-Atlantic community. We need
to revive the reform proposals drafted in spring 2006.
That process, as has been recalled, was stalled more
than one year ago, and we support the efforts being
made by the international community to ensure its
successful completion.

Italy endorses the ruling by the International
Court of Justice on the Srebrenica massacre of July
1995. We believe that the ruling should be applied
scrupulously so as also to further ascertain
responsibility and to ensure that justice prevails. At the
same time, we believe that Bosnia and Herzegovina
may also need to look towards its future and that it
should not let its attention be monopolized by the
tragic events of the past.

On 30 April 2007, Ambassador Sir Jones Parry,
President of the Security Council, sent a letter to the
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina concerning the
issue of police decertification, bringing that long-
standing issue to a resolution. We call upon the Office
of the High Representative and the European Union
Police Mission to closely follow the implementation of
the provisions and conditions set forth in the letter.

Italy supported the decision adopted by the
Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council
on 27 February to postpone the closure of the Office of
the High Representative until June 2008, and we are
ready to review the situation at the meetings of the
Peace Implementation Council to be held later, in
October of this year and in February 2008.
Italy remains committed to the stabilization and
development of democratic institutions in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and to the country's integration into
European and Euro-Atlantic institutions. At the same
time, we remain firmly committed to the process of
handing over full ownership to the Bosnian authorities
and to a gradual reduction of the international presence
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in line with the decision of
the Peace Implementation Council.

As has been recalled, this will be Mr. Schwarz-
Schilling's Iast appearance before the Security Council.
Allow me, therefore, to join the President of the
Council in thanking him on behalf of all of us for his
strong commitment, his strong efforts and his strong
leadership in his difficult endeavours.

