Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): I thank you, Mr. President,
for having convened this important open debate and for
submitting a concept note (S/2017/692, annex) on the
topic under discussion.

Azerbaijan associates itself with the statement
delivered earlier today on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries. I would like to make some
remarks in our national capacity.

Peacekeeping is a unique mechanism and an
indispensable tool for our collective actions to maintain
international peace and security. Despite shortcomings,
it is evident that peacekeeping and peacekeepers have
delivered results, contributed to reducing tensions and
ensured that peacebuilding processes in different parts
of the world moved forward.

Coherence among peacemaking, peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and development is important. That
interconnection was explicitly acknowledged by
the Security Council in resolution 2086 (2013), as
well as in the 2030 Agenda and, most recently, in
the resolutions on the review of the peacebuilding
architecture. By preventing the recurrence of violence,
supporting and enabling critical tasks in certain areas
and assisting host countries in developing their post-
conflict reconstruction strategies, multidimensional
peacekeeping operations establish necessary foundations
for successful peacebuilding processes.

The effectiveness of peacekeeping, its role in the
prevention, management and resolution of conflicts and
its contribution to an orderly transition to reconstruction
and development in an inclusive manner require further
reinforcement of the centrality of underlying elements
that form the basis of peacekeeping. I would like to
focus on some of them.

First, the mandates of peacekeeping operations
must be clear, realistic and achievable, and must be
tailored and constantly adapted to the realities on the
ground. Secondly, the principles of the consent of the
parties, impartiality and the non-use of force except
in self-defence and defence of the mandate must
be observed at all times. Further efforts are needed
towards overcoming uncertainties about the legal
basis for the use of force in peacekeeping. Thirdly,
the Governments of countries emerging from conflict
bear primary responsibility for identifying their needs
and implementing post-conflict development agendas.
Therefore, multidimensional peacekeeping operations
should support the efforts of host countries to that end.

Peacekeeping is a partnership, and its success
depends on the continued cooperation, goodwill
and commitment of Member States to strengthen the
Organization and improve its efficiency so that it can
better deliver on the universally shared principles and
ideals and respond to the needs of those affected by
armed conflicts. International law requires not just an
outcome in preventing or resolving conflicts, but that
such an outcome be accompanied by a process that is
consistent with particular norms.

It is critical that the mandate of any peacekeeping
operation explicitly uphold the principles of political
independence, sovereign equality, territorial integrity
and non-intervention in matters that are essentially
within the domesticjurisdiction of States. Peacekeeping
must not be used to sustain the status quo created as a
result of a violation of those fundamental norms and
principles of international law. Nor can it be used to
consolidate unlawful situations extant at the moment
when hostilities were suspended. That understanding
must be ensured throughout the whole cycle of
peacekeeping operations.

Particular attention should be paid to the issues
of international humanitarian law and human rights
law. The protection of civilians must remain a priority.
In some situations of armed conflict, the restoration
of the demographic composition of the population
affected as a result of large-scale ethnic expulsion is
a prerequisite for the legitimacy and sustainability of
peace. It is therefore important that in such situations
peacekeepers create the necessary conditions for, and
serve as the guarantors of, the full, safe and dignified
return of refugees and internally displaced persons to
their homes and properties.

As a country suffering from the scourge of war and
being situated in proximity to other conflicts, Azerbaijan
will continue its efforts towards establishing lasting
peace and stability in the region of South Caucasus and
beyond, on the basis of the generally accepted norms
and principles of international law and the relevant
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions.

In conclusion, I would like once again to commend
Egypt for its timely initiative of convening this
open debate.

