Mr. Beyendeza (Uganda): In the last few months,
Uganda and other members of the African Union, and
the Non-Aligned Movement sought to achieve a
peaceful disarmament and resolution of the crisis in
Iraq in accordance with United Nations Security
Council resolution 1441 (2002). It is unfortunate that
diplomacy failed, as the United Nations Security
Council was unable to reach a consensus on
implementation of resolution 1441 (2002) to eliminate
the weapons of mass destruction in Iraq. As a result,
war broke out on 20 March 2003.

The Ugandan Government decided on 21 March
2003 to support the United States-led coalition to
disarm Iraq by force. The reasons for this decision have
already been forwarded to the Security Council with a
request to circulate them to all members. Uganda
wishes also to reaffirm its strong support for the people
of Palestine to have a State of their own side by side
with Israel.

Uganda's main concerns are terrorism and
weapons of mass destruction. Uganda has been a
victim of State-sponsored terrorism of the worst type
and the Government of Saddam Hussain has provided
active support to some of the terrorist groups that have
operated against Uganda. Since 1986, such terrorist
groups, including the Holy Spirit Movement, the
Uganda People's Army, the Lord's Resistance Army,
the Allied Democratic Forces and the West Nile Bank
Front, have killed and inflicted untold misery on the
population of Uganda, including burning to death
students at Kichwamba Technical School. You have
also heard of the deaths inflicted in the impenetrable
forests of Bwindi in western Uganda and of human
beings cooked in pots as was the case in Adilang in
northern Uganda.

In Kampala alone, there have been over 48 bomb
blasts resulting in 86 deaths and 286 severe injuries.
The list goes on.

The link between terrorism and weapons of mass
destruction is a threat to international peace and
security that has been recognized by the Security
Council. Considering the fact that Saddam Hussain has
previously used these weapons of mass destruction on
his own people, Uganda believes that the danger of
these weapons falling into the hands of terrorist groups
is real.

We hope that the war will be short and civilian
casualties will be minimized. Uganda would like to
emphasize the need to ensure that the unity and
independence of Iraq, including its sovereignty and
territorial integrity, is maintained.

In addition, the international community may
wish to focus on the immediate post-conflict
mechanism after lifting the trade sanctions against Iraq
to facilitate control by the Iraqi people of their own
resources at the expiration of the oil for food
programme.
Uganda welcomes and supports the Secretary-
General's statements to the Council on 19 and 26
March 2003 on the continued United Nations role to
avert the plight of war on the Iraqi people by
effectively extending humanitarian assistance,
including rebuilding basic infrastructure. The
international community should support the Secretary-
General's efforts to mobilize the necessary resources,
including revenue currently under the oil for food
programme, to reverse the humanitarian crisis that the
Iraqi people are faced with.

Uganda feels that energies of the international
community should now be concentrated on the post-
war period. Given the divisive run-up to the current
war in Iraq, there is need to restore the central role that
United Nations should continue to play in the
maintenance of international peace and security. It is
also important that the attention of the international
community not be distracted from the various key areas
that are critical in building a safer world in the twenty-
first century.

In our view, these include the following areas:
The first is the resolution of the Israel-Palestine
conflict in the Middle East to ensure that both Israeli
and Palestinian States exist side by side in secure and
internationally recognized borders. Secondly, we need
to build a global, multilateral and sustained campaign
against terrorism. We must recognize the potential
danger from the link between terrorists and weapons of
mass destruction. The use of indiscriminate violence in
pursuit of political or any other goals should be
outlawed. Thirdly, we need to reverse the
marginalization of Africa and other developing
countries, ensuring equitable distribution of the
benefits of globalization.

Finally, Uganda calls upon the international
community to urgently agree on measures to mitigate
the negative impact of the conflict in the Gulf region,
especially on the fragile economies in Africa and
developing countries.

