Mr. Llanos (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): West
Africa is an area of priority concern to the Security
Council and the recent Council mission to the region
attests to our political interest in its peace and stability.
The United Nations has made a great effort in the
region to end conflicts and to assist in the processes of
post-conflict reconstruction. My delegation welcomes
the fact that the Council mission took a regional
approach, which alone can guarantee peace and
stability in the region.

In the context of the specific characteristics of
each country, the Council was able to note that C6te
d'Ivoire, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia and Sierra Leone have
had positive experiences in the post-conflict phase. All
face important electoral processes in the coming
months that will enable them freely to choose their own
leaders and to participate in their own social and
economic development.
The role of the United Nations is to provide
assistance and facilitation in order to ensure that every
process is sustainable. It cannot replace the endeavours
that must be made within each society by all sectors.
Furthermore, the United Nations should also prevent
potential crises in third countries of the region that are
not currently on the Security Council's agenda.

The greatest challenges to regional stability are
unquestionably linked to C6te d'Ivoire. The serious
difficulties being encountered in the implementation of
the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement and the polarization
of the country make it vital that solutions be found that
preserve its territorial integrity. We are also concerned
about the potential repercussions of that crisis on
neighbouring countries. We believe that we should
support the efforts of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) and the meeting to be
held in Accra on 29 July.

As noted in the mission's report, in Guinea-
Bissau, notwithstanding the progress achieved in the
political transition, the general situation is fragile. The
Economic and Social Council Ad Hoc Advisory Group
has helped Guinea-Bissau to meet its humanitarian and
development needs, opening new prospects for United
Nations involvement and for cooperation with a
country emerging from conflict.

With respect to Liberia and Sierra Leone, the
United Nations commitment is evidenced in two
important peacekeeping operations with
multidimensional mandates. Following the withdrawal
of the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone, to take
place late this year, the Organization will maintain a
presence in Sierra Leone in order to assist that country
in assuming responsibility for its own security. It is
important to secure the protection and promotion of
human rights. We recognize the specific contributions
that can be made by such institutions as the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission for Sierra Leone, which
has just finished its work. The contribution that such
entities can make should be regarded as
complementary to the work of the justice system. In
C6te d'Ivoire, those responsible for human rights
violations should be brought to trial.

The Council mission was able to observe the
scale of cross-border problems in the region and the
influences at work among countries emerging from
conflict. None of them is safe from those influences.
For that reason, we believe that there is great need for
the Council to continue to treat the regional problems
as a single whole.
We believe that the reactivation of the Mano
River Union should be encouraged. The recent meeting
of heads of State in Conakry is an encouraging sign of
that reactivation. The Mano River Union is called upon
to play a role in promoting peace and security in the
subregion.

I conclude by underlining the role of ECOWAS in
promoting peace and its commitment to democracy in
the region. The recommendations of the Council's
mission identify areas for collaboration between the
United Nations and ECOWAS that deserve the support
of the international community.

