Mr. Baja (Philippines): Thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this public meeting of the
Security Council on East Timor. We also thank Under-
Secretary-General Guehenno for his comprehensive
and positive briefing on East Timor, and we welcome
the Foreign Minister of East Timor, Mr. Jose Ramos-
Horta, to our meeting.

At this stage, we can justifiably consider the case
of East Timor as a model of United Nations
involvement that is close to being a success. The
odyssey started with the United Nations Mission in
East Timor (UNAMET) in 1999, followed by the
Security Council-authorized International Force in East
Timor (INTERFET) also in that year; then came the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET) in 2000 and, now, the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET). The Under-Secretary-General has
articulated the achievements of the United Nations
presence there.

Notwithstanding the gains made by East Timor
and UNMISET, there remain areas of concern that
could necessitate a continued United Nations presence
in East Timor in order to build a stable and sustainable
democracy. Foremost among those concerns is the
maintenance of peace and security. We believe that an
immediate pullout of the international military and
police presence there might create a security vacuum in
the country. A continued United Nations security
presence there, however, will be able to deal, under
East Timor's operational leadership, with law
enforcement activities and to take care of possible
disturbances from remnants of the anti-independence
militia and other criminal elements. This security
presence will also be able to assist in the continued
development of the East Timor National Police and
provide protection to United Nations military liaison
officers. It will also be able to assist in institutional
capacity-building to ensure the stability and
functioning of Government in civil administration.

East Timor has requested a continued military
presence and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations has recommended such an extension for
another year, in a reduced size and with a modified
mandate. We urge the Security Council to head East
Timor's requests and vision and to support the
professional advice and recommendations of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations.

East Timor boasts a committed team of leaders
who not only are politically astute and mature but also
understand the challenges confronting their newly
independent country and are aware of the
responsibilities involved in ensuring its sustainable
development. East Timor inner strength also comes
from the resolve of its people to survive.

Nevertheless, efforts to create means for
sustainable development and secure economic growth
must be provided. The country is one of the least
endowed on Earth. Its population is heterogeneous in
language and culture. The country does not as yet have
major industries; unemployment is high; and the
infrastructure is poorly developed. Hope for economic
salvation lies in expected revenues from oil and natural
gas in the Timor Sea, but as revenues from this source
have been delayed, the assistance of United Nations
agencies, bilateral donors and the Asian Development
Bank must be maintained. There is also an urgent need
to concentrate on human resources development,
particularly in developing mandatory basic education
and in imbuing the people of Timor-Leste with
entrepreneurial skills.

Other key areas for assistance, as referred to by
the Under-Secretary-General, include the management
of public finances and the justice system. The judiciary,
owing to the incomplete legal and procedural
framework in which it operates, is not yet fully capable
of implementing the rule of law in a manner consistent
with international human rights standards. This
includes the conduct of serious-crimes investigations
and proceedings.

East Timor's political and economic growth,
however, relies on a global consensus on the need to
assist the country. Japan, Australia, the Association of
South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) countries and the
European Union are important contributors to the
creation of a viable nation. Indonesia is a key
neighbouring, and my delegation notes the growing
progress in the relations between Indonesia and East
Timor.

At the tenth ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF)
ministerial meeting, held on 18 June 2003, the
ministers issued a paragraph on East Timor, which
reads:

"The Ministers congratulated the
Government of Timor-Leste on its progress since
independence. In particular, the Ministers noted
the positive relationship developing between
Timor-Leste and Indonesia. They noted that a
number of ARF participants continued to make
major contributions to the post-independence
multilateral effort in Timor-Leste. The Ministers
stressed that, as part of the Asia-Pacific, Timor-
Leste's future was reliant on the development of
economic, political and security ties with its
neighbours."

We also note that a joint border commission has
been established by Indonesia and Timor-Leste to take
care of border and refugee concerns, among other
issues. A joint bilateral commission has also been
created to monitor and address other issues of common
concern. There have also been high-level visits
between the two countries, and they have just recently
concluded negotiations on an air services agreement
that is now ready for signing by the respective
Governments.

In baseball, one has to touch home plate in order
to score a run and to win. East Timor is already on
third base and in the final inning. It needs to score a
run. We urge the Security Council to help East Timor
to win by extending UNMISET for another year, as
recommended by the Secretary-General. Then, when
the success story of East Timor is told, it will be a tale
of how the United Nations, through the Security
Council and UNMISET, and the international
community as a whole, helped East Timor to stand on
its feet, make the decisive run and win against all odds.

