Mr. Zannier: The report (8/2009/300) members
of the Security Council have before them today details
the activities of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) during
the period from 10 March to 31 May 2009.

With the conclusion of UNMIK's three phases of
reconfiguration, following the report (S/2008/354) of
the Secretary-General of 12 June 2008, UNMIK has
progressively shifted its focus towards an increasingly
diplomatic and political role focused on facilitating
dialogue and external relations and fostering minority
rights. As set out in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2008/692) of 24 November 2008, which was
welcomed by the Council in a presidential statement
(S/PRST/2008/44), UNMIK's reconfiguration is both
timely and necessary. Moreover, it has served to
enhance UNMIK'S effectiveness, in View of the
prevailing circumstances on the ground, which have
increasingly limited the scope for performing
administrative functions. The reconfiguration took
place in a transparent manner vis-a-vis all stakeholders.
It was also consonant with the United Nations position
of strict neutrality on the question of Kosovo's status.

Under the guidance of the Secretariat, UNMIK
has adhered strictly to the guidelines that provided for
reductions in its budget, which took into account the
role of other actors on the ground and the valuable
synergies of the joint international effort. UNMIK's
role today is different, but no less relevant or vital. The
newly reconfigured UNMIK will continue to perform
its functions under resolution 1244 (1999), with the
overall aim of ensuring peace and stability in Kosovo.

UNMIK's proposed budget for the upcoming
2009-2010 budget cycle amounts to $47,082,000 and
provides for 507 staff members. This reflects the new
09-37195
role taken on by the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) in that field, as well as
the continuing role of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in monitoring
respect for human and minority rights through their
extensive field presence. UNMIK's resources and
skills, combined with those of the other organizations,
provide the full panoply of expertise and staff needed
to implement our mandate while promoting synergies
and avoiding duplication of efforts.

The United Nations remains uniquely situated to
play a useful role for both sides, inter alia by
facilitating the resolution of problems as an
intermediary between parties that are not ready to deal
with each other directly. This may involve mediating
between the communities or facilitating Kosovo's
engagement in external affairs, which is key to
ensuring the functionality of such regional processes
as, for instance, the Central European Free Trade
Agreement. Our status of neutrality allows us to use
our efforts to nurture the reconciliation of Kosovo's
communities and foster regional cooperation, for the
benefit of all of Kosovo's people and for the stability
and development of the region as a whole.

Regrettably, our ability to promote status-neutral
solutions to practical issues is being affected by the
positions taken by the parties in anticipation of the
issuance of the advisory opinion requested by the
General Assembly from the International Court of
Justice (ICJ) on Kosovo's declaration of independence.
Whether justified or not, Belgrade and Pristina have
been viewing every action they or we take through the
prism of how it may be perceived or interpreted by the
ICJ as potentially either weakening or strengthening
the case of one side or the other.

In spite of those difficulties, UNMIK continues to
engage with the various stakeholders on matters
affecting the lives of all of Kosovo's communities, as a
facilitator of a process in which opportunities exist for
the sides to engage and resolve differences. While
efforts to address specific problems tend to be
perceived by one side or the other as a potential threat
to its perceived interests, making it often very difficult
to move the process forward, we have found that
engagement at the technical level, such as in the
cultural heritage or in the missing persons areas, is
constructive and produces results. We therefore urge
both Belgrade and Pristina to find more ways to engage
at the technical level to deliver what both clearly
09-37195
advocate, which is a better life for all the people of
Kosovo.

In that regard, the period covered by this latest
report has been marked by some tangible progress in a
number of areas. One such has been progress in finding
a solution for the decade-old problem of electricity
supply to the Kosovo Serb community south of the Ibar
River. After a decade of refusing to pay for the
electricity they consume, for political reasons, and
following targeted blackouts by the electricity
provider, the engagement of the international
community, including that of UNMIK where and when
warranted, and the support of senior representatives of
Serbia's Ministry for Kosovo and Metohija, have
resulted in at least 98 per cent of the Kosovo Serb
enclaves agreeing to a payment scheme, which has
resulted in their receiving a regular supply of
electricity.

During this period a crisis was also averted north
of the Ibar River, where attempts by Kosovo Albanian
displaced persons, backed by the Kosovo authorities, to
rebuild a number of houses in the northern Mitrovica
suburb of Kroi i Vitakut/Brdjani, met with opposition
from the Kosovo Serb community, which held daily
protests. With UNMIK'S active engagement, an
agreement was reached in principle between the
communities, to the effect that Kosovo Serbs would be
allowed to build homes on newly acquired land in the
same area without opposition from Kosovo Albanians.
While the issue of reconstruction is inherently linked to
the right of return, the Kosovo Albanian and Kosovo
Serb communities still perceive matters in more
political and strategic terms, and the situation remains
fragile.

Another step forward during this period, on a
technical issue of importance for the peaceful
coexistence of Kosovo's communities, occurred in the
area of protecting the Serbian cultural heritage in
Kosovo. UNMIK is engaged in strategic cooperation in
that area with other actors, such as the Council of
Europe. In coordination with other key stakeholders,
UNMIK finally succeeded in overcoming a year-long
stalemate, and last month was able to reactivate the
Reconstruction Implementation Commission, which
deals with rebuilding Serbian Orthodox Church sites.
The reconstruction of cultural patrimony is one of the
few areas in which representatives of Belgrade and of
Pristina interact directly at the technical level.
3

Another such area is that of missing persons,
where Pristina and Belgrade continue to meet, putting
status-related concerns aside. The Pristina and
Belgrade delegations of the Working Group on Missing
Persons met on 3 June at an open session in Belgrade.
Both delegations provided information on potential
sites that could contain the remains of people
considered missing and pledged to do more to address
the problem of missing persons. The Working Group
agreed that the positive momentum achieved must be
continued and developed further, but here too much
remains to be done, and it is key that the issue remain
non-politicized.

Further positive steps have been taken over the
past few weeks towards restoring the effectiveness of
the Kosovo Property Agency (KPA). As members may
recall, following the entry into force of the Kosovo
constitution, KPA offices in Serbia that had facilitated
the collection of claims, the gathering and verifying of
information and the delivery of decisions were closed,
thus hampering the process leading to the final
adjudication of a significant number of claims. A
solution has recently been agreed upon by all
stakeholders to request that the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
provide for an arrangement that would allow for the
operation of KPA offices in Serbia under the umbrella
of the United Nations. Such a solution would allow for
the constructive engagement of Pristina and Belgrade
to ensure restitution of the property rights of internally
displaced persons within the framework of resolution
1244 (1999). I have therefore asked UNHCR to
consider entering into such an arrangement, and I take
this opportunity to acknowledge the continued
cooperation of UNHCR and its valuable contributions
in ensuring the protection of the rights of the displaced
communities of Kosovo.

The number of voluntary returns remains
disappointingly low and, despite repeated calls by the
Kosovo authorities for Serbs to return to Kosovo and
reclaim their homes, the response has been negligible.
To their credit, the Kosovo authorities, supported by
the international community, are making efforts to
ensure that the conditions exist for sustainable returns.

Throughout the reporting period, UNMIK has
been cooperating closely with the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX). EULEX
continues to operate throughout Kosovo under the
overall authority of the United Nations and within the
status-neutral framework of resolution 1244 (1999). As
noted in the annex to the Secretary-General's report,
EULEX declared itself to be at full operational
capability on 6 April and now has a staff of 2,569.
EULEX is engaged in monitoring, mentoring and
advising Kosovo's rule of law institutions and
exercises certain executive functions. EULEX has also
engaged in discussions with the Government of Serbia,
including meetings in Belgrade with the Serbian
Deputy Prime Minister/Minister for the Interior, and
the Ministers for Kosovo and Metohija for Finance and
Justice. UNMIK has remained fully involved in these
consultations.

With the process of reconfiguring UNMIK nearly
completed, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) continues to carry out
its mandated responsibility for comprehensive
monitoring throughout Kosovo through its extensive
field presence. Timely OSCE reporting earlier this year
on the disputed reconstruction of Kosovo Albanian
houses north of the Ibar river and on the electricity cuts
in Serbian enclaves south of the river are just two
examples of how OSCE fulfils this important role.
With its main focus on ensuring that the human rights
of Kosovo's diverse ethnic communities are protected,
OSCE is well-placed to play an even greater role as a
mediator in disputes between the communities, a role I
have strongly encouraged it to play, as it builds the
capacities of local institutions and fosters democratic
principles and practices.

I assumed the duties of Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of Mission a year ago.
It has been a year of intense activities, and with the
cooperation of all, we managed to ensure that the
delicate phase of transition did not produce instability
or crisis. However, as I have outlined, much remains to
be done, and this means that we will need to continue
to work towards the resolution of the remaining issues.
Looking ahead, the reconfiguration of UNMIK also
presents us with an opportunity to enhance cooperation
between the various United Nations actors operating in
Kosovo, improving the overall coherence and
effectiveness of United Nations action and promoting
greater interaction in pursuit of our shared objectives.

A founding purpose of the United Nations is to
harmonize the actions of nations in the attainment of
peace and the resolution of economic, social, cultural
or humanitarian problems and to promote respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms. This goal has
been foremost in our minds during these past three
months, while we completed the reconfiguration of
UNMIK. Our goal, with the support of EULEX, OSCE
and the international military presence, remains to
ensure stability, foster reconciliation and allow for the
return of internally displaced persons. I am confident
that the reconfigured Mission, enhanced by the
significant OSCE field presence and by the EULEX
police and justice components, represents a well-honed
tool for performing these functions on behalf of the
Council and the Secretary-General. My staff and I hope
we can continue to count on the support of the Council.

