Mr. Quinlan (Australia): In my last briefing to
the Council, I spoke of Al-Qaida's structural changes,
noting that the movement no longer follows a centralized
command structure. I also emphasized that the threat
to international peace and security posed by Al-Qaida
emanates from a range of increasingly heterogeneous
groups and affiliates. In today's briefing, I will focus
on those developments in the threat posed by Al-Qaida
and its affiliates and outline the steps taken by the
Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida
and associated individuals and entities to ensure that
the Al-Qaida sanctions regime remains an effective
response to that threat.

The Committee seeks to act quickly and
strategically to ensure that the sanctions imposed
support national and regional responses to the evolving
Al-Qaida inspired threat. That approach encourages
Member States from all regions to take ownership of
the listing process. It was evident last week when the
Committee approved the addition of Boko Haram to its
list of individuals and entities subject to the targeted
financial sanctions and the arms embargo set out in
paragraph 1 of resolution 2083 (2012). As a result of
the new listing, any individual or entity that provides
financial or material support to Boko Haram, including
the provision of arms or recruits, is eligible to be
added to the Al-Qaida sanctions list and subject to the
sanctions measures.

The fifteenth report of the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team (S/2014/41) details the ways
in which Al-Qaida and its affiliates take advantage of
local conflicts or situations of limited State control.
When a political situation shifts and opportunities to
bolster Al-Qaida's agenda arise, the organization and
its affiliates have become adept at quickly seizing such
opportunities to regroup and strengthen. Similarly, the
restoration of political stability and security in one
region does not necessarily serve to weaken the threat
posed by Al-Qaida and its affiliates. It may simply
mean that terrorists find safe havens and opportunities
elsewhere. The shift in the geographical focus of
Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM) in particular
demonstrates such adaptability. AQIM. militants have
moved away from Mali and Algeria to regroup in
southern Libya. That combined trend of localization
and globalization demonstrates the need for the
Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee to maintain a global
approach, while at the same time constantly assessing
and reassessing the threat.

Al-Qaida has gained dexterity not only
geographically but also structurally. In particular, the
trend towards an ever-increasing recruitment of foreign
fighters has given Al-Qaida and its affiliates a more
global reach in a number of theatres of operation. That
strategy has been employed with particular rigour with
respect to Syria. The Monitoring Team's fifteenth
report raises the specific issue of large numbers of
Al-Qaida-affiliated foreign fighters associating with
the Jabhat-al-Nusra organization. As thousands of
foreign fighters engage in conflict alongside local
militants, ties that the Monitoring Team predicts could
lead to new pan-Arab and pan-European networks of
extremists are established. Furthermore, the return of
those battle-hardened foreign fighters to their countries
of origin or to third countries with new ideas and skills
is a cause for concern. Member States in North Africa,
the Middle East and Europe are already grappling with
the reality of returning fighters with experience of
working with Al-Qaida affiliates. For those reasons,
the Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee will continue to
maintain a global approach to the threat.

In generational terms, Al-Qaida is getting younger,
with its leaders increasingly shaped by the experience of
the current social dynamics rather than the experiences
of the 1990s. Leadership positions within Al-Qaida are
being taken up by men in their late 30s and 405. With that
generational shift come new philosophical perspectives
and outreach techniques. For instance, among the new
generation ofBoko Haram militants in northern Nigeria,
a younger perspective has resulted in an increased
propensity for violence and less tolerance for the local
religious leadership. With Al-Qaida affiliates in Africa
and Asia, mid-level commanders bring technological
knowledge and a focus on innovative attack planning.
Younger leaders are also more adept at connecting with
the next generation of recruits, in particular through a
sophisticated use of social media.

While organizationally Al-Qaida is more
splintered, the shift towards diverse and localized
recruitment also means that it has become more
durable. That trend is further amplified by the scope
for domestic radicalization in a number of Member
States, where violent Al-Qaida-inspired cells may
generate themselves largely autonomously, influenced
by Internet propaganda but disconnected from the
Al-Qaida affiliate command structures.

The Committee remains dedicated to ensuring that
the Al-Qaida sanctions regime itself is as effective as
possible. The threat posed by Al-Qaida and its affiliates
is characterized by the fluidity of its organizational
structure and geographical reach. Maintaining a
sanctions list that most effectively responds to the
threat means identifying potential targets and promptly
adding those names to the list. Conversely, it also
means removing from the sanctions list the names of
individuals and entities that are no longer affiliated
with Al-Qaida. To do that in a global context, the
Committee relies on the engagement of all Member
States. Any Member State may at any time propose
a name for listing or delisting under the Al-Qaida
sanctions regime, and I encourage all Member States to
consider doing so.

On 22 May, the coordinator of the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team briefed
the Committee on the current threat landscape. The
Committee recognizes that sanctions will have the
greatest impact if the individuals and entities targeted
by the regime are those that currently have an influential
role in or support, in particular financially, Al-Qaida
and its affiliates. It is important for the Committee, as
well as all Member States, to respond to the changing
threat in the names that are proposed for listing and
de-listing.

An important focus of the Committee is to improve
implementation of the sanctions measures. In its
fifteenth report, the Monitoring Team highlighted the
implementation value for the travel ban of publishing
biometric data on listed individuals. The Committee
now seeks to collect that data from Member States both
for existing entries on the list and when new names
are proposed for listing. Similarly, the Committee has
initiated a Council-wide engagement with the World
Customs Organization to seek an amendment to the
joint guidelines on advanced passenger information
that it issues with the International Civil Aviation
Organization and the International Air Transport
Association. The proposed amendment would raise
awareness among national civil aviation authorities of
the requirements and targets of Security Council travel
bans.

In view of the growing use by Al Qaida-inspired
terrorists of improvised explosive devices (IEDs), the
Monitoring Team concluded that IEDs are Al-Qaida's
weapon of choice and the principal cause of civilian
casualties in attacks by Al-Qaida and its affiliates.
More alarming still, Al-Qaida affiliates disseminate
step-by-step guides to the manufacture of IEDs in a
deliberate attempt to arm "lone-wolf" terrorists. The
Monitoring Team has already engaged Member States,
counter-IED specialists and those involved with private
sector supply chains of components that may be used to
construct IEDs. The Committee is now considering the
best way forward.

The Committee is currently in the process of
reviewing more than 150 entries on the Al-Qaida
sanctions list. That is over half the total number. The
names under review include those lacking the identifiers
necessary to ensure the effective implementation
of the sanctions measures, entries corresponding to
reportedly deceased individuals and to entities that
are reported or confirmed to have ceased to exist. The
Committee also undertakes a review of those entries
that have not been reviewed in three or more years. The
responsiveness of Member States remains crucial to the
successful conduct of those reviews. I should like to
take this opportunity to thank those Member States that
have actively participated in such review processes by
providing detailed and updated information.

The Committee also continues to engage with the
Ombudsperson on delisting requests. Such a process
contributes to making the Al-Qaida sanctions list
focused and effective.

The rapid evolution of the threat that Al-Qaida and
its affiliates pose to international peace and security
requires dynamic and timely action by the Al-Qaida
Sanctions Committee and by the broader United Nations
membership. Ensuring the effectiveness of such a tool
remains a shared undertaking. Member States have a
dual opportunity in that regard. I encourage Member
States to at once assess the threat posed by Al-Qaida
and its affiliates and to actively contribute to making
the sanctions list relevant. I also urge Member States
to concentrate their efforts to fully implement the
measures against listed individuals and entities within
their jurisdiction. As always, the Committee and the
Monitoring Team stand ready to support Member States
in that crucial endeavour.

