Mr. Inzko: Thank you, Mr. President, for giving
me the opportunity to present my first report as High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina. I have
been in office just two months, but I will update the
Council on significant events over the past six months.
I will also outline my priorities.

Some progress has been made towards our
objective of making Bosnia and Herzegovina a peaceful,
viable State, irreversibly on course for European
integration. Equally on the positive side, the country
remains stable and the physical environment is secure.

On a less positive note, however, the State is not
yet fully viable and its role and competencies are
contested by some of its political leaders. As a result,
recent progress towards Euro-Atlantic integration has
been modest, and as a consequence, the country still
requires high attention. Last week, United States Vice-
President Biden and European Union (EU) High
Representative for the Common Foreign and Security
Policy Solana were in Bosnia and Herzegovina in an
unprecedented joint Visit.

The focus was extremely useful and warmly
welcomed by the population. However, the poor
performance on EU and transatlantic integration is
deplorable, particularly as the world recession now
also threatens the fragile economy of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The State and entities' successful
negotiation of a €l.2 billion stand-by arrangement with
the International Monetary Fund (IMF) revealed an
09-35192
unusual degree of common purpose, but the reforms
agreed with the IMF will have the desired result only if
the authorities take appropriate and targeted steps. The
Federation's finances are especially dire, and its
capacity to agree upon and implement cuts in the face
of strong vested interests is rather weak. The Republika
Srpska of Bosnia and Herzegovina is, in this regard, for
the time being, in a better position.

In these circumstances, it is clear that obstruction
of urgent reforms that would help improve living
conditions is absolutely unjustified on moral as well as
political grounds. I will seek to keep this plain fact at
the centre of public debate in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
At the same time, I will seek a change in the political
paradigm that downgrades practical and pressing
economic issues and stresses instead a strident and
unhelpful kind of posturing.

My predecessor reported last December on a
highly hopeful development towards overcoming the
political stalemate. This was the initiation, in
November 2008, of the so-called Prud process of
dialogue among leaders of the three largest national
parties and coalition partners at the State level: Dragan
Covic of the Croatian Democratic Community;
Sulejman Tihic of the Bosniac Party of Democratic
Action; and Milorad Dodik of the Serb Alliance of
Independent Social Democrats. My Office and I have
supported this process since it represents a home-
grown political initiative for dialogue and cooperation.

Periodic meetings of the "Prud three" over a
three-month period resulted in various compromise
agreements and prospective agreements on major
issues, ranging from the question of a State budget for
2009 to the promise to initiate talks on constitutional
reforms and the early fulfilment of parts of the
outstanding objectives and conditions set by the Peace
Implementation Council (PIC) in February 2008 for the
closure of my Office and its transformation into an
EU-led presence.

Unfortunately, the Prud process lost momentum,
and the three party leaders have not met on their own
again since late March, though they have been brought
together by the international community on a number
of occasions, recently by the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of three successive EU presidencies -
Ministers Bildt, Kouchner and Schwarzenberg - and
then, last week, by United States Vice President Joe
Biden and EU High Representative for the Common
09-35192
Foreign and Security Policy Javier Solana. On each
occasion, the three leaders expressed their commitment
to continuing their dialogue.

Foremost among the achievements facilitated by
the Prud process has been the passage on 26 March of
the first-ever amendment to the country's 1995 Dayton
Constitution. This amendment defines the status of the
Brcko District and provides it with direct access to the
Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional Court in the
event of any dispute with the State or entities. Not only
was the enactment of such an amendment one of the
five objectives set out by the PIC Steering Board as
prerequisites for a transition from the Office of the
High Representative to the EU Special Representative,
it was also a condition for the Supervisor to do away
with the Arbitral Tribunal and for the PIC Steering
Board to terminate the supervisory regime. That could
now happen soon.

Other positive news included the agreement
among the State, entities and Brcko District on the
budget framework for 2009, which enabled a relatively
early adoption of the budget.

In addition, the National War Crimes Strategy
was finally adopted in late December. This Strategy
was part of the fifth objective - the entrenchment of
the rule of law - set by the PIC to allow for the
transition from the Office of the High Representative
to the EU Special Representative.

Progress on the second objective - apportionment
of State property - has been more limited, due to the
inability of the Prud three to compromise on this issue.
However, pressure on and cooperation with local actors
has recently brought a first move forward in this area,
with the initiation in late April of the long-delayed
process of the inventory of State property, which
provides the necessary legal framework. I would like to
expressly thank Prime Minister Spiric' for his efforts
and input in this regard. We will focus, of course, in
the weeks to come, on this issue to ensure its
completion.

Notwithstanding the positive achievements that
have been made, divisive rhetoric and official
resolutions challenging the sovereignty, constitutional
order and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina all continued during the reporting period,
principally on the part of Republika Srpska. That entity
has, in official Government and National Assembly
documents, on several occasions referred to the
possibility of unilateral self-determination. Its leaders
have been in the forefront of attacks on the legitimacy
of State institutions - judicial, prosecutorial, policing,
economic, intelligence and defence - as well as in the
forefront of efforts to reverse previous State-building
and EU-mandated reforms. That is all taking place at a
time when the State Investigation and Protection
Agency has submitted a preliminary report to the State
Prosecutor on possible financial wrongdoing by the
Prime Minister. On 14 May, those attacks culminated
in the adoption by the Republika Srspka National
Assembly of conclusions that call for the return of 68
competencies allegedly stolen by the State.

The conclusions also undermine the legitimacy of
the decisions of the Peace Implementation Council and
the Office of the High Representative, as well as those
of the previous High Representatives. I take that
seriously, and I take people at their word. My basic
role as High Representative is to uphold the Dayton
Peace Agreement, at the centre of which is the
sovereignty of the State and the competencies of its
institutions. I will not let those be challenged.

That campaign has also blocked the passage of
State legislation required to complete the EU's road
map for the elimination of visas for Bosnia and
Herzegovina citizens travelling to EU States. It has
also for some time blocked other State legislation that
would fulfil Bosnia and Herzegovina's obligations
under the Stabilization and Association Process.

While Bosniak and Croat politicians have of late
generally avoided wholesale attacks on Republika
Srpska's legitimacy, it should be noted that Federation-
based media have maintained an offensive stance
towards the other entity.

As 2010 is a general election year, there is now
only a small window of opportunity to start work on
even minimal constitutional reforms, particularly if
those are to entail any revisions of the election law,
which they surely will. The positions of the main
parties remain far apart, but the onus is now on them to
engage in serious dialogue, and then reach agreements
that reflect their EU aspirations and can secure a two-
thirds majority in Parliament. I will assist them in my
capacity as EU Special Representative. Do they have
the capacity to succeed in this? I believe they do. Do
they have the political will? Only they can answer that
question.
Of the five objectives and two conditions set by
the PIC for the transition of the Office of the High
Representative into a reinforced office of the EU
Special Representative, three objectives can now be
considered as having been met. Two of them were
completed during this reporting period. They are the
constitutional amendment to secure completion of the
Brcko Final Arbitral Award and the entrenchment of
the rule of law through the adoption of a Bosnia and
Herzegovina strategy for the domestic prosecution of
war crimes, as well as action plans to implement a
justice-sector reform strategy over the period 2009 to
2013. That leaves two unmet objectives, relating to
acceptable and sustainable agreement on apportioning
ownership of State property and defence property
between the State and its entities.

My Office has long argued that, as a first step, the
Council of Ministers should initiate an inventory of the
property involved. The Council of Ministers eventually
agreed to do so, for which I thank Chairman Spirie,
and has set up a working group with a deadline of
30 September to complete the process. My aim is now
to engage political leaders so that an appropriate
solution can be found as quickly as possible.

The defence property issue is less complicated
and less important to the political parties, but is
nonetheless crucial to cementing defence reform and
sustaining Bosnia and Herzegovina's hopes of joining
NATO. We had previously assumed that a settlement
would follow naturally. However, it now seems
necessary to deal separately with the issue of what real
estate the armed forces are to possess. The issue of
surplus weaponry, ordnance and equipment has long
been settled, at least in theory. My Office, together
with NATO headquarters in Sarajevo, will now focus
on quickly resolving the issue of military real estate
and property.

Given the failure of domestic authorities to
deliver on all five objectives set by the PIC Steering
Board, the Board did not consider the issue of
transition when it met in late March. While I can report
that there has been progress on State and defence
property issues, at this stage it appears rather unlikely
that the Peace Implementation Council Steering Board
will take a decision to close the Office of the High
Representative when it meets in late June. However, I
believe that the objectives and the conditions can be
delivered before the PIC meeting in October. The PIC
could then possibly be in a position to decide on the
closure of the Office and the transition to the EU's
Special Representative.

Following the joint visit in April by the three EU
presidency Foreign Ministers - Ministers Kouchner,
Schwarzenberg and Bildt - the joint visit by Vice-
President Biden and High Representative Solana on
19 May attested both to a strong common approach and
the EU's seriousness about the need for a robust and
tailor-made strategy for the future EU Special
Representative in the country. Current domestic
circumstances make such enhanced involvement by the
EU and the wider international community essential.
The vast majority of the citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina continue to support Euro-Atlantic
integration and the prosperity, security and self-respect
it would bring. Although we have seen signs of
progress, in general the nationalistic political dynamic
routinely overrides popular sentiment. I will need the
Council's support in countering that.

I have outlined the progress that we have made
and the obstacles we have encountered. The fact is that
there is progress, although it is slow, and we have
reason to believe that the positive will win out over the
negative. That is what the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina want and that is what we must continue to
help them to achieve. As I said during a recent meeting
with civic activists, the majority of citizens
undoubtedly believe in doing what is necessary and
right. That is the real majority in Bosnia and
Herzegovina - not an ethnic majority but a majority
of those who want to live in a free and prosperous
country that is part of the European Union. I am on the
side of that majority and I believe that it will prevail.

