Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): It
is good for us to observe that six months have gone by
since the establishment of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, to take note of what really has been the
significant progress achieved in its work and to look a
little bit ahead. I want to thank Ambassador
Greenstock, as others have done, for his vigorous,
committed and creative leadership, and also to thank
all those who have worked with him, because I am sure
he would be the first the acknowledge what a
tremendous team effort this has been, particularly on
the part of the Vice-Chairs, the other Committee
members and all the experts involved. This has been
complicated, hard work, and they have done a
tremendous job. I must say I think that they have had a
lot of success in helping to focus global efforts on the
global threat that is terrorism.

Resolution 1373 (2001) was intended to enhance
the ability of the members of the international
community to combat terror over the long term, as
some others have mentioned. There is no deadline in
this struggle, no foreseeable end to it. We will have
occasion to come back periodically over time to assess
how we are doing. In that regard, I note and welcome
Ambassador Greenstock's thought that the Counter-
Terrorism Committee will preserve the potential for
dialogue with all States and with each State as this
process goes forward, because all of us, I hope, will be
adapting as we learn more and as we achieve progress
in the battle against terrorism.

All States have an obligation to comply with
resolution 1373 (2001), both in terms of the process
that it sets out and by national action. We urge
Members that have not filed reports with the
Committee to do so. We encourage Members that have
the capacity to do so to provide assistance to those who
need it, to those who want to join the fight against
terrorism and who need help in doing so, and to those
who want to fully implement resolution 1373 (2001)
and need help in doing so. A number of States,
including the United States, are engaged in this effort
of providing support, and we want to encourage
everyone to do what they can in that regard.

I also want to applaud Ambassador Greenstock's
vision of a vigorous and dynamic Counter-Terrorism
Committee process and effort, including more direct
dialogue with members, in the next phase of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee's work and in
addressing concerns about failures to implement 1373
(2001) or to comply with all of its provisions.

I want to join others also in emphasizing the
importance of the roles of regional and subregional
organizations in the fight against terrorism. Those
organizations - those that are willing to join in the
fight - have an essential role to play, we think,
because they provide a local, regional forum of
interchange, action, encouragement and assistance.
They are well placed to encourage their members to
implement resolution 1373 (2001), and they are also
well placed to assist the Committee in monitoring
implementation and in promoting international support
for its efforts.

The United States strongly supports the
deepening of contacts between the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and those regional organizations that are
joining the fight against terror. We, of course, support
the course that Ambassador Greenstock has outlined
for the future and welcome the continued strong
leadership he and his colleagues have brought to bear
in this endeavour.
