Ms. Power (United States of America): Thank
you very much, Mr. President, for your briefing
and your leadership of this important Committee.
Congratulations on a great first few days as President
of the Council.

Like others here, the United States hopes that
the inauguration of President Rouhani creates an
opportunity for Iran to act quickly to resolve the
international community's serious concerns about Iran's
nuclear intentions. Unfortunately, we have not yet seen
any clear signs that Iran is committed to addressing the
most pressing concerns about its nuclear programme.
On the contrary, recent developments trouble us. Just
last week, the Director General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), Mr. Amano, reported
that Iran was continuing to march forward with its
prohibited nuclear activities. The Director General
stated that

"the Agency will not be in a position to provide
credible assurance about the absence of undeclared
material and activities in Iran unless and until Iran
provides the necessary cooperation".

That is a conclusion we have heard repeatedly
from the IAEA. Rather than taking steps to meet the
obligations imposed by the Security Council, Iran is
installing advanced centrifuges that may be two to
three times more efficient at enriching uranium than
its current centrifuges. The Director General also
reported that Iran is continuing to add to its stockpile
of enriched uranium. Iran's expanded enrichment, its
construction of the IR-40 heavy-water reactor at Arak
and other examples raised by the Director General not
only violate multiple Security Council resolutions, they
move us further away from a negotiated solution.

Later this month, the IAEA will hold a new round of
talks with Iran. At the talks we strongly encourage Iran
to adopt a cooperative and transparent approach with
the IAEA. In the meantime, and until concrete progress
has been made, the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006) must step up its efforts to
improve the implementation of sanctions. In recent
months, its work has not kept pace with the threat. As the
President indicated, we were disappointed to find that,
despite the best efforts of the Chair to find consensus,
the Committee often fails to take even routine steps to
implement its technical mandate. That must change.
As a first step, the Committee should implement the
recommendations contained in the May 2013 final
report of the Panel of Experts (S/2013/331, annex). The
recommendations are reasonable. If implemented, they
would provide clarity and guidance to States about
aspects of the sanctions. The Committee should also
sign an agreement with INTERPOL to help disseminate
information about individuals subject to targeted
sanctions. Other Sanctions Committees routinely take
such measures to implement the Council's resolutions.
In this Committee, however, some members have
politicized such actions and prevented the Committee
from doing its job.

Even more critical, the Committee must improve
its ability to respond to Iran's sanctions violations.
It should immediately respond to Iran's July 2012
ballistic missile launches, which were a clear violation
of resolution 1929 (2010). An effective response to
that violation would include new targeted sanctions
on those responsible. The Committee should also
follow up vigorously on violations involving Iran's
attempts to procure proliferation-sensitive items. A
failure to address those and other violations would
undermine the Council's credibility and authority. In
line with its mandate, the Committee must do more
to address Iran's arms smuggling. Its steady supply
of weapons and military support to extremist groups
clearly violates resolution 1747 (2007). In addition to
violating sanctions, such assistance directly threatens
stability in Yemen, Lebanon, Gaza, Iraq and other
regions. Needless to say, Iran's longstanding military
support of the Al-Assad regime is, under the current
circumstances, simply unconscionable.

Even in the light of Iran's troubling actions, we
remain convinced that principled diplomacy is still
the best tool to achieve a comprehensive and peaceful
solution to the international community's serious
concerns. We would welcome a constructive sign that
Iran may be prepared to engage substantively and
seriously with the international community. If Iran
chooses to do so, it will find a willing partner in the
United States. We hope that Iran's new leadership
chooses that path. Until Iran decides to meet its
obligations, the Committee's work remains critical
to the diplomacy of holding Iran accountable to the
Council and to the broader international community.

