Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We once again thank
Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed for her
briefing. I would like to express our appreciation to her
and to the President of the Council and the Chairperson
the African Union for the very important mission they
conducted very recently to two African countries that
are among those seriously affected by climate change.
That visit was very meaningful.

I would also like to thank the other briefers,
particularly Ms. Hindou Ibrahim, whose passionate
presentation was fully aligned with the purpose of this
meeting and the heavy responsibility that briefers have
to be as objective as possible and not be partial. That is
very critical and we should learn from today's meeting.
Frankly, what we heard today almost validates the
concerns expressed by some colleagues.

I wish to recognize the presence among us of the
President ofNauru and the Prime Ministers of Curacao,
Kingdom of the Netherlands. I would also like to greet
the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kazakhstan.

Climate change is one of the greatest threats to
the entire global community. No country can remain
unaffected, as the Deputy Secretary-General said.
Its devastating consequences not only undermine
development gains, but they also threaten the very
existence of our communities. Although their
contribution is negligible, it is well known that it is
developing countries, particularly the most vulnerable
among them that literally know nothing about how long
they can survive, that disproportionately suffer the
impacts of climate change.

We therefore underline that climate change
requires urgent and concerted global action and
responses, anchored primarily in promoting inclusive
and sustainable development. That is also why what we
did in 2015, when we unanimously adopted the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and its 17 Goals
was so historic and the expression of multilateralism at
its best. It is with that in mind that we concur with the
assessment of the Council, as reflected in presidential
statement S/PRST/2011/15, that

"possible adverse effects of climate change may, in
the long run, aggravate certain existing threats to
international peace and security".

We recognize that climate change, in certain
circumstances, could create conditions for conflict or
exacerbate it. In communities where there is heavy
dependence on natural resources for livelihoods, the
likelihood of intercommunal violence or cross-border
or regional conflicts is high. The situation in the Lake
Chad basin or the Sahel region is a clear manifestation
of the link between climate change and conflicts, and
the briefing by the Deputy Secretary-General yesterday
(see S/PV.8306), following her joint high-level visit
with the African Union, highlighted that aspect.

On the other hand, it is also important to note
that climate change or climate-related environmental
change does not automatically result in conflict. The
lack of durable and comprehensive solutions aimed
at addressing climate-change-induced migration,
insecurities, increased tensions and competition for
resources could lead to localized or cross-border
conflicts in various parts of the world. In this regard,
addressing the root causes of such climate-induced
conflicts remains of vital importance. We need to do
so in a comprehensive manner; this would require
taking concrete measures to reduce the vulnerabilities
of States to the impact of climate change and creating
a cooperative framework to mitigate such impacts,
including climate-induced migration and displacement.

Redoubling our efforts to ensure sustainable
development for current and future generations
in the context of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, the Addis Ababa Action Agenda, the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, the Paris Agreement on Climate Change and
the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction
2015-2030, inter alia, is critical. A genuine commitment
to multilateralism should make this self-evident.
Furthermore, ensuring the full implementation of the
Paris Agreement and of our commitments under various
frameworks aimed at addressing the adverse impacts
of climate change is a prerequisite for addressing
climate-change-induced conflicts or security risks.

In this regard, all countries, particularly developed
ones, should take concrete measures to honour their
commitments and pledges in line with the Paris
Agreement by providing sufficient and sustained
climate financing to developing countries, particularly
the most vulnerable. The facilitation of the transfer
of appropriate technology ought, naturally, to be part
of this obligation. Such efforts, in our view, would
complement national and regional efforts to address
the adverse impacts of climate change and prevent
climate-change-related security threats and conflicts.

To that end, the General Assembly and its relevant
subsidiary bodies and the Economic and Social Council,
as well as the relevant intergovernmental frameworks
established to address the root causes of climate change
and its adverse impacts, should continue to play the
primary role, as affirmed by the Security Council in its
presidential statement S/PRST/ZOll/IS.

Where the impacts of climate change have become
a threat to the maintenance of international peace
and security, the Security Council, in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations, has a role in
analysing the conflict and the security implications
and finding a path to peace and security. The Council,
in collaboration with the relevant regional and
subregional organizations, could also take concrete
measures to manage climate-change-induced security
risks and conflicts, in line with comprehensive
national and regional priorities. For instance, regional
initiatives such as the one by the Economic Community
of West African States to conduct a comprehensive
study and recommend an action plan to address
climate-change-induced conflicts in West Africa could
be cited as an example.

In conclusion, I would stress the need for all relevant
United Nations organs, within their own mandates, to
take concrete measures in line with their national plans
and priorities to address the root causes and negative
effects of climate change and related security threats
or conflicts.

