Mr. Pascoe: More than a week of intensive
diplomacy at the United Nations has underscored the
institutional readiness of the Palestinian Authority to
run a State and seen the Palestinian President apply for
membership for a State of Palestine in the United
Nations. The Quartet has noted this application, while
calling for resumed negotiations and urging concrete
proposals from the parties on territory and security
within three months of talks resuming. The Quartet
reaffirmed the international legal basis for the peace
process and its support, expressed on 20 May, for the
vision of Israeli-Palestinian peace outlined by
President Obama. It also urged the parties to avoid
provocations on the ground.

Judging by the passions of last week, the parties
remain far apart. No one can deny the depth of their
dispute, but there are now some building blocks in
place that could help make negotiations more effective
than before. These include a clear timetable,
expectations that the parties must come forward with
proposals, and an active role for the Quartet. It will not
be easy to chart a way forward, but now is again the
time for everyone to give diplomacy a chance.
11-51651

Let me begin by noting an important international
success story. The Palestinian Authority is capable of
running a State. This strong international consensus
was clear at the meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee on 18 September here in New York. The
meeting confirmed the assessments of the World Bank,
the International Monetary Fund and the Office of the
United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process of the capability of the Palestinian
Authority. The efforts to build robust State institutions
and revive the Palestinian economy have brought real
security and economic improvements. We commend
President Abbas and Prime Minister Fayyad on this
achievement. The Palestinian Authority has achieved
what it set out to do two years ago, and this must be
noted, preserved and built upon.

For this reason, the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
meeting urged greater facilitation by the Israeli
Government, including enhanced measures to enable
private sector growth in the West Bank and Gaza;
continued, predictable and improved revenue transfers
from Israel; and allowing Area C to develop. The
meeting expressed concern over the fiscal situation,
which many attributed to structural constraints on the
private sector, while underscoring the importance of
donor support to the Palestinian Authority. In this
regard, I welcome the $200 million transferred by
Saudi Arabia for the Palestinian Authority's recurrent
expenditures and development spending. With a
$150 million financing gap for the remainder of the
year, additional and timely donor support to meet the
Authority's needs is critical, including to ensure
payment of salaries and contracts.

When meeting last Friday, Quartet principals
stated that a donors conference should be held to give
further impetus to the State-building agenda. They also
proposed, as part of the context of renewed
negotiations, to identify additional steps they can
support individually and collectively so as to secure
significantly greater independence and sovereignty for
the Palestinian Authority over its affairs.

I stress the State-building achievements for a
reason. The main obstacles to a Palestinian State are
not institutional, but political: the unresolved issues in
the conflict between the parties, the continuing Israeli
occupation, and the ongoing Palestinian divide.

Last Friday, 23 September, President Abbas
submitted to the Secretary-General an application for
3
membership for a State of Palestine in the United
Nations. In accordance with the Charter and the rules
of procedure, the Secretary-General transmitted the
application to the President of the Security Council on
the same day and sent a copy to the President of the
General Assembly. The Secretary-General respects the
prerogatives of the Security Council and the General
Assembly. The application is now before the Council;
it is members' issue to decide.

As these deliberations continue, we must spare no
effort to help the parties back to the negotiating table.
The Quartet will now work for a preparatory meeting
of the parties within a month to agree on an agenda and
a method of proceeding. Let me appeal to both parties
to agree to move forward. The Quartet made clear that
it would expect the parties to come forward with
comprehensive proposals on territory and security
within three months of resumed negotiations.

This would be a moment where the parties would
be truly tested in their readiness to make serious
proposals that address the core concerns of the other. It
is also designed to ensure that the talks move quickly
to the heart of the matters in dispute. The goal would
be to make substantial progress within six months, with
a Moscow conference held at the appropriate time, and
to reach an agreement not later than the end of 2012.

Special Coordinator Serry played an active role
with the other Quartet envoys and Quartet
Representative Blair in developing this framework. As
the Quartet has made clear, the parties should refrain
from provocative actions if negotiations are to be
effective. It has also reiterated the obligations of both
parties under the Road Map.

Resuming negotiations and making progress is
easier said than done, of course, and this was evident in
the eloquent and deeply felt speeches of both leaders to
the General Assembly. Yet despite frustrations and lack
of trust, each leader extended his hand for peace, and
both parties have undertaken to review carefully the
Quartet call. We hope that, whatever its reservations,
each side will now engage towards the preparatory
meeting envisaged by the Quartet. The United Nations
intends to be a full participant in this effort, and
Special Coordinator Serry has already returned to the
region to follow up with both parties and his Quartet
partners.

I will not give a detailed report of developments
on the ground this month in my briefing today, but I do

wish to highlight a few key matters. During the
reporting period, a total of two Palestinians were
killed, including one militant, while 102 Palestinians,
including 12 children, were injured, and two Israeli
Defense Forces personnel and 10 Israeli civilians were
injured, illustrating the continuing cost of the ongoing
conflict.

In the current atmosphere, it is essential that all
sides impress on their security forces and civilian
populations the need to act responsibly. They must do
their utmost to avoid escalation and take early action to
defuse possible tensions. I commend the peaceful
nature of the large public demonstrations held in
support of the application for Palestinian membership
in the main Palestinian cities in the West Bank.

Extremists on both sides must not be allowed to
inflame the situation. The past month has seen an
upsurge in Israeli settler violence, including, on
5 September, the fifth arson attack on a mosque in the
past two months. The rule of law must be enforced by
Israeli authorities against this phenomenon. Security
must also be ensured for Israelis, as was underscored
by a car and knife attack in Tel Aviv by a West Bank
Palestinian on 29 August, and by Israeli reports that
they had foiled a suicide attack in August in Jerusalem.

One hundred housing new units were approved in
the Beit Aryeh settlement in the northern West Bank
since the last briefing. The Israeli authorities also
announced their intention to expropriate 200 acres of
land around a settler outpost in the West Bank. More
Palestinian structures in Area C have been demolished
to date in 2011 than in either of the past two years.
Today's decision by the Jerusalem District Planning
Committee to advance planning for a large number of
units in East Jerusalem is of particular concern. We
have repeatedly stated that settlement activity is illegal
and contrary to Israel's Road Map commitments.

In Gaza, despite the restoration of an uneasy calm
in late August, 18 rockets, including three Grad
rockets, were fired into Israel during the reporting
period. We condemn these indiscriminate attacks,
which must cease. During the same period, Israeli
forces conducted four incursions and two airstrikes into
Gaza, resulting in six Palestinian civilians being
injured, including three children. We continue to urge
Israel to show maximum restraint.
We also continue to call for further easing of
Israeli closure measures on Gaza, particularly in regard

11-5165]
to the importation of construction materials, exports
and the freedom of movement of people.

We can report no movement on Palestinian
reconciliation based on Palestinian Liberation
Organization commitments, although President Abbas
stated that he hopes that the implementation of the
reconciliation accord will be accelerated in the coming
weeks. There also has been no progress regarding
access to or the release of Staff Sergeant Shalit, who
remains in Hamas captivity.

Allow me to comment briefly on Lebanon, where
the overall security situation remained calm. On
20 September, in the West Bekaa, the Lebanese
Internal Security Forces arrested four men and killed
two others suspected to have links with the kidnappers
of the seven Estonian nationals who had been abducted
in March and released in July. The situation in the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
area of operations has remained generally stable.
However, UNIFIL's freedom of movement was
impeded in an incident on 13 September in the vicinity
of the village of Ayta ash-Sha'b, which resulted in the
light injury of one UNIFIL soldier.

Israeli violations of Lebanese airspace continued
on an almost daily basis, although at a diminished
pace.

We welcome the strong commitment to the
Special Tribunal expressed by President Suleiman in
his address to the General Assembly (see A/66/PV.11)
and reiterated by Prime Minister Mikati today.

In northern Lebanon, the United Nations
continues to coordinate closely with the Government of
Lebanon on the provision of assistance to displaced
Syrian nationals, as well as on matters of protection
and determination of their status. Their number, by our
count, has reached 3,780 people.
11-51651

The increase in Syrian nationals seeking refuge
across the border is a reflection of the escalating
political and human rights crisis in Syria, which has
killed at least 2,700 people since March. The
polarization continues to deepen between the Syrian
Government, which appears determined to pursue its
policy of violent repression despite international and
regional calls to change course, and a growing popular
opposition that has continued to organize protests
across the country.

On 15 September, a coalition of Syrian
opposition leaders announced the formation of a Syrian
national council and released a national consensus
charter affirming the peaceful, inclusive and
non-sectarian character of the Syrian uprising and
committing to the establishment of a modern State that
will guarantee the rule of law and respect for human
rights. We are aware of reports of increased defections
from within the army and the continued violence
against and mistreatment of activists and their
supporters.

On 12 September, the President of the United
Nations Human Rights Council appointed three experts
to form the international commission of inquiry
mandated by the Council on 23 August. They will meet
this week in Geneva to discuss their programme and
methods of work, and establish contacts with relevant
stakeholders. We underlined the importance of
accountability for all human rights violations
committed in Syria since March, and hope that the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic will extend
full cooperation to the Commission.

