Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): Allow me to begin by
congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October. We wish you every success. I would also like
to express our appreciation for the convening of
today's important debate and to welcome the
Secretary-General's report on the situation in
Afghanistan and its implications for international peace
and security (S/2008/617). In addition, we are grateful
to Mr. Kai Eide, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his insightful briefing.
5
Seven years ago this month, an unprecedented
war was launched - a war that was not against a
country or a State, but against the amorphous scourge
of terrorism that was threatening to undermine security
in all parts of the world. That war was unavoidable,
inevitable and absolutely necessary. Now, in 2008,
despite hard work on the part of international coalition
forces and Afghans alike, terrorism appears to be on
the rise again. The Taliban burn down schools, stamp
out reconstruction and butcher civilians. They attack
roads and regions around Kabul, hampering
international humanitarian relief efforts. Ordinary
people are increasingly their targets. Their belligerence
against true progress and security in Afghanistan is
continuous, boundless and cruel.

To push back against that scourge, we must first
understand the changes that have occurred with regard
to its sources and the strategy of the threat since 2001.

First, the Government of Afghanistan recognizes
that the Taliban is a heterogeneous group and that some
of its members may be willing to participate in the
peace process. Our Government will keep the door
open to such members.

Secondly, the Government of Afghanistan
acknowledges the evolving strategy of the Taliban and
Al-Qaida. While the world's attention was focused
within the borders of Afghanistan, the Taliban and
Al-Qaida intensified their operations in the Federally
Administered Tribal Area border regions of Pakistan.
They now hope to use the timing of the elections in the
United States and Afghanistan to force a change in the
international commitment in Afghanistan.

Thirdly, the Taliban are fighting a war of
perception. They seek to instil uncertainty about
prospects for peace in Afghanistan by launching
attacks of a spectacular nature - attacks that the news
media can easily capture and broadcast.

We must also recognize that security is not
confined to military security. Real security is
established through improvement in the day-to-day
lives of Afghans, measured by improvement in
humanitarian efforts, governance and the rule of law,
counter-narcotics efforts, the upcoming elections,
strong army and police forces, and a strong and
sustainable economy.

First, the humanitarian situation regarding the
food shortage in Afghanistan needs immediate

attention on the part of the international community,
especially as winter approaches. The crisis has been the
first topic discussed and pursued in every Afghanistan
Cabinet meeting this year. Our Government hopes that
the world will heed the call of the United Nations for
increased international relief efforts.

Secondly, three days ago, our Government took a
crucial step towards improving governance and
eliminating corruption. President Karzai announced a
reshuffling of the Cabinet, including the appointment
of a new Interior Minister. That key move accompanied
the creation of a High Office of Oversight to combat
corruption and of special anti-corruption police and
prosecutors. We are also strengthening local
governance through new appointments, the training of
local administrators and new incentives for
accountability.

Thirdly, counter-narcotics efforts in Afghanistan
are seeing the beginning of a breakthrough. More than
half of the provinces are poppy-free. The few
remaining centres of poppy cultivation are in the
insecure areas of Afghanistan, where international and
Government efforts have been unable to put down real
roots. The Government of Afghanistan applauds the
recent decision of forces led by NATO and the
International Security Assistance Force to target opium
factories for the first time.

Fourthly, our Government understands the
tremendous importance of secure, transparent, timely
and credible presidential elections in the summer of
2009. There is no alternative to elections in ensuring
the legitimacy of the process in Afghanistan. To that
end, we have drafted legislation on the Independent
Election Commission, and we held our first day of
registration last week. However, our Government also
cautions that the elections require a process of
sustained long-term efforts and hopes to ensure that the
political process acts as a unifying, rather than as a
divisive force for Afghanistan.

Fifthly, the Afghan National Army has made
significant improvements in command and control, and
plans are in place to increase its numbers from 75,000
to 134,000 by 2010. The Afghan National Police has
also increased its activity and is the focus of rank and
pay reform.

Sixthly, the Government of Afghanistan is
strongly dedicated to improving the economic
livelihood of every Afghan. We are building roads,
schools and clinics in more than two thirds of our
villages through the National Solidarity Programme.
As a testament to our efforts, gross domestic product
has tripled since 2001. In short, the Government of
Afghanistan is making progress on many fronts.
However, our goals are so ambitious as to need strong
and sustained international support to be fully realized.

The way forward in Afghanistan is to recognize
that abandonment and failure are not options. We must
stop engaging in the wrong debate of whether or not
we will fail. We must instead focus on the right debate,
on how we can succeed. That debate acknowledges the
absolute necessity of the following four items: a
regional solution; sustained international commitment;
appropriate strategies in this war of perceptions; and,
lastly, a consideration of all components important to a
successful political solution to Afghanistan's
challenges.

First, it is now clear that the Taliban is a regional
threat. Its base of operations is no longer in
Afghanistan, but in the border regions of the Federally
Administered Tribal Areas. We have found in the new
President of Pakistan, Mr. Asif Ali Zardari, a friend and
trusted leader with whom to address terrorism. Our
Foreign Minister, Mr. Rangin Dadfar Spanta, will visit
Pakistan on 22 October to further that collaboration
and discuss long-term strategic relations between the
two countries. However, the international community
also has the responsibility to maintain the momentum
between the elected Government of Pakistan and
Afghanistan by boosting joint efforts to eradicate the
threat of the Taliban and Al-Qaida.

Regarding the second aspect of the way forward,
the Government of Afghanistan applauds the
international community for its reinvigorated attention
to Afghanistan. We commend Kai Eide's leadership in
coordinating the efforts of the international community.
Only six months into his term, we are seeing very
positive results from the stronger collaboration
between our Government and the United Nations. In
addition, the Bucharest summit and the Paris
Conference produced a strong consensus that the
international community will stay engaged in
Afghanistan as long as necessary, verifying
international aid pledges that totalled more than
$20 billion. In the seven years since international
forces first entered Afghanistan, international attention
has often flagged, but the new relationship with the
United Nations, the Bucharest consensus and the Paris
momentum are all indications that international
attention is refocused. Let us sustain that attention and
not lose focus again.

The third important aspect of the way forward is
a full consideration of how to wage a smarter war of
perception. Three things need to be done.

First, we should be careful with what we say
about Afghanistan. Media outlets move with
astonishing speed in Afghanistan and word of mouth
carries any pessimistic news quickly to the Afghan
people. The Taliban have used some recent statements
and reports as a powerful weapon to convince the
Afghan people that the international community's
resolve is wavering. That is undeniably harmful to our
operations and efforts in Afghanistan.

Secondly, we must not underestimate our
successes. The gross domestic product of Afghanistan
has tripled since 2001. In two thirds of Afghanistan,
there is no conflict and millions of Afghans work and
live their lives peacefully. The international community
must not underreport the many success stories in
Afghanistan.

Thirdly, our assessments and reports must be
stronger in reflecting the destructiveness and brutality
of the Taliban. We build a school in six months; they
burn it down in six minutes. The Taliban are, in fact,
responsible for the majority of civilian casualties in
Afghanistan this year.

The fourth and final aspect of the way forward is
in regards to the Secretary-General's political surge in
Afghanistan. Such a political surge must consider the
following components to be successful.

First, reconciliation efforts must be better framed
both inside and outside of Afghanistan. Currently,
those reconciliation efforts are portrayed as an
alternative to the efforts of the past seven years. In
fact, reconciliation is but another tool in our arsenal to
ensure continued progress towards a stable
Afghanistan. From the members of the Ulema to tribal
leaders, strong forces desire peace and reconciliation in
Afghanistan. Thus, important steps have been taken in
recent months to begin the reconciliation process.

Secondly, a political surge includes not only
reconciliation with interested parties, but also a
strengthening of relationships with Afghan
communities themselves. Such outreach by the
Government of Afghanistan will be extended to

communities under Taliban influence and in secure,
peaceful regions.

Thirdly, a political surge cannot afford to neglect
the importance of military action. Afghanistan must be
able to negotiate from a position of strength, which
depends on the strong backing of international troops
and the Afghan National Army. An increase in
international troops is an essential and necessary first
step to counter terrorist activities. However, those
troops must also be willing to face enemies and
conduct operations thoroughly. They should address
responsibly the issue of civilian casualties that is a
challenge to our goal of winning the Afghan people's
hearts and minds.

We face at this time a critical opportunity to turn
the tide against the forces of insecurity and instability
in Afghanistan. The Government of Afghanistan will
devote itself fully and completely to the quest for
security and peace. In turn, we hope that this Council
will continue to generate the right debate - a debate
that acknowledges the importance of a regional
solution and of sustained international commitment; a
debate that assembles, with urgency, appropriate
strategies to fight effectively in this war of perceptions;
and a debate that considers all of the components
important to a successful political surge.

