President Sassou Nguesso (spoke in French): I
would like first of all to thank the Security Council for
this opportunity to address the Council today on an
issue which without question forms a major part of its
agenda: armed conflict in Africa. I am doing so on
behalf of the African Union, an institution which will
always express deep gratitude to the Security Council
for its tireless efforts and for the determination it is
demonstrating in its initiatives to support peace and
security on our continent, which for too long has been
buffeted and threatened. The stabilizing action that the
Council is taking and the partnership that has been
established between the Security Council and the
African Union are to be welcomed and encouraged,
particularly since today's meeting is taking place on
the eve of the missions that the Council will undertake
next week in Africa.

Fortunate coincidence has it that my country,
which is chairing the African Union this year, currently
occupies a seat on the Council and is able to play its
modest part in the Council's initiatives for Africa and
hence to provide a link between these two bodies
whose actions must always be undertaken in harmony.
Harmonization of our undertakings is a goal towards
which, fortunately, we all striving. This requires
effectiveness and credibility in our approaches. It
justifies the regular consultations that we conduct
between our two bodies. The way in which we together
manage such complex issues as Cote d'Ivoire and
Darfur is eloquent testimony to the relevance of that
vision.

The partnership that has been established between
the United Nations and the African Union is based
upon a vision which clearly establishes that there can
be no peace without development and there can be no
development without peace. The report of the
Secretary-General on the causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa (S/1998/318) remains relevant
today. It provides the basis for a broad strategy of
prevention which takes account of all the dimensions
of the violent crises which are shaking the African
continent.

Here, Security Council resolutions 1170 (1998),
1196 (1998), 1208 (1998) and 1209 (1998) continue to
be relevant and remain a subject of our attention since
they stress

"the close linkage between international peace
and security and sustainable development and the
need for the international community to respond
to the challenge of illicit arms flows to and in
Africa in a comprehensive manner, encompassing
not only the field of security but that of social
and economic development". (resolution 1209 (1998), sixth preambular paragraph)

That means that, because they are so closely
linked, we must deal appropriately with issues of
economic and social development, poverty elimination,
national reconciliation, good governance, social justice
and others. Ultimately, the goal is to create viable and
stable societies.

The creation within the African Union of the Peer
Review Mechanism responds to the need to be aware
of the multidimensional aspect of these conflicts.
Participation in the Mechanism reflects the
commitment of African leaders who are determined to
establish modern States. This vision and the practices
that arise from it enable Africa today to see the
prospect of a brighter future. We see this today in the
economic area, where the indicators seem to suggest
that there is movement towards consolidation in the
direction of more sustained growth. We see it also in
the area of peace and security, the subject of my
remarks. Yes, Africa is going in the right direction,
even if the line is not a straight one and if progress
remains fragile. Nevertheless, we embrace the positive
signs, of which there are many examples.

Most of the current conflicts are at least three
years old: these are not new crises. The tragic case of
Somalia, the situation between Eritrea and Ethiopia,
the crisis in northern Uganda and the situation in
Western Sahara are conflicts that, unfortunately, have
lasted because they have not been dealt with
appropriately. Nor have there been commitment or
mutual confidence on the part of the principal
protagonists.

Some conflicts that ranked among the worst in
the continent have now been settled in an encouraging
way - for instance, the civil war in Angola, which is
now but a bad memory, and the crises in Liberia, Sierra
Leone, Guinea-Bissau and, recently, Burundi. In the
management of some of these post-conflict situations,
we appeal for sustained, long-term international
support that could avoid a relapse or return to the
previous state of affairs. Hence, we welcome the
recently created Peacebuilding Commission, which in
Africa will find a place for appropriate
experimentation.

Concerning certain other conflicts now taking
place, the international community possesses scenarios
for emerging from crises; these should allow us to see
the light at the end of the tunnel before the end of this
year. Such is the case with the situations in C6te
d'Ivoire, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
in Darfur. In the first two cases, road maps exist with
clear timetables that must be respected. In this respect,
particular responsibility lies with the national actors,
whose efforts we are determined to support. In the case
of Darfur, following the agreement reached on 5 May
2006 in Abuja, which needs to be strengthened and
implemented, we have at our disposal a framework that
allows us to prepare for the transition towards a United
Nations operation of a strong African nature, in close
cooperation with all the parties, particularly the
Government of National Unity of the Sudan.

We must now continue to strive to strengthen the
partnership between the United Nations, the African
Union and the subregional communities. In this regard,
we welcome the adoption by the Security Council on
14 September 2005 of resolution 1625 (2005) on
enhancing the effectiveness of its role in conflict
prevention, particularly in Africa. Our continent has
the appropriate tools to implement this partnership. I
am referring in particular to the Protocol relating to the
creation of the African Union Peace and Security
Council and the African Union Non-Aggression and
Common Defence Pact, adopted in Abuja in January
2005.

In closing these general comments, I would like
to emphasize our common will to put an end to these
intolerable situations that continue in Africa by making
best use of all the means that international cooperation
provides, particularly in the framework of the
partnership that has been established between our two
organizations. To be sure, we still have a long way to
go, but I like to say that the longest journey always
begins with the first step. Patience and extended effort
are extremely valuable friends. I therefore hope that
the path that we have been following together for so
long will lead us in the end to more promising
horizons, because nowhere is it written that tragedy has
to remain at the heart of Africa's future.

