Mr. Moustafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Miroslav Jenca,
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his
briefing. I thank also Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General, who
is absent from today's meeting, for his ongoing efforts
in favour of the peace process in the Middle East and of
its terms ofreference. I thank him also for his continued
efforts to contain the deteriorating humanitarian
situation in the Gaza Strip, and for his consistent
encouragement of all Palestinian reconciliation efforts.

Over the past 70 years, the international community
has agreed that the two-State solution is the best and
most equitable solution to the Palestinian question.
However, the prospects for the implementation of such
a solution on the ground are dwindling by the day, and
Palestinian territories are being subjected to waves of
illegal settlement activity. I believe, therefore, that we
must rise up together to address these setbacks, which
threaten the life, safety and security of Palestinians and
Israelis alike.

The faltering two-State solution has created many
challenges for the Palestinian people, and frustration
has been rampant among Palestinians and Palestinian
factions, affecting their lives and their relations,
especially given that it has been 23 years since the
signing of the Oslo Accords, which called for the
establishment of a Palestinian State within five years.

However, despite these challenges, Egypt recently
succeeded in relaunching Palestinian reconciliation
efforts. The legitimate Palestinian Government has
returned to the Gaza Strip for the first time since 2007.
This is clear recognition of the unity of all Palestinians,
whether in the West Bank or in the Gaza Strip, under
a single leadership that represents them and speaks on
their behalf, a leadership that recognizes the State of
Israel and is committed to negotiations and peaceful
efforts as a way towards the two-State solution, despite
all the challenges and despite the Israeli incursions
into the territory of the future Palestinian State,
including Jerusalem.

As we work together with our Palestinian brothers
to seize the opportunity to reunify Palestinian
territories under a legitimate leadership, I call on the
international community, especially influential States,
to seize this historic opportunity and to salvage the
two-State solution through a comprehensive political
vision that eschews piecemeal, temporary or palliative
solutions, which have proved unsuccessful. I call on
them to recognize the risks and consequences resulting
from the failure of such a solution for the two peoples
and the region as a whole.

In addition, in line with the call for peace and
coexistence made by the President of Egypt in the
General Assembly (see A/72/PV.5), I call on Palestinians
and Israelis to realize that their two peoples will
continue to live on that sacred land and that neither will
go away. They must choose to either live and coexist
based on equal rights and obligations or to succumb to
one-upmanships and extreme positions that might serve
certain parties one day, but would force the two peoples
to suffer the dire consequences of illogic, incitement
and hatred.

A settlement is not impossible, as some like
to say. The resolutions of the United Nations since
1948, especially those of the Security Council, have
established detailed parameters for a settlement based on
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.
Those resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative, which
is considered a historic Initiative, endorsed by the
Council in resolution 2334 (2016), prove that we can
solve all issues only if there is a serious intention to do
so. The resolutions of the United Nations have never
imposed a solution on any party. They have, rather,
set a framework for a final settlement, based on direct
negotiations between the two parties.

In closing, I would like to reiterate our commitment
to working together with Palestinians and Israelis and
with all influential international Powers to reach a just
settlement to the Palestinian question.

