Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): First and foremost, we would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for having convened this session
to review the work of the Security Council during the
month of August. We would also like to congratulate
you and your entire delegation for the outstanding work
carried out this month. We are grateful for the concept
note you prepared, Sir, to guide our discussion today.

Turning to your point, Mr. President, about
potential areas of convergence between the Security
Council and the General Assembly in the area of
nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation, we believe
that, rather than viewing it as a matter of convergences,
the Assembly and the Council could employ a division
of labour based on the competencies enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations.

The Security Council is charged with addressing
disarmament and the non-proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction from the perspective of the fight
against terrorism, particularly as it relates to adopting
measures to prevent non-State actors, including terrorist
groups, from acquiring weapons of mass destruction.
There is no doubt that the globalization of commercial,
logistical and economic transactions has made the task
of controlling proliferation more complex, and has
made it easier for non-State actors and terrorists to
take advantage of transnational criminal networks in
their attempt to obtain weapons of mass destruction.
It is also true that terrorism has expanded its violent
methods and terrorists are more determined than ever
to obtain weapons of mass destruction and to use them
on civilians, as has occurred in Syria and Iraq.

In that connection, the Security Council plays
a fundamental role through resolution 1540 (2004),
and in fact has made strides in efforts to prevent,
investigate and respond to the threats and risks linked
to nuclear, biological and chemical weapons. Resolution
1540 (2004) has made it possible for the international
community to make headway in tackling the issue of
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction to
non-State actors. That has been accomplished, inter
alia, by improving reports, bolstering or adopting
new legislation, providing assistance, cooperating at
the regional level and drawing up national plans of
action. We are concerned that the Security Council is
not yet ready to assert that the only way to avoid the
destruction of the environment or of humankind by
way of such weapons, especially nuclear weapons, is
through their total elimination. That being the case,
we believe that the Security Council, as an organ,
finds itself constrained in spearheading the process of
nuclear disarmament.

It falls to the General Assembly - whose very first
resolution focused on disarmament - to work towards
the entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-
Test-Ban Treaty and the negotiation and adoption of an
internationally verifiable treaty banning the production
of fissionable material, as well as a comprehensive
treaty prohibiting the development, production,
stockpiling and use of nuclear weapons, among others.

We also believe there to be another urgent,
pending issue, namely, the establishment of a nuclear-
weapon-free zone in the Middle East. In that connection,
we urge Israel and other countries to unblock action on
the issue and to take concrete steps towards signing an
agreement to that effect.

The permanent members of the Security Council,
as nuclear-weapon States, have a fundamental role to
play in that process. Achieving a world free of nuclear
weapons necessarily entails a broad discussion on
all issues related to disarmament and international
security, based on the principles of preserving the
security of the individual parties and not allowing any
State to gain an advantage over any other, always with
a view to ensuring military stability without affecting
security and without weapons of mass destruction. That
discussion process should be open, broad and inclusive,
as set out in the proposal for the convening of the
fourth special session of the General Assembly devoted
to disarmament.

Turning to the second part of your concept note,
Sir, in connection with lessons learned and possible
ways to improve the future performance of the Security
Council in terms of conflict prevention - including,
for example, with regard to South Sudan, Syria and
Western Sahara - we believe that a critical area that has
been overlooked when in comes to conflict prevention
in the Security Council is the mobilizing of resources
for sustaining peace, which is essential for generating
peace dividends, including creating jobs, providing
public services, establishing solid political institutions
and providing justice.

We believe that preventing conflicts requires
more diplomacy and dialogue, and fewer threats and
sanctions. There appears to be a tendency among some
members of the Security Council to apply Chapter VII
of the Charter of the United Nations, instead of the
mechanisms aimed at preventing conflict as provided
under Chapter VI of the Charter - in practice, turning
to the various regional and subregional organizations
around the world. Resolving conflicts is always a
political undertaking, and there is therefore a need for
political will to prevent and resolve them.

We also want to highlight the damage done to the
Organization, and the world in general by, the double
standards by which the Council often operates. We have
spoken here about working methods, confidentiality and
transparency, but I would like to talk about silence. There
are issues that are subject to an absolutely untransparent
silence on the part of the Council. When members of
this organ work actively to prevent the dissemination of
information about conflict situations in certain parts of
the world, all members of the international community
are kept in the dark about key aspects that ought to
be addressed in order to prevent conflicts. That is the
case in Palestine and Western Sahara, for instance,
where silence and the untransparent manner in which
those issues are addressed call into question the entire
international security and peacekeeping apparatus that
serves to underpin relations among States.

I would mention, for example, the incident on
11 August in the vicinity of Al-Guerguerat, where
Moroccan military forces several times crossed the
berm, in violation of the ceasefire agreement, into
the Bir Gandouz sector, next to the first Sahrawi-
controlled military region. We believe that such events
do not receive adequate attention from the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations. By not being provided
with timely information on such developments, it was
not until 26 August that members of the Council were
informed - in closed consultations requested by my
country - about what had occurred. Such practices are
inacceptable. For we cannot overlook, for the sake of
political expediency, protracted conflict situations that
have an impact on international peace and security.

Furthermore, the situation in the occupied
territories of the State of Palestine has continued
to worsen, without the Council being able to send a
clear message demanding Israel to end its settlement
policy - the consequence of its prolonged military
occupation for nearly half a century. We have insisted
that the Israeli occupation is the main cause of human
rights and international humanitarian law violations
in the occupied territories. More than five years have
elapsed since the adoption of a Security Council
resolution on the Palestinian question.

To conclude, we would like to mention the open
debate (see S/PV.7753) on children and armed conflict,
during which a considerable number of countries
supported the agenda of the Security Council on the
subject. It is necessary to highlight that the issues of
accountability and protecting children in armed conflict
must be addressed in a non-selective and impartial
manner, while respecting the respective mandates of the
mechanisms established to that end in accordance with
the purposes and principles of the Charter of United
Nations, applicable international law and the relevant
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions.

I reiterate our congratulations to you, Mr. President,
and to your delegation for the outstanding way in
which you have led the work of the Council during the
month of August. Once again, we extend our hand in
cooperation with New Zealand in what we are certain
will be a successful piloting of the Council's business
in the month of September.

