Mr. Abdel Aziz (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic): The Security Council is meeting today to adopt
a draft resolution that reaffirms a serious international
resolve to achieve peace and stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina through a commitment to the full
implementation of the General Framework Agreement for
Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Annexes
thereto.

The draft resolution before the Security Council
today is the beginning of a new phase, following the
elections that took place according to Annex 3 of the
Peace Agreement, and the beginning of the establishment
of civilian institutions. This is a new phase, based on the
conclusions of the meetings of the Ministerial Steering
Board and of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina
held in Paris, which adopted the Action Plan for the next
12 months to promote the civilian implementation of the
peace process.

 

As we stand on the threshold of this new phase, my
delegation would like to reaffirm a number of
considerations that we believe should receive priority
attention within the framework of the full implementation
of the provisions of the Peace Agreement. These
considerations are the following.
The first consideration is the importance of the resolve
of the members of the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to commit themselves fully and without
exception to follow up the peace process, on behalf of the
three peoples that make up Bosnia and Herzegovina, in
order to achieve full implementation of the Peace
Agreement and to maintain the sovereignty of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and its territorial integrity.

The second consideration is the importance of the
commitment of all parties to full cooperation with all the
entities participating in the implementation of the Peace
Agreement, as well as with those entities charged with
special missions by the Security Council, particularly the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and its
orders for the arrest of those accused of violating the
principles of international humanitarian law.

In this context, I should like to pay tribute to the
central Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina for having
carried out such orders, and to express our condemnation of
the continuing refusal by other parties in the region to do
so. I should like also to underline the role that the
Stabilization Force (SFOR) must undertake in carrying out
the arrest orders of the indictees as well as the need for the
international community to exert as much pressure as
possible to ensure full compliance with the Tribunal's
orders.

The third consideration is the principle of
conditionality underlined in operative paragraph 4 of the
draft resolution, which links the availability of international
financial assistance and the degree to which all the
authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina implement the Peace
Agreement, including cooperation with the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and cooperation with
the Action Plan that has been approved by the London
Conference. That principle must be implemented so as to
differentiate between those who cooperate and those who
do not. It must be a continuing incentive to implement all
the provisions of the Peace Agreement. It must not be used
in a way that might cause some parties in Bosnia and
Herzegovina to fall victim to the irresponsible behaviour of
others.

The fourth consideration is the importance of the
municipal elections to be held in 1997 under the
supervision of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) through its mission, which
will continue its duties in the next phase.

The fifth consideration is the utmost importance of
implementing arms-control measures in the region, fully
and without any further delay. This must be done with
goodwill, without seeking ways to avoid it. Full
transparency must be ensured in such an implementation
in order to establish mutual confidence.

The sixth consideration is that the highest level of
respect for internationally agreed human rights and
fundamental freedoms must be ensured, without religious
or ethnic discrimination. All parties must ensure the right
of all refugees and displaced persons to return freely and
in safety to their original homes or any other place of
their choice in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Finally, the reconstruction and development of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the creation of a civil
society there take on special importance at this stage.
Such activities will lessen tensions in the region.
Therefore, international financial institutions and donor
States have a great responsibility to provide as much as
possible in this field.

In the light of these considerations, and given the
importance of continuing the uninterrupted
implementation of the provisions of the Peace Agreement,
Egypt has decided to contribute forces to SFOR. We have
decided to continue providing police officers to the
International Police Task Force in the next phase. Within
the same context, the Egyptian delegation will vote in
favour of the draft resolution.

