Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the
outset, I wish to express our appreciation to you, Sir,
for convening this important open debate at this critical
juncture in developments in the Middle East. This
meeting will surly provide us with an overview of the
current state of affairs in the region and the path
forward to bring peace to the Middle East.

The question of Palestine, from its occupation
until today, has remained one of the biggest challenges
and problems of the world. The occupation represents
the most painful and biggest tragedy of humankind in
modern history. More than six decades of massacres,
home demolitions, embargos, the abduction and
imprisonment of people, attacks on neighbours and
others, and violations of international law and international
humanitarian law have followed this occupation.

The Israeli regime continues to defy international law
in its pursuit of an unlawful and inhuman blockade of the
Palestinians, particularly in the Gaza Strip, which has
entered its fifth year. A recent report of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East indicates that broad unemployment in Gaza in
the second half of 2010 reached an unprecedented 45.2 per
cent, one of the highest rates in the world. The seizure of
another civilian boat, the Dignite-El Karama, by the Israeli
regime was yet another violation of international law. The
inhumane blocked is a source of grave concern to people all
over the world, who have expressed their support for such
humanitarian gestures as the freedom flotilla and the
Dignite-Al Karama and called for the immediate lifting of
the Gaza blockade.

States supporting the Israeli regime have brought
shame on themselves because, on the one hand, they claim
to advocate human rights and international law and
international humanitarian law, while at the same time they
support the occupation, illegal settlements and all violations
of international law by the brutal regime occupying
Palestine. The history of the Israeli regime is nothing but
crime, the killing of men, women and children, the use of
banned weapons and the stockpiling of nuclear weapons,
blind assassinations, attacks on civilians and aid convoys in
international waters, and war crimes in Lebanon and
Palestine. All these inhumane acts have become the routine
doings of the occupying regime. There is no doubt that
support for this regime is tantamount to support for
occupation, massacre, assassination and the violation of
human rights.

Attaining a peaceful and just settlement of the
question of Palestine is imperative to the realization of
comprehensive and lasting peace and stability in the Middle
East and beyond. In our view, achieving lasting peace in
Palestine and the region will be possible only by ensuring
justice, putting an end to discriminatory and racist policies,
and ending the occupation of Palestine and other occupied
territories. Today, we are seeing more and more States
joining the ranks of those that have already recognized
Palestine as an independent State. This is a very clear
indication that the cause of Palestine is gaining new
momentum.
On Syria, there have evidently been attempts to incite
sectarian sensitivities and denominational tensions and
divisions, a known tactic of hegemonic regimes. Such

mischievous attempts are worthless and vain and will have
no effect on the stability of the country. The enemies of
humankind do not want and have never wanted the people
of Syria to remain united, independent and developed. But
the people of Syria know that the key to their independence
and dignity is unity and resistance to mischievous and
subversive attempts.

The Israeli regime has persisted in its aggressive
policies towards Lebanon by constantly violating its land,
sea and air space and refiising to withdraw from occupied
Lebanese villages. These occupations and acts of
aggression should stop immediately.

Before concluding, I would like to react to the
reference made to my country by the representative of the
Israeli regime in this Chamber this morning. It is no
surprise that, in levelling baseless allegations against Iran's
nuclear programme, the Zionist regime has preposterously
attempted to deflect attentions from its long and dark
catalogue of crimes and atrocities, such as occupation,
aggression, militarism, State-terrorism, and crimes against
humanity. It is a widely recognized fact that the Israeli
regime's clandestine development and unlawful possession
of nuclear weapons poses a uniquely grave threat to
regional and international peace and security. The Israeli
regime has clearly defied the demands of the overwhelming
majority of the United Nations Member States that have
time and again called on it to renounce nuclear weapons
and accede to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT).

Regrettably, the inaction of the relevant United
Nations organs in the face of such Israeli policies and
practices has emboldened this dangerous regime. The
Council is expected to condemn the Israeli regime for the
possession of nuclear weapons, compel it to abandon
nuclear weapons, urge it to accede to the NPT without
delay, and demand that it promptly place all its nuclear
facilities under the full-scope safeguards of the
International Atomic Energy Agency. Indeed, peace and
stability cannot be achieved in the Middle East so long as
the massive Israeli nuclear arsenals continue to threaten the
region and beyond.

