The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Mexico.

This meeting of the Security Council is especially
significant. It provides a twofold opportunity: first, to
renew the international community's political and legal
commitment to the fight against terrorism, and
secondly, to thank and to pay a well-deserved tribute to
Ambassador Greenstock and his team, headed by Anna
Clunes, In that context, we also wish to welcome to the
chairmanship Ambassador Inocencio Arias of Spain
and his team and to wish them every success. The
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) remains in good
hands. I take this opportunity also to thank the experts
of the Committee and the Secretariat team, in particular
Ms. Sujata Mehta.

My delegation associates itself the statement that
will be made later by the representative of Peru on
behalf of the Rio Group.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee is an
instrument created pursuant to an exceptional
resolution of the Security Council - a resolution that
represents a step forward in the building of
international law. Indeed, the fight against terrorism
must be implacable and merciless; that is the resolve
expressed in the mandate that the Security Council
entrusted to the Committee. The fight against terrorism
is ultimately in the hands of States, and it is up to the
Committee to provide guidelines and support so that
they can effectively carry out their international
obligations in that regard.

Terrorism is an act of barbarism. Therefore,
fighting terrorism must be an act of civilization, carried
out with scrupulous respect for human rights. We are
fighting terrorism not only in order to live in safety, but
also - and above all - in order to preserve and
broaden our freedoms, to affirm the dignity of human
life and to ensure the rule of law. Terrorism is
essentially an enemy of freedom; thus the fight against
this phenomenon must not be a pretext for cancelling
rights and freedoms. In the fight against terrorism,
international law must be our best weapon: that is
Mexico's conviction.

The legitimacy of all our efforts would be
significantly diminished if we were to depart from the
fundamental principles and purposes that govern the
Organization. For that reason, my delegation - in the
context of the General Assembly and recently in the
Commission on Human Rights - has promoted draft
resolutions that emphasize the need to protect human
rights in the fight against terrorism. In addition, we
enthusiastically welcome the recent exchange between
Ambassador Curtis Ward and the Human Rights
Committee in Geneva, and we hope that cooperation in
that sphere between that Committee and the CTC will
intensify. My delegation believes that we must bear in
mind the growing importance of this issue in the light
of the report submitted by the Secretary-General in the
context of the fifty-ninth session of the Commission on
Human Rights, in conformity with General Assembly
resolution 57/219.

With respect to the progress made in the
consideration of reports submitted to the Committee,
my delegation believes that it has been possible to set
priorities according to each State's capacity to
implement resolution 1373 (2001). In the subsequent
stages, which will begin under Spain's leadership, the
Committee's work must go beyond mere recognition of
the existence of national legislation in that regard and
must be aimed at considering the establishment and
development of the necessary administrative machinery
to effectively implement the resolution's provisions.

Capacity-building through the Committee's
assistance programme is one of the key elements that
will enable us to move all States forward together
towards our common objective. The CTC should
explore all possible avenues so as to maximize its
capacity to respond to requests for assistance on the
part of Member States.

All of the foregoing clearly reveals the
Committee's cooperative nature. The force of its
mandate pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) lies in
cooperation among States. In that connection, the
certainty of a clear mandate that is free of ambiguous
interpretations has been the factor that has enabled us,
under Sir Jeremy Greenstock's direction, to promote
the consensus, cooperation, authority and legitimacy of
the Committee itself.

We welcome the forthcoming meetings of the
Committee with representatives of the International
Atomic Energy Agency, the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, the World Customs
Organization and INTERPOL to consider the issue of
weapons of mass destruction and terrorism. Such
meetings should serve as a preparatory step, before the
Committee devotes greater time and effort to that vital
aspect of resolution 1373 (2001).

In this same context, the Committee should, in
the near future, begin preparations to address the links
between terrorism and transnational organized crime,
pursuant to paragraph 4 of resolution 1373 (2001).

Furthermore, the Committee has adopted the right
course in promoting the idea that, on a voluntary basis,
States might include reports presented to other
organizations as part of the information they submit to
the Committee itself. That would help to avoid the
duplication of efforts and lighten the burden on States
in terms of reporting requirements. Clearly the
confidentiality required by States must be preserved.

The special meeting of the CTC on 6 March with
international, regional and subregional organizations
represented a successful step forward. That meeting
reaffirmed the will and the need to act in an effective
and coordinated fashion. It is now incumbent on each
organization, within the context of its mandate,
to establish institutional mechanisms - if such
mechanisms do not already exist - and to develop
political and legal measures to back up all of those
efforts. That is the difficult task that lies ahead.

The decision of the Organization of American
States shortly to convene a meeting to follow up the 6
March meeting is a clear indication of the commitment
of the hemisphere in this regard.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2003/191),
submitted pursuant to the provisions of resolution 1456
(2003). My Government has taken due note of its
contents, and in this context we would like to highlight
a few points to which my delegation has already
referred.

Combating terrorism requires a far-reaching
response that goes to the root cause of such acts and
addresses the underlying social, economic and human
situation. Nothing can justify terrorism, but there are
explanations for it. The best weapons to use against
terrorism are sustainable development and those that
tackle in a comprehensive manner the humanitarian
problems generated by conflict in various parts of the
world. In this endeavour, we should not overlook the
fact that the promotion of human rights, tolerance and
education are vital elements that must be taken into
account in tackling terrorism. This is the new culture of
understanding and the rule of law that the fight against
terrorism demands. The United Nations certainly has a
key role to play in realizing that vision.

Only if we are united in our objectives and
purposes and act in accordance with the law will we be
able, in the long term, to secure our goal of effectively
preventing terrorist acts.
I would like to conclude by paying tribute to
Ambassador Greenstock and by welcoming
Ambassador Arias.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Belarus. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.

