Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I should
like at the outset to pay tribute to the members of the
Council who shouldered their responsibilities in carrying
out the mission with me. I also thank the Secretariat,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Alan Doss, and the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) for having organized the mission to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. I believe that all
participants will agree with me that it was a very
intense yet extremely useful mission for us all.

I recall that the mission to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo was justified by the fact that we
shall soon have to take important decisions regarding
the future of MONUC. In that context, we wished to
determine with the Congolese authorities - first and
foremost President Kabila, who honoured us with a
hearing, as well as members of the Government, the
Congolese Parliament and local civil society - how
best to achieve our common goal of restoring the
sovereignty of the Congolese State over its entire
2

territory by rebuilding a stable and peaceful country.
We can do so only in the framework of a sustainable
and trusting partnership with the authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We were there not
to negotiate but to hear the positions of the Congolese
authorities and the various interlocutors with whom
we met.

I believe that we can draw the following lessons
from our meetings. First, the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has evolved over
the past 10 years and progress has been made. At the
same time, however, the situation remains fragile. The
humanitarian and human rights situations in particular
are worrisome. As a result, any change in the situation
of the United Nations presence in the country will have
to be undertaken cautiously on the basis of the
situation on the ground and avoid creating new
instability. I would stress that we cannot follow
artificial time frames and must be guided only by the
reality of the situation on the ground.

Secondly, security sector reform is, of course, a
key challenge in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, as it is in many post-conflict countries. The
lack of an effective republican army is, according to
President Kabila himself, the greatest failure of the
international community and his own Government. The
Congolese authorities confirmed their desire to
professionalize their army through bilateral cooperation,
while calling for MONUC'S support in training the
police force and strengthening the capacities of the
judicial system. Lastly and importantly, MONUC is
expected to provide logistical support for the various
elections scheduled for the coming months.

Naturally, my colleagues and I could elaborate
further on all these issues on the basis of our detailed
discussions with all our interlocutors, in which many
extremely important questions, in particular the issue
of logistical support for the elections, were raised.
Members of the Council will no doubt recall the scale
and cost of the support we provided to the 2006
elections. Hence, support for the upcoming elections
will obviously have very significant consequences for
the Organization. We shall return to this topic in detail.

What are the consequences for MONUC? I
believe that, first, the members of the Security Council
have expressed their readiness to work with the
Congolese authorities to strengthen peace and stability
in the country in order to ensure the protection of
10-36802
civilians and allow for the reconfiguration of MONUC.
I believe that the message we conveyed to the
Congolese authorities is clear. MONUC will not
remain in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
indefinitely. We must aim for a transition that would
restore Congolese sovereignty over the entire country,
but that transition will have to be prepared in
cooperation with the Congolese authorities through
dialogue and a common analysis of the situation before
we can foresee the inevitable consequences.

Secondly, we are ready to support the efforts of
the Congolese authorities in security sector reform and
the implementation of the zero-tolerance policy against
impunity.

Lastly, we discussed the need to continue our
discussions. In that context, we are convinced that the
decisions taken by the United Nations will benefit from
an ongoing analysis of the situation on the ground.

Taking into account the outcome of these
meetings, France is preparing a draft resolution, to be
considered shortly, that will renew MONUC's mandate
before the end of the month.
10-36802

In conclusion, I would say in my personal
capacity that we found the Congolese authorities to be
very open to dialogue with the Security Council. While
the Congolese authorities are, quite legitimately,
foreseeing the departure of MONUC, they at no time
presented any ultimatums or demands. On the contrary,
they offered us an appropriate framework, and I
believe that we can rest assured that the foundations
have been laid for a dialogue between the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Security Council. Our
draft resolution will seek to reflect the quality of those
exchanges.

