Mr. Rubadiri (Malawi): My delegation would like to
thank you, Sir, and the other members of the Security
Council for giving us this opportunity to contribute to this
very important discussion on Angola. I find it a little bit
difficult to be able to say much more in thanking the
previous President and yourself with respect to meetings
that were closed to us, but I am sure they were done with
a lot of wisdom as well.

As members know, Malawi lies deep in the southern
part of Africa in which the Republic of Angola also lies.
The brotherhood of this region, so dear to us, has been
shared in a history that has been as stormy as the Cape of
Good Hope and as dark and tragic as the causes that
mothered it.

We speak, therefore, with feelings of great hope and
conviction that the ray of light in the tunnel will soon be
seen. Miracles have happened in southern Africa. Angola
will not be the exception.

We thank the Secretary-General for his report on the
United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM III), contained in document S/1996/503 of 27 June 1996.
We pay particular tribute to him for his continuing efforts
and those of his Special Representative, Mr. Alioune
Blondin Beye, UNAVEM. III personnel and of all others too
many to mention here, in the search for a peace that we
also cherish and yearn for in Angola.

We have seen the development of many positive
advances towards peace. These have been acknowledged in
the Secretary-General's report, and we welcome these
developments. Like other nations that have spoken before
us, however, we must say that we remain deeply
concerned by the pace at which some of the agreed
measures have been and continue to be implemented.

In this regard, while acknowledging the positive
developments - such as the adoption of the framework
agreement on military matters, the promulgation of the
Amnesty Law, the beginning of the process of
incorporating UNITA military personnel into the Angolan
Armed Forces and the completion of the quartering of the
rapid reaction police - we continue to have many
anxious moments. We must take notice of the sporadic
skirmishes that have been reported in some provinces. We
hear of delayed quartering, desertions and, above all,
UNITA's reluctance to hand over better-quality weapons
and other equipment used for military purposes.

These are disturbing developments portending a
spirit of irritating reluctance, a simple lack of faith or
perhaps a deliberate refusal to come out openly for peace
and national reconstruction. As I said before, we cry for
Angola. Our region cries for Angola. We in Africa know
that our tragedies cannot be played out in an arena of
wasted time. The world tends to be impatient with us for
some reason or other. This is an appeal to the brothers
who are players in all this to realize that, after the
popping of bullets, we have to uproot the mushrooms of
mines that form the carpet on which humanity walks in
dear Angola, maiming women, children, old fathers and
mothers. These fields did not come from villages of
Africa, and that is why the international community must
take note of our appeal to help us to demine them.

A wholesome peace cannot be achieved in Angola
and the region if no corrective measures are taken to
address these concerns and many others so succinctly
outlined in the Secretary-General's report. We urge all the
parties concerned, particularly UNITA, to continue
abiding by the agreements reached in the Lusaka
Protocol. We appeal specifically to UNITA to adhere
strictly to the agreed time-frame for carrying out all
measures aimed at a successful outcome for the Lusaka
Protocol. The people of Angola and the region have
waited so long for peace and tranquility; delay, even in
terms of months, only prolongs the misery and the
suffering.

The peace process in Angola has reached a critical
stage. It requires a concerted effort and the continued
support of the international community. We therefore
support the Secretary-General's recommendation for the
extension of the mandate of UNAVEM. III. We also

 

appeal for donor support for the many needs arising from
demobilization and reintegration, and in order to alleviate
the socio-economic hardships that Angola is currently
facing. This region knows that if South Africa was able to
solve problems that touched us all, Angola too will be able
to solve problems critical to the whole of Africa but also to
the international community and the Security Council:
problems of peace and security.

