Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, it gives me pleasure to warmly
congratulate you, Madam President, and your friendly
country, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I wish you every
success. I would also like to commend you on your
selection of the theme for this open debate.

I would like to stress the commitment of the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to the rule of law in line with
the Charter of the United Nations. We would like to
stress that the Charter, which enshrines the importance
of freedom, sovereignty and justice for all, should
always be present in our minds and in the context of
our efforts to build a bright future for our children,
who will inherit this world with all its potential and
challenges.

The diversity of the world's systems and the
traditions of its peoples confirms that there is not
a single model for the rule of law, as well as the
importance of pursuing the dialogue with regard to the
various successful national applications in this area.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia was established on
the basis of the teachings of the Islamic faith, which
is anchored in justice and equality. Those principles
include different forms of human cooperation and
harmony. God the Almighty has taught us that we
cannot be faithful unless we desire for others what we
desire for ourselves, and that whoever unduly kills a
human being has in effect killed all people. It is on those
principles that the law and governance were established
in my country.

In this international Organization, we start from
different cultures and concepts, but all ofus are seeking
a common goal, namely, the development of a world in
which we renounce our intolerance and differences in
order to live in enduring peace and security.

The system of Islamic jurisprudence concurs, in its
fundamentals, with the principles of the rule of law. It
concurs with the formal interpretation of the concept
related to the need to establish a law that regulates all
the affairs of the community. It also concurs with the
substantive interpretation of the rule of law's concept,
that is to say, the commitment of State authorities to the
law. The principles of Islamic sharia, which govern my
country, are an example of a full-fledged legal system
based on the principles of shura, justice, equality
and dignity. As to the lies that some are trying to
promote asserting that the Islam suppresses freedoms
and oppresses women, they are nothing but desperate
attempts to cover the truth and promote hatred. Islamic
sharia has provided for respect for human rights,
including safeguarding one's faith, soul, mind, honour
and wealth. Therefore, human rights in Islam include
political, civil, economic, cultural and social rights.

Human rights in Islamic sharia are more important
than mere laws. They are an integral and holy part of our
faith; our belief in them leaves no room for bargaining
or mischaracterization.

My country recognizes that we live in an
interactive and changing world, but we see in that
constant development a chance for rapprochement and
consensus. We would like to stress that no State should
unilaterally adopt legislation that unduly undermines
the economic and financial balance in its region or the
world.

It is strange that the Israeli representative talks in
this forum about the alleged violations of the rule of law
in my country and other Arab countries. For we know
that the most serious violations of international law are
committed by the occupying Israeli authorities, which
practice the worst forms of State terrorism against the
Palestinian people, in total disregard of international
law and international legitimacy, and invent baseless
pretexts to continue their policies of blockade and
aggression against a powerless people.

Where does Israel stand in terms of the rule of law
when it carries out political assassinations and summary
killings? Where does Israel stand in terms of the rule
of law when its settlers invade territory and displace
its legitimate population? Where does is Israel stand
in terms of the rule of law when it allows its soldiers
to desecrate holy places and places of worship for both
Muslims and Christians? Where does is Israel stand in
terms of the rule of law when it expels the Palestinians
from their homes in Jerusalem, in a despicable practice
of ethnic cleansing?
Here in this Chamber, the Israeli representative
has claimed that the countries of the region do not
respect the rule of law, as if he had not heard of the
multitude of United Nations resolutions that call for
the implementation of international law, which Israel
continues to violate around the clock - including the
continuing Israeli occupation itself, which represents
the worst violation of international law and international
legitimacy?

What is being inflicted upon the Syrian
people - including killings, torture and
displacement - at the hands of the regime, which is
responsible for their protection, is truly regrettable. I
would like to stress that, from the start of the crisis in
Syria, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has sought to find
a peaceful solution that ensures that all those who have
blood on their hands are held accountable and that the
Syrian people play a leading role in that regard.

However, after three years of conflict in Syria,
during which the reins of power have been brought down
upon children's skulls, amid the screams of innocent
people, the international community is still unable to
shoulder its responsibility to protect a people facing
oppression and extermination or to hold accountable
the linchpins of the regime responsible for killing more
than 140,000 citizens and for displacing millions more,
thereby destabilizing the entire region andjeopardizing
international peace and security.

As to the Syrian representative's claims that his
country is fighting terrorism and other States are
supporting terrorists, they are nothing but a desperate
attempt to divert attention from the reality in that
country, which faces the greatest tragedy seen in this
century - or throughout the ages.

We would like to stress the need for international
cooperation based on collective responsibility, in line
with the principles of international law, including
when it comes to combating and dismantling illegal
networks and organized crime, money laundering and
illicit trafficking in weapons and human beings. We
believe that all such violations pose a serious threat to
international peace and security.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia makes every possible
effort, on the basis of its commitment to the Charter
of the United Nations, to be an effective Member of
the Organization. Our commitment is not limited to
enacting relevant national legislation and commitment
to the resolutions of the Security Council and General
Assembly. It also extends to making out utmost our
effort to promote justice and law.
The initiative of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to set
up the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre in New
York and the King Abdullah bin Abdulaziz International
Centre for Interreligious and Intercultural Dialogue in
Vienna are but two examples of our commitment to
collective action to maintain international peace and
security, two of the most important objectives of the
rule of law.

In conclusion, my country stresses the importance
of the principle of sovereignty and of the right of every
State to exercise its political freedom independently on
its territory without foreign threats of the use of force.

However, at the same time, we do not underrate
the right of every people to live free of oppression on
their own land and to benefit from its natural wealth
and resources in order to enjoy the social and economic
development needed for stability.

