The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Germany
and Italy in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions ofthe Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sacirbey
(Bosnia and Herzegovina) took the seat reserved
for him at the Council table; Mr. Schnmacher
(Germany) and Mr. Francese (Italy) took the
seats reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch, High
Representative for the Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Petritsch to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them a letter
dated 18 October 2000 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
transmitting a letter dated 18 October 2000 and a report
by the High Representative for the Implementation of
the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina,
document S/2000/999.

At this meeting the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch, High
Representative for the Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina. I give him the
floor.


