Ms. Morrison Gonzalez (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the briefers for the
information they have given us today.

We welcome the good offices of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) in
promoting peaceful solutions in the subregion through
dialogue, confidence-building and reconciliation
among the parties. We want to highlight its advocacy
work with the countries of the subregion on the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic, and its contribution to the resumption
of the activities of the joint commission of the Central
African Republic and the Congo. We also underscore
their enormous efforts towards a peaceful resolution
of the crisis in the North-West and South-West regions
of Cameroon.

We are sorry to see the deterioration of the security
situation in some parts of the region, especially in the
Lake Chad area, as a result ofBoko Haram's attacks and
the worrying situation in Cameroon. We also condemn

the abuses committed against civilians, particularly
the abduction of adults and children by the Lord's
Resistance Army.

The adverse effects of climate change, such as
increasingly frequent and large-scale droughts and
floods, are a challenge for Central Africa and continue
to be of great concern. The incidence of extreme
weather events hurts farming and has a negative impact
on people's health and food security. In that regard,
we welcomed the extraordinary ministerial meeting
in Brazzaville of the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS) and its Governments" adoption
of a common subregional position on the contribution
of Central African forests to the global fight against
climate change and commitment to reducing threats to
the world's second-largest rainforest and mobilizing
more global support for the subregion. We believe this
initiative will make a positive contribution to improving
the living conditions of those who live in forests and in
urban centres alike.

The humanitarian situation in various parts of
Central Africa continues to be of great concern,
particularly in Cameroon, where the escalating
violence and insecurity have affected the lives of
hundreds of thousands of civilians, especially women
and children. The security is exacerbating the high
rate of sexual abuse and exploitation, as well as the
incidence of murders, abductions, arbitrary detentions
and forced recruitment. We deplore and strongly
condemn the killing of a humanitarian actor in north-
western Cameroon on 1 December and urge regional
organizations to continue to intensify their mediation
and dialogue efforts among the parties in order to
build the confidence and political will needed to build
sustainable peace throughout the country.

In conclusion, we commend the work of Mr. Fall,
UNOCA and ECCAS for their efforts to promote a
peaceful solution to the crises in the region. We urge
all the countries of Central Africa to expand the
democratic space and take concrete steps to improve
the processes of dialogue with the various political
actors and civil society, with a View to addressing the
common problems caused by armed groups, illegal
activities and transhumance, in order to develop a
safe region, respect for human rights and sustainable
stability, which would enable its human and social
wealth and natural resources to be used more effectively
and thereby transform its economy, offering greater
opportunities for socioeconomic development for each
individual country and the region at large.

