Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China welcomes you to New York, Madam President,
to preside over today's open meeting. I thank Under-
Secretary-General Lowcock and the Executive Director
of the World Food Programme, Mr. Beasley, for
their briefings.

For some time now, some African and West Asian
countries and regions have seen droughts and the effects
of climate change, among other challenges, and have
suffered from severe famine. Helping the countries
concerned to cope with famine and settle the issue will
help eliminate the root causes of war and conflict. The
United Nations, the World Food Programme and other
relevant agencies have made great efforts to alleviate
disasters, which China greatly appreciates. The
international community should continue to provide
help to the countries and regions concerned.

First, it is necessary to promote inclusive and
balanced development that benefits all. Development
is a top priority and the fundamental policy objective
if various global issues are to be resolved. The
United Nations system must play a coordinating
role to promote the effective implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, give
priority to the elimination of poverty and hunger
and continue to increase input into the development
of developing countries. The principles of extensive
consultation, joint contributions and shared benefits
should be adopted in global governance to guide
the globalization of the economy towards healthy
development, properly respond to climate change issues
and actively help developing countries to enhance their
capacity for independent development with a View to
achieving development.

Secondly, efforts should be stepped up for the
resolution of regional hotspot issues to help the regions
in conflict realize peace and stability at an early date
and embark on the road to sustainable development.
The Security Council and the international community
should have a greater sense of urgency in finding
political solutions to relevant hotspot issues, act in
accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, assist countries in
conflict in advancing the peace process and national
reconciliation and in resolving their disputes through
such peaceful means as dialogue and consultation, with
a view to building together a world of lasting peace and
universal security for all to share and to create a good
environment for common development.

Thirdly, all United Nations organs should perform
their respective functions and observe the division of
labour while strengthening cooperation. The Security
Council, which has the primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security issues,
should focus its efforts on helping relevant countries and
regions to respond to peace and security issues, while
the World Food Programme and the United Nations
humanitarian agencies should respond to the needs of
Member States in a timely manner and actively carry
out food aid and other humanitarian relief activities.
The strengths of and the roles played by regional and
subregional organizations should be fully tapped
to foster synergy in the international community to
resolve the problem of famine.

China remains committed to the resolution of
disputes to dialogue and consultation and plays a positive
and constructive role in seeking political settlements
for international and regional hotspot issues. In the
meantime, China is actively helping other developing
countries in poverty eradication and the elimination of
hunger. In 2017, China actively fulfilled its international
obligations by providing non-stop multiple batches of
emergency food assistance to 38 countries in Africa
and Asia and to four international organizations
through mulitilateral and bilateral channels. We have
also carried out 158 projects of various kinds under
the World Food Programme, the Food and Agriculture
Organization and other international organizations,
effectively alleviating disaster situations in relevant
countries and regions. China stands ready to continue
to work with the international community to promote
the building of a community of shared future for
humankind and make our contributions for achieving
lasting peace and common prosperity in the world.

