Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to extend my thanks to Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
for her briefing and for the tenth report submitted to
the Security Council pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011).
Jordan reiterates its support for the ICC, which is a
critical pillar in the promotion of criminal justice. Its
work contributes to putting an end to impunity during
armed conflicts, maintaining international peace and
security and promoting the rule of law.

We welcome the ongoing consultations between the
Libyan Government and the Office of the Prosecutor
of the ICC. We affirm that the Court will succeed in
undertaking and discharging its mandate pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011), which depends largely on
cooperation between the two sides. In this respect,
we appreciate all the efforts made by the Libyan
Government to cooperate with the Court so far. We
call on the Libyan Government to continue to provide
all the facilities and logistical support necessary to
collect evidence and conduct investigations and ensure
coordination and information exchange as well as the
arrest and surrender of all perpetrators of crimes.

It is imperative that all parties to the Rome Statute
cooperate with and assist the Court in the discharge
of its mandate and in support of its jurisdiction, in
accordance with their obligations under the Statute.
The scale of the challenges faced by Libya today is
daunting, and we see the negative repercussions of these
challenges on neighbouring countries. The numbers of
the displaced and asylum seekers are increasing in view
of the atrocious, inhumane practices that are taking
place in the country, namely, killing, kidnapping,
torture, arbitrary arrest by criminal and armed groups,
in particular the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.

It is crucial that Libya continue to promote the
rule of law and ensure that all perpetrators of crime
be held liable without exception, in accordance with
international standards in the areas of prosecution
and justice, with a view to ensuring stability in the
country and supporting the political process there. We
need to assist Libya in confronting and prosecuting the
perpetrators of crimes committed on its territory, and
should provide the country with every possible means
to address these crimes, which are affecting not just
Libya but all of its neighbours as well.

In conclusion, we reiterate the need for the
international community to provide every type of
support to the constitutional and other legitimate
authorities in the country so that they can meet their
obligation to build a new democratic Libya while
taking into account the need for all actors to work
together to enable the Libyan State to assert control and
sovereignty over the entire territory of Libya.

