Ms. Bolafios Perez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
1 thankyoa, Mr. President, for organizing today's open
debate and for preparing the extensive concept note
(S/2014/869, annex) to guide us in our deliberations. We
also express our appreciation to the Under-Secretary-
General for his introductory remarks.

We would like today to share some concerns that
my delegation has with respect to the focus of this
debate. We have seen cases where there is criminality
and terrorism establishes itself to take advantage
thereof, or where terrorists draw on organized crime
to finance their activities. In this regard, we recognize
the potential linkages and interconnections between
terrorism and destabilizing factors such as transnational
organized crime and drug-trafficking. However, in the
concept note, all of these phenomena are addressed
together, ignoring that the interconnections between
them must be treated on a case-by-case basis and that
they vary from region to region.

Assuming that terrorism and transnational
organized crime are automatically linked is not only
inaccurate but also dangerous. Saying that there
is no country that is not affected by terrorism or
manifestations of transnational organized crime would
be to send a message that the agenda of the Security
Council covers all things, when in reality immediate
action by the Council is not necessarily warranted
because, quite simply, not all cross-border criminal
activity reaches the threshold to constitute a threat to
international peace and security.

Nor does the concept note do much to recognize the
particularities of each one of these phenomena, taking
into account that, for example, fighting terrorism
is quite different from fighting drug-trafficking or
organized criminal groups, not to mention the issue
of the cross-border movement of people. Nor do we
support new categorizations of terrorists according to
the type of criminal activity involved as resolution 2195
(2014), just adopted, seeks to do. It must be recalled
that a terrorist's motivations are different from those
involved in transnational organized crime. We would
like to believe that when transnational organized crime
is addressed by the United Nations system, whether
by Council consideration or in a more general context,
such efforts would seek to step up cooperation among
Member States to combat this scourge. However,
by emphasizing coercive measures, controls and
regulations, we risk promoting a more defensive
approach by sovereign States.

These are some of our comments at the conceptual
level. In addition, we also have more specific comments
to make. First, we believe that this discussion can
contribute to our conflict-prevention efforts in
maintaining international peace and security allowing
us to fine-tune our responses to emerging threats and
challenges. Transnational organized crime and the
illicit trafficking in weapons, goods and people, like
terrorism, are common and shared responsibilities,
and we need to work together to prevent and combat
these phenomena. This is further justification for
strengthening international cooperation and providing
technical assistance, in particular to encourage and
facilitate the implementation of relevant conventions
and protocols.

Secondly, a wide range of existing strategies and
initiatives have been developed at the national, regional
and international levels, making it harder to identify
synergies and similarities. This is due not only to the
peculiar nature of each item, or the fact that each is
discussed in a different expert forum, but also to the
fact that each issue is governed by its own legal and
legislative context. We must adhere to the instruments
that are legally binding for States parties, in this
particular case the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime, and not establish new
obligations under the pretext of fighting terrorism.

Thirdly, different strategies are required to address
the specific threats posed by the different types of
phenomena, especially suitable strategies to reduce
the demand and supply of illicit drugs. Unless these
causes are addressed, the problem will be displaced
elsewhere or simply replaced by other illegal activities.
Governments must therefore strengthen the rule of law
in their countries so as to develop social antibodies
against transnational organized crime and break the
cycle of criminality and underdevelopment definitively.

Fourthly, strengthening the capacity of the United
Nations to assist Member States to combat these
phenomena is only one element, albeit an important
of, of the broader arsenal of measures to address this
issue. While we recognize that the United Nations
has a role to assist the affected States, this should be
implemented in accordance with existing mandates, at
the request of Member States and with full respect for
their sovereignty, under national ownership.

Finally, turning to resolution 2195 (2014), we
recognize the efforts of Council members to achieve
a balanced text and take into account the elements of
importance to the broader membership. Likewise, we
take note of the request for a report of the Secretary-
General on threats posed by this new category of
terrorist, who benefit from transnational organized
crime. We hope that the concerns raised today will
be taken into account and we stress the importance of
reports of the Secretary-General remaining within the
scope of the Security Council's responsibilities.

