Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): It is an honour for the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to take the floor, on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, during this
quarterly open debate on a topic to which we have
historically attached special importance - the situation
of the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.

First of all, the Movement takes this opportunity to
once again reaffirm its permanent solidarity with the
Palestinian people and its unwavering support for their
just cause, particularly in the current context, where
the situation on the ground in occupied Palestinian
territory, including east Jerusalem, is dire and clearly
unsustainable, considering the tragic developments
of the past few months. Among them, the most recent
episode of violence occurred only 10 days ago in Gaza,
which points to the triggering of a new war. In this
regard, the States members of the Movement reaffirm
once again that the continuing Israeli occupation and
the Palestinian-Israeli conflict as a whole continue to
threaten international peace and security, and therefore
require urgent action for a solution in accordance with
international law, the relevant UnitedNations resolutions
and, of course, the Charter of the United Nations.

Furthermore, the Security Council must comply
with its obligations under the Charter and act
accordingly to uphold its resolutions, which not only
constitute the basis for a just and lasting peaceful
settlement but are also legally binding on all States
Members of the United Nations. In this regard, we
express our readiness to contribute to the achievement
of a peaceful, just and lasting solution to the conflict
and call for the undertaking and intensification of all
international and regional efforts necessary to support
this objective, the fundamental purpose of which is
to put an end to this injustice and to promote a just
and lasting solution. Let us be clear - the only way
to achieve this goal is through peaceful means based
on the two-State solution on the basis of the pre-1967
border, with a view to establishing a sovereign and
independent Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as
its capital.

The Movement continues to consider that
resolution 2334 (2016) offers the most viable path to
peace by setting out the fundamental requirements
and parameters for a just settlement that would
preserve the two-State solution on the basis of the
pre-l967 borders and respect the long-standing terms
of reference adopted by the international community
under the relevant United Nations resolutions, the
Madrid principles, including the principle of land for
peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet road
map. Likewise, resolution 2334 (2016) guarantees the
fulfilment of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people, including their right to self-determination and
independence in their State of Palestine, with East
Jerusalem as its capital. We therefore call for the full
and effective implementation of resolution 2334 (2016),
in particular by the occupying Power.

Similarly, the States of the Movement continue to
fight for the full respect and implementation of all other
relevant resolutions on this issue, for only in this way
will the necessary conditions be created to put an end
to the occupation, justly resolve the conflict in all its
aspects and make Palestinian-Israeli peace and security
a reality for the benefit of both peoples, of the region
and of the international community as a whole. It is
therefore imperative to take immediate action to remedy
the situation on the ground, reduce tensions and foster
an environment conducive to the search for peace.

We also take this opportunity to express our deep
regret at the recent veto by the United States delegation
to this organ of draft resolution S/2018/516, submitted
last month by the delegation of the State of Kuwait
(see S/PV.8274), which sought to address the recent
escalation of violence and the urgent need for the
protection of the Palestinian civilian population in the
occupied Palestinian territory and in particular in the
Gaza Strip. We therefore express our concern about the
inability of the Security Council to fulfil its mandate
on this important issue due to the special interests of
one of its permanent members.

With regard to Gaza, the situation
there - in particular, the grave humanitarian situation
that unfortunately continues to deteriorate as the
days go by - continues to cause great concern to the
Movement. In this regard, we reiterate the call for
the total lifting of the Israeli blockade on the Gaza
Strip, which continues to subject more than 2 million
Palestinian children, women and men to indescribable
suffering. It is necessary to stress once again that the
crisis in Gaza must be addressed in a comprehensive
manner and in accordance with international law,
international humanitarian law and human rights law,
as well as the relevant United Nations resolutions and
in the context of a general situation caused by the
prolongation of Israel's illegal and belligerent foreign
occupation and the unequivocal calls to put an end to
this occupation that has been going on for more than
half a century.

Moreover, and bearing in mind that Israel has
clearly renounced its obligations to protect the
Palestinian civilian population as the occupying Power,
in accordance with the Fourth Geneva Convention, the
Movement calls upon the international community to
guarantee the protection of Palestinian civilians in the
Gaza Strip and in all the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, in order to address the
serious insecurity situation of the occupied population
and prevent the loss of more innocent lives. Along
these lines, we reiterate our deep concern because no
responsibility is attributed by Israel for all the violations
committed, which promotes impunity and further
destabilizes the situation on the ground. At the same
time, it diminishes the prospects for peace. Accordingly,
we call for international action, in particular by the
Security Council, to demand accountability and the
cessation of the violations committed by the occupying
Power. Israel must comply with its obligations in the
framework of international law.

In addition, the Movement reaffirms that all
measures and actions taken or to be taken by Israel,
the occupying Power, such as the illegal decision dated
14 December 1981, which sought to modify the legal,
physical and demographic status and institutional
structure of the Syrian Golan, as well as Israeli
measures seeking to assert Israel's jurisdiction and
administration in this area, are null and void and have
no legal effect. In this regard, and in accordance with
the principled position of the Movement, we demand
once again that Israel comply with the provisions of
resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw completely from the
occupied Syrian Golan to the pre-June 1967 borders,
in implementation of resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973).

In conclusion, the Movement reaffirms its
enduring solidarity with the Palestinian people and its
unwavering support for its just cause, and at the same
time its commitment to further strengthening and
coordinating international efforts aimed at promoting
a just, lasting, comprehensive and peaceful solution to
the question of Palestine in all its aspects, including
the suffering of Palestinian refugees, on the basis of
General Assembly resolution 194 (III). We also reaffirm
our strong commitment to continuing to support the
heroic Palestinian people in their efforts to achieve
justice and the realization of their inalienable rights and
legitimate national aspirations, including the right to
self-determination, freedom and independence in their
independent State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as
its capital.

