Mr. Donoghue (Ireland): Ireland aligns itself
with the statement delivered earlier on behalf of the
European Union. I would also like to make the following
statement in my national capacity.

Ireland heartily welcomes the opportunity to debate
in this forum the question of the human cost of the illicit
transfer, accumulation and misuse of small arms and
light weapons. We would like to thank the Lithuanian
presidency of the Security Council for giving us the
opportunity to discuss the significant concerns about
human security raised by the issue.
We were pleased to welcome the adoption the year
before last of resolution 2117 (2013), which we saw as
a very encouraging step on the road to combating the
scourge of the illegal proliferation and accumulation of
small arms and light weapons. We also welcomed the
adoption of the consensus outcome document of the fifth
Biennial Meeting of States to Consider Implementation
of the United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects.

As the concept note (S/2015/306, annex) clearly
sets out, in our world the majority of deaths in conflict
are caused by the use of small arms. More human-
rights abuses are committed with small arms than
any other weapon, and armed insecurity is one of
the major impediments to development everywhere.
Ireland therefore strongly supports the measures set out
in resolution 2117 (2013), in particular the integrated
approach to tackling the significant problems posed
by the illicit accumulation and proliferation of such
weapons. An integrated approach is essential if the
international community is to adequately address
the challenges posed by these weapons - whose
contribution to conflict, post-conflict violence and
gender-based violence is rightly acknowledged in the
concept note - as well as the dangers they pose for
humanitarian and peacekeeping interventions. Ireland
therefore welcomes the inclusion of issues related
to small arms and light weapons when peacekeeping
mandates are under consideration. We strongly support
current projects and efforts to make arms embargoes
more effective, including through the development of
international tracing procedures. We firmly believe that
ammunition must also be included in the international
community's control systems for such weapons. We
look forward to the second Open-ended Meeting of
Governmental Experts, to be held next month, and to
further consideration of practical control measures in
respect to these weapons.

Ireland recognizes that women continue to be a
powerful force for change in relation to disarmament,
non-proliferation and arms-control affairs, and we
welcome the renewed focus on women's empowerment
and the gender impact of illicit arms proliferation that
today's debate has highlighted. We are pleased that
the global study of the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), currently under way, will also address the
impact of small arms on women affected by conflict,
and we look forward to exchanging views with the lead
author of the study on those and other points soon.

Resolution 2117 (2013) is an important instrument
for improving recognition of the inter-relationship
between the misuse of small arms and light weapons,
the issue of women and peace and security, and human-
rights questions. The Arms Trade Treaty (ATT), which
entered into force on 24 December, has also been
ground-breaking in recognizing, for the first time in an
international treaty, the link between international arms
transfers and gender-based violence. We look forward
to continuing that vital work along with Member States
and civil society, with a view to making women more
visible in the disarmament debate. We welcome today's
discussion as another step in the right direction.

The Arms Trade Treaty is of course a major step
forward in the international community's efforts
to regulate the international trade in conventional
weapons. As the first legally binding instrument in
that regard, it also has strong potential for assisting us
greatly in our efforts to control small arms and light
weapons. As the ATT enters the final implementation
phase before its first Conference of States Parties, to
be held in Mexico in August, Ireland is working with
States parties and civil society to ensure that the Treaty,
which represents a rare and inspiring success for the
international disarmament community, will put in place
strong and resilient implementation measures that will
enable us to carry out its ambitious provisions, not least
in relation to small arms and light weapons.

