Ms. Anderson (United States of America): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, and thank the
Secretary-General for the important remarks he made
today.

Mr. President, let me begin by thanking you for
your recent visit to Washington, DC. Your visit
highlighted the enduring strength of the bilateral

relationship between the United States and Lebanon, as
well as the many common goals we share, including
reaching a comprehensive Arab-Israeli peace. The
United States continues to strongly support Lebanon's
independence and sovereignty and the full
implementation of resolutions 1559 (2004), 1680
(2006) and 1701 (2006).

We are pleased to note that there have been two
rounds of proximity talks between Israelis and
Palestinians already. We believe that through good-
faith negotiations the parties can agree to an outcome
that ends the conflict and reconciles the Palestinian
goal of an independent and viable State based on the
1967 lines, with agreed swaps, and Israel's goal of a
Jewish State with secure and recognized borders that
reflect subsequent developments and meet Israel's
security requirements.

The United States recognizes that Jerusalem is a
deeply, profoundly important issue for Israelis and
Palestinians, for Jews, Muslims and Christians. We
believe that through good-faith negotiations, the parties
can agree on an outcome that realizes the aspirations of
both parties for Jerusalem and that safeguards its status
for people around the world.

We call again on our international partners, both
inside and outside this Council, to promote an
atmosphere of cooperation between the parties. We
renew our call for Arab States to advance the promise
of the Arab Peace Initiative and take steps that show
Israelis, Palestinians and their own citizens that peace
is possible and will bring tangible benefits.

Let me thank you, Mr. President, for convening
the Council today to discuss the importance of
promoting dialogue across cultures. As the world is
woven closer together by technology and trade, new
ways of thinking are replacing old lines of division.
The United States supports frank and open dialogue in
the spirit of mutual interest and mutual respect, rooted
in the belief that cultures and faiths of the world need
not be in conflict. Indeed, despite the great diversity of
the human family, cultures the world over share
common principles of justice, progress, tolerance and
belief in the dignity of all human beings.
Exchanges such as this one help leaders share
perspectives and views directly. But we should not
neglect the importance of direct person-to-person
dialogue and cooperation. Cross-cultural exchange is a
task for citizens, not just officials. International
exchange and training programmes have long been
important components of United States foreign policy
and outreach, but their role is now being expanded.
These programmes serve as concrete vehicles for
cooperation that can have a lasting impact. The United
States currently funds exchanges for more than
2.4 million people a year. And, while each programme
is unique, they all advance our goal of promoting
understanding among peoples. Millions of Americans,
through schools and universities, religious institutions,
youth groups and other organizations, help build close
ties with peoples all around the world through their
own informal exchanges.

Diversity and intercultural dialogue are very
much a part of America's history and identity. What
President Obama calls "our patchwork heritage" is an
abiding source of national strength. The United States
has, in many ways, been a long experiment in bridging
cultural divides. The United States is a diverse and
pluralistic society, one that people of all religious and
cultural backgrounds call home. It is very much the
American way to celebrate the different ways in which
we have been created.

The United States recently decided to join the
Group of Friends of the Alliance of Civilizations. Over
the past five years, the Alliance has grown into an
important global network of partners that fosters
dialogue and encourages grass-roots projects in the
areas of youth, education, media and the successful
integration of migrants. We support the Alliance's
mission, and we believe that by joining we can further
the innovative, inclusive approach of that promising
cultural initiative.

With his historic address in Cairo last year,
President Obama called for a new beginning between
the United States and Muslims around the world. As he
said,

"in order to move forward, we must say openly
the things we hold in our hearts and that too often
are said only behind closed doors. There must be
a sustained effort to listen to each other, to learn
from each other, to respect one another and to
seek common ground".
Not all differences can be easily bridged. Not all
disputes will vanish simply from dialogue. But the
United States firmly believes that the interests we share
as human beings are far more powerful than the forces
that would drive us apart. Frank, respectful and open
dialogue strengthens those who would resolve disputes
through negotiation and non-violence and weakens
those who would replace argument and civility with
rage, terrorism, violence, aggression and hatred.

Those who seek a partner for respectful dialogue
and those who work for just and lasting peace will
always have a friend in the United States.

Of course, recognizing our common humanity is
only the beginning of our task. Our words must be
matched with action, because, more and more, the
challenges of our interwoven age are common to all of
us, from climate change to nuclear proliferation to
pandemic disease. We need global solutions to global
challenges, and we need the respectful dialogue that
helps us find peaceful solutions to even the most
intractable problems.

