I would first like to thank Ambassador Tarek Ladeb and Ambassador Dian Triansyah Djani for their briefings and for their excellent work and outstanding leadership of their respective committees. I also wish to thank Ambassador Djani for his commitment to the work of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, and the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) over the past two years. Terrorism and the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons of mass destruction (WMDs) continue to present a grave threat to international peace and security. Like other contemporary threats to international peace and security, such risks cannot be effectively addressed by a single State. Consequently, bilateral and multilateral diplomacy to counter terrorism and proliferation are more crucial than ever. For our part, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines remains committed to building durable and strategic partnerships - globally and within Latin America and the Caribbean - to enhance our security efforts on counter-terrorism and non-proliferation. Despite the ongoing challenges produced by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, the three committees and their respective groups of experts continued joint efforts in the implementation of their respective mandates. We welcome the measures adopted by the committees to mitigate the impact of the pandemic and encourage them to enhance collaboration, information-sharing and coordination within their respective mandates. The Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) must be commended for its efforts to strengthen dialogue and cooperation with international, regional and subregional organizations acting in the areas outlined in resolution 1373 (2001) amid the COVID-19 pandemic. Equally, the CTC and the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) continued uninterrupted engagement with representatives of Member States on a virtual basis to help ensure the full and effective implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) and other relevant resolutions. My delegation acknowledges the 112 Member States that completed the questionnaire that facilitated the joint report of CTED and the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team on actions taken to disrupt terrorism financing (S/2020/493, annex). Regarding the evolving threat to international peace and security posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), Al-Qaida and their affiliates, the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team assessed in its latest report that the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on terrorism has varied between conflict zones and non-conflict zones, and between short and longer-term threats (see S/2020/717). ISIL, Al-Qaida and their global affiliates continue to generate violence around the world, and we remain deeply concerned about the evolving relationship between ISIL and Al-Qaida, particularly in West Africa and the Sahel. We are also concerned about the surge in ISIL activity in Iraq, the Syrian Arab Republic and elsewhere in the region, as its strategic direction, propaganda, recruitment and fundraising activities during the pandemic remain unclear. We recognize the important role of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, its Monitoring Team and the Office of the Ombudsperson, and encourage Member States to enhance cooperation by providing updated information about the individuals and entities placed on its sanctions list. We reiterate that any measures we undertake to prevent and combat terrorism must comply with our obligations under international law, including the Charter of the United Nations and relevant international conventions and protocols. Turning to the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), we would like to express our appreciation to the Committee's Group of Experts for its continued efforts in carrying out its mandate. We encourage the Committee to continue working with Member States to prevent the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and their means of delivery. While several events planned for the comprehensive review were postponed or cancelled due to the COVID-19 pandemic, we welcome the virtual outreach and training events that the Committee hosted. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines remains committed to doing its part to ensure that we fully eradicate weapons of mass destruction, and will continue to support the work of the 1540 Committee. In conclusion, we call upon Member States to continue their collaborative efforts to address terrorism and proliferation by promoting the highest standards of regional and international safety and security.
