Mr. Pleuger: My report will be extremely short.

As the whole Council knows, the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1572 (2004) was set
up only two weeks ago. We held our first formal
meeting on 6 December, and held one informal meeting
on 16 December. We issued a note verbale on
17 December, informing all Member States of the
measures taken, namely, concerning the arms
embargo - which has been in force since
15 November - and such targeted sanctions as a travel
ban and the freezing of assets, which went into force
on 15 December. We also informed Member States of
the fact that the Committee has initiated a process to
establish a list of individuals and entities to be subject
to the travel ban and to the freezing of assets. In that
process, which has not yet been concluded, the
Committee will fully take into account the current
efforts at mediation being undertaken by the African
Union, in line with the Council's presidential statement
adopted on 16 December.

As our term on the Security Council will also
expire at the end of this month, I would like, on behalf
of my delegation, to thank all colleagues for their good
cooperation.

I will resist the temptation to respond to what was
said by Ambassador Munir Akram, because I think that
is a discussion that we will have to have in the General
Assembly, and not in the Security Council. But allow
me to say just one short word in that regard. I agree
with Ambassador Akram that we have gone through
troubled times in the Council over the last two years. I
think that we also agree around the table that the
Secretary-General was right when he spoke about a
fork in the road as regards keeping the United Nations
relevant against a backdrop of new threats and
challenges. We now have before us the report of the
High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change
(A/59/565). I believe it essential that we all work
together, within and outside the Council, to implement
the Panel's proposals.

I think we have a common interest in
strengthening the only global multilateral system that
we have. In order to strengthen its most important
organ, which has the main responsibility for peace and
stability - that is, the Security Council - we have to
make sure that it gains in effectiveness, gains in
legitimacy and gains in transparency so as to make its
decisions not only more legitimate, but also acceptable
and implementable. I think that we will do that next
year. I hope that States members of the General
Assembly will find the political will and meet the
responsibility to increase the effectiveness and the
legitimacy of the Council.

