Mr. Vervaeke: I am honoured to brief the Security
Council on behalf of the European Union (EU), in the
presence of Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, as well as African
Union Commissioner Sma'il Chergui and Ambassador
Omar Hilale.

The Political Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic, which
was signed on 6 February in Bangui, is a genuine
chance for the recovery of the country from an
enduring crisis. We are hopeful because the agreement
starts with the right foundation, based on the Libreville
road map, while respecting the primacy of the rule
of law, following the recommendations of the Bangui
Forum on National Reconciliation, recognizing the
democratically elected institutions and putting at its
centre the fight against impunity and promoting justice
as a means of achieving national reconciliation. There is
also a follow-up mechanism, and sanctions are foreseen
in the case of violations of the agreement.

Throughout the process, the European Union lent
its full political support and expertise to make the peace
agreement happen. I would like first to express our
particular thanks to the African Union. From the outset,
the African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation in the
Central African Republic has been the only framework
for the European Union, and it has delivered. Most
important were the tireless efforts and leadership of
Commissioner Chergui. His commitment was essential
for a successful outcome of the negotiations. Let me
also praise the leadership of the Central African
Republic - the country itself. President Touadera's
vision and ownership made the difference. Lastly,
I would like to say a very special word to the United
Nations, and in particular to Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Parfait Onanga-Anyanga
for his strong personal commitment to peace in the
Central African Republic and the indispensable role he
played in leading the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) over the past years.

It has been said that the peace agreement is a major
achievement. It opens a new chapter. Its implementation
is first and foremost the joint responsibility of its
signatories. But there is no reason to sit back. We
collectively need to engage more, not less. We, the
European Union, are mindful of our responsibility to
help the country achieve lasting peace and stability.

The first priority, in our view, is to rapidly put in
place the follow-up mechanisms. All Central African
Republic actors will need to be genuinely committed. We
are pleased to see that President Touadera has already
launched concrete steps in that regard. Winning the
people's hearts and minds will be essential. Spreading
the word on the ground about the peace agreement
should therefore be another urgent priority.

Inclusiveness will also be central for the success of
the agreement, including making the Government more
inclusive and reflecting the various strands of society
and the country. Likewise, the National Assembly and
civil society will have a key role to play, notably in
giving a voice to victims, youth and women. Similarly,
justice and reconciliation require attention. Work needs
to rapidly take shape at both the national and local
levels, be it with the temporary inclusive justice and
reconciliation commission foreseen by the agreement,
the upcoming commission on truth, justice, reparation
and reconciliation or the local peace committees.

On the security side, which was already
mentioned, the mixed units can play a useful role as
a confidence-building measure, under the command of
national defence, with a clear mandate and specifically
marked geographic areas of operation, like the
transhumance corridors. They will require vetting and
monitoring, and their establishment should be compliant
with the principles and the spirit of the disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation and reintegration process.

But the peace agreement should not let us forget
that the situation on the ground, as it still prevails today,
demonstrates the structural weakness of the State,
fragility and instability, together with a severe and
protracted humanitarian crisis. That will not disappear
overnight, as Special Representative Onanga-Anyanga
reminded us. That is where the European Union remains
committed, and it will continue to play its role during
the implementation of the agreement. We are currently
already looking at ways and means to sustain, and even
increase, our support. Tomorrow, at the special meeting
of partners in New York, we will play our role. Our
priorities are in the following sectors.

First, reforming the security sector remains a
top priority. The European Union Military Training
Mission, which is ZOO-staff members strong, will
continue to play the leading role in defence sector
reform, for which it has been given a mandate. Upon
the request of the Government, we are expanding the
Mission to also include a civilian element. The Mission
will continue to work hand in hand with MINUSCA,
which provides the umbrella for the deployment of
European Union-trained Forces armees centrafricaines.

Secondly, we will continue to support the
Government with regard to the redeployment of State
authority at the local level, which is indispensable for
its functioning and the delivery of social services to the
population. Under the Bekou trust fund, which we set up,
in total, €240 million is currently being implemented.
We are working on a €50-million extension, as well
as potential additional support from our EU member
States. Those actions provide social services and
infrastructure that help in the reconciliation and
development of communities, including through labour-
intensive projects.

Finally, let me also stress that neighbours and
countries in the region will have an important role to play.
Their engagement with the Central African Republic
remains essential to achieve regional stability. In that
regard, the relaunch of bilateral joint commissions,
notably on transhumance, security and cross-border
issues, will contribute to a secure framework.

The true challenges of the peace agreement are
political, and not necessarily a question of additional
budgets, however important they might be. The
European Union and the Central African Republic will
continue to work very closely in political dialogue. We
will also expand our dialogue with our partners in the
region in support of the peace agreement.

Let me end by reassuring the Council that the
European Union will continue to work with all partners
in the African Union, the United Nations and the region.
At a time of a unique opportunity to help the Central
African Republic emerge from its difficult history,
we will maintain, or even increase, our substantial
engagement. Together with the Government and the
parties to the agreement, with a strong civil society and
along with the neighbours in the region, we can make
the peace agreement the basis for a better future for the
Central African Republic. The European Union is fully
committed to that.

