Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Indonesia thanks the Polish
presidency for convening this open debate on a highly
important topic. We also thank the Secretary-General,
the Director-General of the International Committee
of the Red Cross and the representative of the Iraqi
Al-Amal Association for their briefings.

Indonesia strongly believes that the protection of
civilians in armed conflict should always be one of
the core aims of the Security Council. We support the
Council's attention on safeguarding innocent people in
conflicts. Yet it is deeply disturbing that attacks against
civilians have increased in recent years - especially in
2017 - as well as attacks on peacekeepers, which hinder
them in discharging their duty to save human lives.

Furthermore, attacks against humanitarian
workers, medical missions and civilian assets have
reached an unprecedented level. In a number of cases,
State authorities have been unable to prevent, counter
or investigate them properly. A lack of capacity is one
important factor behind that. Everyone needs to be
reminded of the clear obligation under international
humanitarian law to differentiate between civilian
populations and combatants. Everything must be
done to avoid attacks on civilians, civilian objects and
medical personnel, along with their facilities. Allow
me to share some additional points pertaining to our
topic today.

First, since the protection of civilians is the primary
responsibility of each Member State, capacity-building
by States and related support by the United Nations
and other partners are vital. The promotion of a culture
of peace with a rights-based approach and requisite
laws during peace time are therefore very important.
Lessons learned and best practices should be shared.
We share the Secretary-General's view on the need
for all Member States to develop national policy
frameworks on the protection of civilians. There should
be clear institutional authorities and responsibilities for
safeguarding civilians.

Secondly, considering the very serious challenge
of non-compliance by non-State actors, who are active
in most conflicts today, the Security Council should
explore innovative ways to secure their respect for
global norms against harming civilians.

Thirdly, there needs to be improvement in medical
care to respond to emergency situations. United Nations
peacekeeping missions in several conflict areas have
experienced challenges in responding consistently to
medical emergencies and in evacuating casualties. We
stress the need to ensure the swift and safe passage
of injured, wounded or sick peacekeepers along with
medical and humanitarian personnel who are engaged
exclusively in medical duties.

Fourthly, Indonesia underlines the increasingly
important role of women in peace processes as well
as the protection of civilians. Regrettably, women
and children suffer the most in conflicts. Women
understand what is needed to create and deepen peace
in communities. There should be more system-wide
action to help empower women's roles in societies,
including as an indispensable force for peacebuilding,
protecting civilians and sustaining peace.

While reiterating the fundamental role of Member
States in protecting civilians in armed conflict, it is
critical that, together with United Nations agencies, the
Council facilitate measures to strengthen countries'
capacities to protect civilians as well as sustain peace.

Theimperativetoprotectciviliansmustbe embedded
throughout the peace continuum - from conflict
prevention, resolution, mediation and peacekeeping to
peacebuilding and long-term development.

I should like to conclude by reiterating the
determination enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war. Our task through the United Nations is
to save and protect civilians wherever they may be from
the evils of war.

Indonesia stands ready to play its part in advancing
the agenda of protecting civilians in armed conflicts
concretely by contributing peacekeepers as well as in
shaping and sharing norms. As stated by the Indonesian
Foreign Minister on several occasions, our collective
efforts in resolving conflicts should always be aimed
at ending all forms of violence, restoring security and
stability and protecting all persons. Everyone and every
country should be engaged in that noble cause. No
civilians should be left behind or left unprotected.

