Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): On
this day, as we commemorate the tragic events of
11 September 2001, I once again convey my country's
solidarity with the Government and the people of the
United States.

My delegation thanks the Russian Federation
for calling for this briefing, which sheds light on
the conclusions of the third tripartite summit of the
guarantors of the Astana process, held in Tehran on
7 September, which also addressed the situation in Idlib
province. The meeting took place in a context marked
by concerns about the imminence of a large-scale
offensive by the Syrian armed forces against the rebel
strongholds in Idlib governorate.

Cote d'Ivoire has consistently expressed its
disapproval of the use of force by any actor and has
reiterated, along with all observers of the Syrian
conflict, that such an armed confrontation would
cause an unprecedented humanitarian catastrophe in a
province that is home to some 3 million people, more
than half of whom are internally displaced. Those fears
are compoumded by the threat of the use of chemical
weapons, for which the belligerents are already
denying responsibility.

In the context of growing tensions, the Tehran
meeting was a real source of hope both for the
people of Idlib and for the international community.
Unfortunately, it does not seem to have provided
reassuring answers to concerns about the fate of Idlib
province, in particular with regard to the protection
of civilians and the humanitarian repercussions of
the conflict, the Astana guarantors having insisted
only on the need to combat "terrorism and the right of
Damascus to recover its entire territory".

The numerous calls for restraint by the Security
Council and the international community did not prevent
the recent escalation of violence, which, according
to the spokesman for the United Nations Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA),
Mr. David Swanson, resulted in the displacement of
more than 30,000 people. Again according to OCHA,
between 1 and 9 September 30,542 women, children
and men were displaced from the south and south-west
of Idlib, as well as from the north and north-west of
neighbouring Hama province.

Cote d'Ivoire remains convinced that there is still
time to give peace a chance. It therefore urges all parties
involved to immediately implement a ceasefire and to
pursue negotiations, in the spirit of resolution 2254
(2015), in order to prevent an even larger humanitarian
tragedy in Syria.

