Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Security Council has been increasingly
working in open formats, occasionally in breach of
earlier agreed-upon formats. I wanted to speak at this
public meeting today, which, as we know, is permitted
under the rules of procedure.

We are grateful to Mr. Jan Kubis for his briefing
and for having presented the report (S/2016/396) of
the Secretary-General. We welcome the efforts of
the United Nations and, above all those of United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). We are
grateful to the Permanent Representative of Iraq for his
substantive statement.

Iraq's tragedy has continued for 13 years, with
significant consequences for the entire region. At this
juncture, we note the need to overcome the internal
political crisis as soon as possible. We understand
the importance of reforming the system of State
governance. However, what is most important in today's
context is the task of achieving national reconciliation
and joining efforts to overcome the country's problems.
That can be achieved only through a broad national
dialogue and agreements based on consensus among all
the participants of the internal political process, while
maintaining the unity and ethnic and confessional
diversity of the country.

United efforts will enhance effectiveness in
combating terrorist organizations. We fully support the
fight of the Iraqi Government against the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Lebant (ISIL). We have noted successes.
However, the rapid increase in terrorist activities,
in particular in Baghdad, forces us to be concerned
and to question the effectiveness of the actions of
the coalition, which lately, for some reason, has been
referring to itself as the global coalition. Yet the area in
which terrorists are active continues to expand beyond
the region - into Libya, Afghanistan and Europe. We
are convinced that only a comprehensive approach
in combating terrorism, while strictly adhering to
international legal standards, can produce the desired
results. There should be no double standards. We need
a consistent and principled position on the part of all
members of the international community to combat this
absolute evil.

We are particularly concerned about reports of
ISIL using weaponized chemical agents, which the
report mentions. One of those cases was reported to the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.
Unfortunately, nothing is said about investigating such
cases. Weaponized chemical agents are spreading
throughout the region and are being used by terrorists.
Some Member States continue to pretend that that is
not happening and blame the Al-Assad regime for
everything. Yet analyses of the primary chemical
components of weapons seized from insurgents in
Tikrit, with the subsequent identification of producers
and terms of sales to other countries, show that they
were in fact manufactured in Turkey or supplied to that
country without the right of re-export.

In that context, our initiative on developing an
international convention to combat chemical terrorism
is becoming increasingly timely. They same can be
said in connection with the Russian and Chinese draft
resolution. We are in favour of strict respect for Iraqi
sovereignty, which is regularly violated by Turkey
through air strikes. Those can lead to the death of
civilians, as noted in the report. Under the pretence of
combating terrorists, Turkey continues to maintain a
presence in the Bashiqa camp, and the protests from
Baghdad are simply disregarded.

The humanitarian situation in the country is a
cause for concern, in which the number of people
requiring assistance is now more than in Syria. At the
same time, however, the main problems with regard
to humanitarian access are located in areas under the
influence of terrorist organizations. The report states,

"[h]undreds of thousands of people are in
desperate need of assistance, with little or no
opportunity to exit. Thousands of families are
already caught between the front lines of opposing
forces [,] and many more are likely to become so in
the coming months." (S/2016/396, para. 54)

A catastrophic situation can be seen in Fallujah. Over
the course of the so-called liberation, Ramadi was first
blocked and then practically destroyed by air strikes.

Together with you, Sir, and other colleagues from
Security Council - just recently during a working
lunch with the President of the International Committee
of the Red Cross - we discussed the fact that we are not
all attaching equal importance to different situations.
Some situations receive more attention than others. That
is probably for political reasons. For example, every
day and week, we discuss the humanitarian situation
in Syria, whereas in Iraq, which is also combating a
terrorist threat, the humanitarian situation is rarely the
focus of our attention. That needs to be rectified, and
we should invite Mr. O'Brien to examine the situation
very carefully.

In conclusion, I would like to express my wish for
the people of Iraq overcome this long-running crisis as
soon as possible.

