Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): We are
grateful for the opportunity to participate in this open
debate. We endorse the statement made by the observer

of the European Union. I would also like to address a
few issues that I consider especially pertinent.

I thank the Chairs of the counter-terrorism
Committees for their briefings, and I commend the
work they continue to do, together with their respective
groups of experts. Given Spain's experience in
combating terrorism, I reiterate my country's strong
commitment to continuing to cooperate with the three
Committees and the entire United Nations system in
fighting that threat to the world order, which must
remain a permanent priority of the Organization's
agenda.

Terrorism is a complex, many-faceted phenomenon
that is constantly evolving. Terrorists never stop seeking
out new strategies, new tools and new methods with
which to attack and harm the international community.
We must therefore be constantly alert so as to tirelessly
adjust our response to the terrorist phenomenon and to
address it using a multidisciplinary approach.

The Secretary-General has on several occasions
referred to the United Nations Counter-Terrorism
Coordinator. Spain has no doubt as to the usefulness
of that post given that it will help to promote a more
strategic approach that facilitates communication and
interaction among the various United Nations entities.
Thus the full implementation of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy will be possible
on the basis of broader participation and greater
transparency and functionality.

In that context, Secretariat bodies such as the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force will
be able to play a more active role in coordinated
efforts within the system to promote national and
regional strategies to counter terrorism. Those entities
will also have at their disposal instruments aimed
at strengthening coherence such as the Integrated
Assistance for Countering Terrorism Initiative and new
entities such as the United Nations Centre for Counter-
Terrorism, which will allow them to increase such
coherence.

It is also necessary to promote interaction with
the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum, which, despite
having been established only recently, has managed to
set out a number of principles of action for international
cooperation, whose value should be broadly promoted.

Despite their common denominator, all terrorist
manifestations have their own specific characteristics
depending on their location. Each terrorist attack
therefore requires special consideration and the adoption
of national and regional strategies that allow for a
local and systematic response. The counter-terrorism
Committees, and in particular the efforts made by
the Executive Directorate (CTED), must continue
to be strengthened so as to promote the inclusion of
their valuable contributions in the framework of local
strategies that are fully agreed to by the recipient
countries and regions.

We encourage CTED to continue improving
the effectiveness of preliminary implementation
assessments so as to identify the most relevant
shortcomings in the fight against terrorism, with the
goal of strengthening its field presence and encouraging
cooperation on the part of international donors.

Spain believes that the following aspects deserve
special attention: the victims of terrorism; the fight
against terrorism in the context of the Internet;
incitement to terrorism; prevention; and the efforts
made by the CTED to promote dialogue and tolerance
in accordance with resolution 1624 (2005).

Spain welcomes the efforts made by the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) to
improve the rigour and transparency of its working
methods. I call upon the Committee to continue those
endeavours. The commendable work done by the
Ombudsperson since the adoption of resolution 1904
(2009) has allowed for the process of the delisting of
sanctioned individuals to proceed in a satisfactory
manner.

Spain fully supports all processes that lead to
initiatives contributing to improving the effectiveness
of the system of sanctions. We support the constructive
spirit of the reforms undertaken to strengthen safeguards
in connection with the proceedings. I wish to make clear
that Spain does not question the legitimacy or the legal
foundation of the established system, which represents
a fundamental pillar of the fight against terrorism.

