Mr. Fesko (Ukraine): Please accept our sincere
congratulations, Sir, on having successfully steered the
Security Council's work during the month of August.
We also would like to commend the highly professional
work of the entire Malaysian delegation, which allowed
the Council to conduct its daily business in an effective
and efficient manner. We would also like to take this
opportunity to congratulate Malaysia on its National
Day of Independence, which falls on today's date.
Because the Council's formal wrap-up sessions are not
held regularly, which is regrettable in our opinion, we
appreciate the holding of today's meeting.

At the outset of Malaysia's presidency, the Council
held an open debate (see S/PV.7753) on the subject
of children and armed conflict. The debate vividly
demonstrated that, even though, on a fundamental
level, United Nations States Members appreciate the
gravity of the problem, they have different views and
approaches on how to address the subject. Regardless of
divergent views on some aspects of the issue, the crux
of the matter is that, without eliminating conflicts, or
at least reducing their intensity, children will continue
to bear the brunt of suffering in war zones, and the
international community will continue to grapple with
the challenge of how to help affected children. In that
regard, it is absolutely crucial that the Council redouble
its efforts to prevent potential conflicts and contribute
to the settlement of ongoing ones, thereby removing
the core cause of threats to the lives and well-being of
children and other vulnerable groups.

The other open debate (see S/PV.7758), on the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs), was also very pertinent to the current state
of affairs on the world stage. The integrity of the
global non-proliferation regime has been severely
compromised by the irresponsible actions of some
actors. In a world in which established norms and
international instruments can be blatantly violated
without accountability and where might makes right,
it is particularly disturbing that some exploit existing
gaps in the system and feel free to pursue WMD
programmes of their own. In fact, in some cases, like
that of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, we
are witnessing a worrying trend of complete disregard
for international obligations and the relevant Security
Council resolutions. Rogue non-State actors similarly
are attempting to acquire WMDs, and the most recent
conclusions of the Joint Investigative Mechanism on the
use of mustard gas by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant looks almost banal in the current environment.
It is anything but banal. The violations committed by
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea must not be
treated as a routine item on the Council's agenda, and
law and order in the international arena must be upheld
if global non-proliferation efforts are not to be wasted.

Another hallmark activity of the Council during
the month of August was the selection process of the
next Secretary-General. So far, we have held three
straw polls. While the results of the polls are no secret
to anyone even remotely interested in the subject, the
Council as an organ persists in maintaining its old
ways while rejecting any attempt to reform its work. In
the light of the recent changes made to the process for
the selection of the Secretary-General, characterized
by the unprecedented openness and transparency
introduced by the General Assembly, the Council's
fascination with so-called "established practice' is
truly incomprehensible. The steadfast refusal by some
Council members to consider the possibility of formally
making the results ofthe straw polls public does no good
either to the Council or the candidates. As we all have
learned, the results are leaked almost immediately, and
the Council subsequently finds itself in a situation in
which it is unable to provide transparency as to its work
or to ensure confidentiality to the candidates. On that
matter, I would like to underline that our delegation,
together with many others, advocates for a more
transparent process, including properly informing the
general United Nations membership of the outcomes of
the straw polls. The selection process is far from being
over, and nothing bars the Council from introducing
long-awaited changes in its work.

The Council is usually preoccupied with grave and
sombre issues. Against that background, the signing of
a final peace agreement by the Government of Colombia
and the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia was
a much welcome reprieve. We welcome the successful
completion of efforts to end the 50-year-old conflict.
We are ready to engage constructively in efforts to
consider the Council's next steps to support the peace
process in Colombia.

In conclusion, I once again congratulate you, Sir,
on the successful completion of Malaysia's presidency,
and I would like to convey a message of our full support
to the incoming presidency of New Zealand in the
difficult month of September.

