Mr. Ali (Malaysia): I express my congratulations
to you, Mr. President, and the delegation of France on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of February 2010. We have no doubt that,
under your able leadership, the Security Council will
continue to deliberate and take action on the most
pressing questions regarding the maintenance of
international peace and security.

Malaysia has always followed with avid interest
the progress of its newest neighbour, Timor-Leste. Our
involvement with Timor-Leste began on the eve of the
country's independence itself, and Malaysia is proud of
the progress that young nation has made in a mere
eight years, outstripping many of its peers.

It gives me great personal pleasure to welcome
back to New York an old colleague who has gone on to
greener pastures, His Excellency Mr. Jose' Luis
Guterres, Deputy Prime Minister of the Democratic
Republic of Timor-Leste.

We thank the Secretary-General for his most
recent report, contained in document S/2010/85, on the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT), and Ms. Ameerah Haq, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for her
briefing. In this regard, allow me to congratulate
Ms. Haq on her recent and well-deserved appointment
to the post.

The 9 October 2009 elections at the level of local
authorities were yet another milestone on Timor-
Leste's path towards nation-building. Given the
encouraging signs thus far, Malaysia has every

confidence that future elections at every level will be
ably handled in a fair and transparent manner by
Timor-Leste.

The encouraging security situation augurs well
for the ongoing work on the resumption of policing
responsibilities by the National Police of Timor-Leste
(PNTL) through a phased approach. As recognized in
the report of the Secretary-General of last year on this
matter (S/2009/504), there is a need to ensure the
PNTL's ability to meet the criteria mutually agreed by
the Government of Timor-Leste and UNMIT. UNMIT,
in turn, must remain committed to the principle of
national ownership, in particular with regard to the
comprehensive review of the security sector, and an
agreement between the two parties must be finalized if
things are to progress in due course.

Malaysia believes that adherence to the rule of
law is crucial to ensuring the respect of the people for
their own security forces. Accountability for criminal
acts must not only be seen to be paramount, but must
also be so, as it is the cornerstone of trust in the
system. Malaysia takes heart from the continued
commitment of the Government of Timor-Leste to
ensuring the accountability of its security forces
through the mechanisms introduced.

Stability and prosperity are two sides of the same
coin; one cannot be sustained without the other. If
poverty is left unchecked, it will sooner or later erode
the foundations of stability in a country. This is why
Malaysia welcomes the move of the Government of
Timor-Leste to address the high rates of unemployment
and poverty among the Timorese population, in
particular its efforts to finalize the National Strategic
Development Plan.

Malaysia also lauds the closing of all the camps
for internally displaced persons (lDPs), and welcomes
the establishment of the Peacebuilding and Social
Cohesion Department in Timor-Leste. We hope that the
Department will realize its full potential and live up to
the promises inherent in its creation.

While the dispersal and resettlement of IDPs
represent welcome progress, alongside resettlement
there must also be efforts to ensure that former IDPs
have the means to sustain livelihoods in their areas of
origin. We understand that the resettlement of IDPs is
more than just a physical process; it also involves
financial considerations. IDPs resettled in areas where
they used to reside need to come to terms with the loss

10-2486]
of their former property. Over and above that,
communal life must also be taken into account, since
IDPs are often resettled into communities. Thus, the
acceptance of the local community is imperative.
Malaysia recognizes that the Government of Timor-
Leste is cognizant of these problems, and hopes that
solutions will soon be found to overcome the matter.

In an effort to assist the people of Timor-Leste in
these economically challenging times, Malaysia would
urge the international community to explore ways to
invest in Timor-Leste with a view to creating
employment opportunities for the people. In this
regard, Malaysia undertakes to encourage its own
businessmen to consider Timor-Leste as a viable
business partner.

As part of its commitment to Timor-Leste,
Malaysia reaffirms its continued support for and
cooperation with the country, both at the multilateral
level, through UNMIT and the United Nations police,
and at the bilateral level, through the Malaysian
Technical Cooperation Programme. As the fourth
largest contributor of police personnel in Timor-Leste,
Malaysia is proud to be part of the nation-building
process of its neighbour.

The Secretary-General finds that the security and
justice institutions in Timor-Leste remain fragile, and
that there is the distinct possibility that they would be
unable to withstand another major crisis of the
magnitude of that of 2006. With this in mind, Malaysia
is of the view that Timor-Leste still requires the robust
presence of UNMIT. Malaysia supports the extension
of the mandate of UNMIT for a further year, to be
reviewed on a yearly basis. UNMIT continues to be
relevant in its work promoting cooperation among all
parties in Timor-Leste to engage in political dialogue
for the rebuilding and development of the country.

For its part, Malaysia will continue with its effort
to provide training to Timorese security personnel. In
addition to training for the Defence Forces of Timor-
Leste under the Malaysian Defence Cooperation
Programme, Malaysia, together with Australia, is in the
process of organizing a peacekeeping training
workshop for Timorese security personnel to take place
in the later part of this year.

Malaysia reaffirms its commitment to the peace
and stability of the region as a whole, of which Timor-
Leste is undoubtedly an integral part. We are confident
that the strong political commitment of the people and
Government of Timor-Leste, together with the support
of the international community, will only help the
country rebuild and prosper that much more quickly.

