Mr. Fuentealba (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, Sir, let me thank you for having taken the
initiative to convene this special Security Council
debate on strengthening collective security
mechanisms. I have the honour to greet you warmly on
behalf of Her Excellency the President of Chile,
Mrs. Michelle Bachelet J eria.

At this meeting, we would like to add our
country's voice to the consideration of a central topic
for this Organization and the international community.
In accordance with the preamble and Article 1 of the
Charter, which defines the Organization's purposes, the
United Nations was created, above all, as an instrument
of collective security, designed to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war.

We must recognize that, in the face of an
international context different from that which the
signatories of the Charter were witnessing in 1945, it is
essential to adapt our Organization to the requirements
of an international security that involves new threats,
while the traditional ones have not disappeared.

However, the process of reform of the United
Nations, launched with the adoption by consensus of

the 2005 World Summit Outcome (resolution 60/1), is
pursuing a somewhat leisurely pace after some
concrete achievements, such as the establishment of
the Human Rights Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission.

Chile has consistently advocated far-reaching
reform of the United Nations that would enhance its
credibility and legitimacy by reaffirming the principles
and values of the Charter. We have already taken
significant steps in that direction, but we must not
neglect the challenge of reforming the Security
Council, which is the centrepiece in the global process
of the Organization's necessary reform. The present
composition of the Security Council does not reflect the
international reality of the twenty-first century. Clearly,
the organ responsible for ensuring international peace
and security must be more representative - possibly
expanding its membership - and have more
transparent and participatory working methods.

At a time when the bloodiest conflicts occur in
intra-State scenarios but have a big impact on the
surrounding neighbours, regional mechanisms must
also be strengthened, so that they can play a preventive
role, which is indispensable in every regard. In Latin
America and the Caribbean, we have made progress
that should be studied in other latitudes. We established
the first nuclear-weapon-free zone in a densely
populated region of the world. Under the 1991
Mendoza Commitment, we became a region free of
biological and chemical weapons. In 2002, we
established the South American Zone of Peace and
Cooperation and today, in the framework of the Union
of South American Nations, we are discussing a
subregional defence initiative, based on confidence and
cooperation. All those achievements can perfectly well
be extrapolated to other regions, needing only political
will to realize them.

The Charter of the United Nations restricts the
legitimate use of force, through legitimate means of
defence, to collective action to repel aggression and the
exercise of the inherent right of individual or collective
self-defence. For its part, the Final Document of the
1978 first special session of the General Assembly
devoted to disarmament called for the balanced
reduction of conventional armaments, based on the
principle of undiminished security of the parties with a
view to promoting or enhancing stability at a lower
military level.

Chile believes that it is essential to ensure
transparency in the acquisition of legitimate means of
defence. Such means are not only authorized by the
Charter, but also derive from the principle of
undiminished security for all States at the lowest
possible level of armaments, as proclaimed in the
above-mentioned Final Document. Transparency is, in
turn, an essential prerequisite for mutual trust, which
must lie at the very foundation of any action designed
to consolidate international security.

In that regard, our region took a decisive step
with the Inter-American Convention on Transparency
in Conventional Weapons Acquisitions, which gives
legal force to the standards previously established by
the United Nations Register of Conventional Arms.

Yet, beyond the provisions of that Convention
and with special emphasis as of 1990, Chile has
pursued an open, prudent and sustainable policy to
equip an essentially defensive military force. National
defence policies have been debated intensely and
democratically in our country and then universally
disseminated in the National Defence Book, of which
two editions have been published and a third is in
preparation. Chilean military purchases, of which our
neighbours were duly forewarned, sought to maintain
the operational level of an armed force whose troop
strength has been reduced in light of the national and
regional situation, but which need to remain
technically up to date to perform their constitutionally
assigned tasks and participate effectively in
peacekeeping operations. Indeed, Chile is currently
involved in Haiti, Cyprus and Bosnia and Herzegovina.
As a result of those policies, it has been possible to
keep total defence spending at only 1.09 per cent of the
gross domestic product and 6.36 per cent of
government spending. Those percentages include all
operating expenses of our armed forces.

My country has made mutual confidence-building
one of the central elements of its foreign policy
towards its neighbours and the region. Thus, we have
created ongoing bilateral consultation mechanisms
with Argentina and Peru, in both cases spearheaded by
meetings of Ministers for Foreign Relations and
Ministers of Defence, known as the 2-plus-2 meetings.
On the substantive front, we have agreed with
Argentina, with valuable assistance from the Economic
Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean, on a
standardized methodology between the two countries
for measuring military spending that introduces
certainty and confidence as a sensitive aspect of our
bilateral relationship. Moreover, building on the
agreements on military assistance in natural disasters
and those on the holding of joint exercises, we have
progressed towards establishing the Southern Cross
joint military force, which we have made available to
the United Nations for deployment as of 2010.

In addition, observing that some of the regional
security instruments and mechanisms are inadequate to
meet current situations, Chile has established a
network of bilateral defence cooperation agreements
with various countries in our hemisphere and the rest
of the world.

The international situation could shortly generate
new opportunities for relaunching the multilateral
disarmament agenda. The United States President-elect
has made a promise to seek ratification of the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, which, if
kept, would be a positive development in the sad path
followed over the past ten years by the forums of our
disarmament machinery. That ratification would
undoubtedly send a strong political signal that could
influence the eighth Review Conference of the Parties
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, in 2010.

We cannot allow ourselves another failure in the
most important forum in the nuclear non-proliferation
regime. Moreover, in response to voices of authority
that have been raised recently both in this country and
around the world, negotiations should be resumed to
move towards gradual nuclear disarmament based on a
reduction in the operational status of the remaining
nuclear weapons.

Thirty years after the first special session of the
General Assembly devoted to disarmament, and twenty
years after the most recent special session, Chile is
convinced of the need to convene a fourth special
session, at the highest political level, to conduct a far-
reaching and forward-looking review of the goals and
in particular, the multilateral forums and instruments in
the fields of disarmament and international security.
We are delighted that the First Committee of the
General Assembly adopted by consensus draft decision
A/C.1/63/L.22 on the subject a few days ago. As the
principal representative organ of the United Nations,
the General Assembly is called upon to negotiate the
terms of a new road map.
Those are the principal challenges faced by the
Organization on the issue of security. Chile is strongly
committed to the work being done by the United
Nations and is absolutely convinced that we bear the
huge responsibility of bequeathing to future
generations a world of peace and security.

