Mr. Kydyrov (Kyrgyzstan) (spoke in Russian):
I should like, at the outset, to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Jan Kubis;
the Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, Mr. Yury Fedotov; and Ambassador
Tanin for their substantive statements.

I have the honour today to speak on behalf of
the member States of the Collective Security Treaty
Organization (CSTO). The CSTO member States
support the role of the United Nations in coordinating
international efforts to support Afghanistan. We endorse
the approach of the Afghan leadership to ensure the
country's progress towards peace, stability, prosperity
and broad cooperation with regional neighbours.

We pay tribute to the efforts of the Afghan people
themselves, who have striven in the face of numerous
challenges to determine their own future and to assume
ownership of their own development and security. In that
context, we note the successful holding of the second
round of the presidential elections on 14 June. We hope
that at this historic turning-point in their country's
history, the people of Afghanistan will come together
to address the challenges and ensure the equality of all,
respect for the law and the rights of various groups, and
justice and harmony.

The member States of the CSTO fully support the
efforts of the Afghan Government to move towards
national reconciliation. We suggest that this process
should be carried out under the leadership of Kabul and
on the basis of three well-known principles, namely,
that the rebels must lay down their arms, recognize
the Constitution of Afghanistan and sever their ties to
Al-Qaida and other terrorist organizations.

The member States of the CSTO are convinced
that it will not be possible to stabilize the situation
in Afghanistan in the long term or to effectively
address the challenges facing the country without a
comprehensive approach to existing problems. We are
gravely concerned by the surge in the activities of the
Taliban, Al-Qaida and other terrorist and extremist
groups, illegal armed bands and criminal elements, and
in particular by their spread to the northern regions of
the country, which directly affects the interests of this
Organization in that zone. A major challenge at this
stage is clearly the problem of illegal drug production
and drug trafficking. The strong connection between
terrorism and illegal Afghan drug production is
particulary alarming, because it undermines Afghan
achievements in the sphere of security and its capacity
to ensure law and order in the country. We note with
concern funding and support for terrorist activities,
including income from the cultivation, production and
trafficking in illicit narcotics as a country of origin or
transit, which Afghanistan is, as well as illicit delivery
to the country of precursors.

The member States of the CSTO also express
their concern at the growth in the production of opium
poppy that was noted in the report Afghanistan Opium
Survey 2013, published by the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime (UNODC). The cultivation,
production, illegal trafficking and consumption of
opium in Afghanistan continue to pose a serious threat
to stability, security, socioeconomic development and
governance in thatcountry, the region and the world as a
whole. The member States of the CSTO strongly belive
that the production, trade and trafficking of illicit drugs
from Afghanstan represent a threat to international
stability and provide a breeding ground for international
terrorism and organized crime. Combating the drug
threat is one of the main components for achieving
stability and security in Afghanistan and is an intrinsic
part of our overall efforts to combat the terrorist threat,
including a possible worsening of the situation given
the upcoming withdrawal from the country this year of
the International Security Assistance Force.

We support the important role of United Nations
agencies and UNODC in monitoring the drug situation
in Afghanistan and in helping to ensure security,
stability and socioeconomic developent in the country.
A significant contribution to addressing that can
be made by bolstering bilateral and multilateral
cooperation between Afghanistan and other countries in
the region. We reiterate our commitment to combating
the illicit drug trade and using the potential of regional
cooperational to combat Afghan drug trafficking. We
therefore accord great importance to the specialized
regional structures that work closely with UNODC. In
November 2007, the Central Asian Regional Information
and Coordination Centre for monitoring trafficking in
illicit substances and their precursors was established
in Almaty.

The member States of the CSTO reiterate their
readiness to continue to support Afghanistan's counter-
narcotic efforts, including by training specialists for
law enforcement structures at national training centres,
providing necessary equipment and maintaining the
permanent anti-narcotics mechanism Operation Canal,
which was set up as part of the preventive operations
established under the aegis of the CSTO. We are
ready to enhance cooperation with the Afghan people,
United Nations specialized agencies, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe and other
interested parties. We call for enhancing international
and regional cooperation in order to effectively and
jointly counteract the drug threat emerging from
Afghanistan, in line with the principle of common and
shared responsibility. We express our readiness to use
the potential of the coordinated work of the CSTO in
our foreign policy in order to enhance security and
stability in Afghanistan and in the region as a whole.

