The Secretary-General: A week ago in this
Chamber, I informed the Council that the people of East
Timor had voted overwhelmingly to reject an offer of
autonomy from the Indonesian Government and in favour
of a transition towards independence.

The conditions under which the popular consultation
took place on 30 August were far from ideal, but the
extremely large turnout and the judgment of the
international observers and the Electoral Commission left
no doubt as to the integrity and validity of the ballot. The
international community should therefore now be
proceeding, without any hesitation, to implement the
result of the ballot.

Unhappily, no sooner had the result of the ballot
been announced than East Timor began a descent into
chaos. The scale of the violence, death and destruction
has been far beyond what any international observers
anticipated. As I said in my press conference yesterday,
what is happening in East Timor may well fall into
various categories of international crime. The individuals
who have ordered and carried out these crimes must be
held accountable.

 

During the last week, my colleagues and I have given
the Council regular and detailed briefings on these
developments. There has been an overwhelming
international public response to the plight of the people of
East Timor in their hour of darkness. Members of the
Council have been preoccupied with the crisis, as have my
colleagues in the Secretariat and myself. In addition, I have
been in constant telephone contact with many heads of
State and other leaders from all parts of the globe. In
particular, I have spoken throughout the week with
President Habibie in Jakarta.

My goal has been to create conditions that would
allow the United Nations Mission in East Timor
(UNAMET) to carry out the mandate with which the
Council has entrusted it. The first such condition is the
restoration of law and order, which, under the 5 May
Agreements, is the responsibility of the Government of
Indonesia. The Council has dispatched its own mission to
Indonesia to emphasize directly to the leaders of that
country at the highest levels the urgency of the situation
and the necessity for immediate action.

Despite all our efforts, the security situation has
steadily deteriorated and the United Nations Mission in East
Timor has been forced to close all but one of its offices.
Yesterday, UNAMET relocated all non-essential staff,
including 280 UNAMET local staff and their families, out
of East Timor. Only 86 international staff remain in the
headquarters in Dili. Lawlessness and disorder have reigned
in Dili this week, despite a significant presence of
Indonesian police and military who are unwilling or unable
to control the situation.

As I said in a public statement yesterday, faced with
this grave situation the future of UNAMET's presence in
East Timor remains under hourly review. On Tuesday,
Indonesia declared martial law in East Timor, but neither
this nor the presence of extra troops has had the effect of
restoring order. As members know, on Wednesday and
Thursday, UNAMET convoys were attacked by armed
militias, despite having an escort of Indonesian troops, and
yesterday soldiers of the Indonesian army tasked with
guarding the compound joined the pro-integration militia
who were terrorizing those inside.

Approximately 1,000 East Timorese have taken refuge
in the United Nations compound. The conditions under
which they are being accommodated are precarious. The
plight of these unfortunate innocent victims is but one
aspect of an unfolding humanitarian disaster in East Timor.
The vast majority of the population have been forcibly
displaced.

With access to all of East Timor now denied to the
international community, we cannot be certain of the full
dimensions of the humanitarian crisis or of the
requirements for survival of the population that has been
uprooted. But it is clear that extremely urgent action is
required to provide for the basic needs of food, water and
health care. Food is fast running out in the places of
known concentration inside East Timor. The problem of
the bulk of the population, now believed to have fled or
been forcibly moved to West Timor, is equally pressing.

I am glad to be able to say that UNAMET reports
the situation in Dili today as being very quiet.

Earlier today the Security Council mission visited
East Timor to see for themselves the conditions on the
ground and the impediments being faced by UNAMET
and its courageous staff. I understand that they were able
to visit the whole city and see for themselves the extent
of the destruction. Like the members of the Council, I
look forward to receiving the full report of the mission
within the next day or two. But I believe it is worth
remarking at this point that the ability of the Indonesian
armed forces to maintain calm in Dili during the
mission's visit further emphasizes their responsibility for
the security situation as a whole.

As I said yesterday, the time has come for Indonesia
to seek the help of the international community in
fulfilling its responsibility to bring order and security to
the people of East Timor. This work must include
guaranteeing the safety and protection of the civilian
leaders of the pro-independence camp.

Once again I urge Indonesia to agree without further
delay to the deployment of an international force. The
international community is asking for Indonesia's consent
to the deployment of such a force. But I hope it is clear
that it does so out of deference to Indonesia's position as
a respected member of the community of States.
Regrettably, that position is now being placed in jeopardy
by the tragedy that has engulfed the people of East
Timor.

I sincerely hope this open debate in the Council will
contribute to the ending of that tragedy. The meeting of
the Council today symbolizes the determination of its
members and that of the United Nations membership as
a whole to fulfil their obligation under the Charter.

 

