Ms. Tachco (United States of America): I thank
Mr. Martin for his important briefing, which I believe
will give us a great road map for our work in the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions.

It is easy to get bogged down in the details of
working methods. Those details are important, without
a doubt. We want the Security Council to operate as
effectively and efficiently as it can, but we, the United
States, want to focus on just one aspect of our working
methods today, that is, we want to talk about people.

We need to commit ourselves to listen carefully to
the people around the world who are affected by our
decisions and to keep the impact of conflicts on them
foremost in our minds. If we could truly channel the
perspectives of the people living in places like South
Sudan, Syria or the Democratic Republic of the Congo
who have been traumatized by years of conflict, think
of how our responses would change. But all too often
that is not how our meetings work. Instead of thinking
about actual conditions on the ground, we default to
talking in generalities that can dull the senses. We talk
in statistics that can never fully capture the suffering
that happens outside this Chamber.
That is why the information that the Council
receives from on-the-ground monitoring is essential for
conflict prevention, and we must be inclusive and allow
for a full range of voices to explain the dynamics of
conflicts and the totality of their impact on civilians,
communities and societies. It is for those reasons that
we have so frequently sought to have civil society,
human rights defenders and humanitarian experts brief
the Council.

The voices from the field are important for two
main reasons. First, the information that we receive
from humanitarian workers and human rights defenders
differs from other types of reports. In part, that is
because without their perspective our knowledge of a
conflict is incomplete. When civil society briefers join
us, we hear about cases of torture, arbitrary arrests and
crackdowns on peaceful protests. Those are human
rights issues that can deeply affect our understanding
ofa conflict. In fact, such human rights violations may
be the source ofa conflict, and pursuing accountability
can be key to a durable peace.

We therefore need to hear perspectives not just
from the Government elites, but from the people who
are documenting credible cases of human suffering.
Closing our eyes and ears to those voices does not
advance our interest in maintaining international peace
and security. Rather, it leads to discussions that are
detached from realities on the ground and impedes our
ability to fully deliver on our responsibilities on the
Security Council.

We need to be especially mindful of the importance
of hearing perspectives from women and girls in
conflict. Their voices are easy to overlook in official
reports, but a fundamental part of the Council's
modern agenda is recognizing the need to include
women and girls at every stage of conflict resolution
and peacebuilding. We know that peace agreements are
more durable when women are at the table. By the same
token, we strengthen our own mandates when we take
gender perspective into account. The best way to do
that is simple: inviting women from conflict areas to
share their views with us directly.

Secondly, human rights reporting and monitoring
give the Council improved situational analysis and early-
warning capabilities. Both are needed if we are going
to improve the Council's track record in preventing
conflict. The Council has already acknowledged, in
paragraph 13 of resolution 2171 (2014), that "serious
abuses and violations of international human rights or
humanitarian law, including sexual and gender-based
violence, can be an early indication of a descent into
conflict or escalation of conflict". But that is also just
common sense. It is hard to imagine any conflict on our
agenda that did not begin with widespread human rights
abuses - often directed against women and girls. The
sooner we know that such situations are emerging, the
faster we can react.

However, the Council's standard practice and
working methods do not fully capture that link. Once
conflict emerges, the Council immerses itself in the
details of political and peacekeeping missions, often
spending large amounts of time and resources in the
process. But if we acted decisively after receiving
warning signs of human rights violations, we could
stand a better chance of preventing conflict in the
first place.

That is where we must aim to improve, and
we certainly can improve. For example, we could
establish an annual open debate for non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) engaged in mediation and
conflict analysis to ensure that the Council is aware
of best practices. We could invite relevant NGOs to
engage with the Council ahead of mandate renewals
or the adoption of thematic resolutions, similar to
our practice of engaging with troop-contributing
countries in advance of mandate renewals. We could
more frequently invite humanitarian and human rights
organizations to speak under rule 39 of the provisional
rules of procedure, making them participants in
meetings. We could also ask them to provide more input
into briefings and reports. We can also make better
use of our video teleconferencing capabilities to hear
directly from the people affected by the situations on
our agenda.

We hope that the Council can soon begin expanding
on these ideas and seeking ways to increase our
engagement with key humanitarian, human rights and
civil society partners. Those are the voices that should
inspire all of us on the Council to act in defence of
those most vulnerable.

That alone will not overcome our deepest political
divisions, of course, but when we are confronted with

the voices of ordinary people demanding an end to
conflict, our responses can change for the better. That
will never change, but we should structure the Council
in a way that maximizes the chances to see that our
common interest lies in preventing the outbreak of war
and addressing pressing threats. Hearing directly from
people is a powerful way to achieve that goal.
