Mr. Sharma (India): May I begin, Madam
President, by congratulating you on your presidency of
the Council, and by complimenting the Council on the
generosity with which it suffers little children to come
unto it from time to time, as it does non-members.

The tragic plight of children, whose "souls dwell
in the house of tomorrow", caught up in the conflicts
and savageries visited on them by their elders today,
and their lives blighted and destroyed, wrings our
hearts with anguish. There is a special pain in the
betrayal of innocence. It gives a new and poignant
meaning to the old aphorism of Francis Bacon,

"Children sweeten labour, but they make
misfortunes more bitter",

or indeed to the older Biblical prophecy:

"Unto the woman he said, I will greatly multiply
thy sorrow and thy conception; in sorrow thou
shalt bring forth children". (The Holy Bible, Genesis 3:16)

Olara Otunnu, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
has won our admiration and appreciation for the total
and tireless dedication with which he has embraced and
pursued his mandate. The results of his efforts are in
the Secretary-General's report before us. However, the
report raises some questions, which I shall touch upon
in a constructive spirit.

First, a question. How much does it help to
discuss in isolation the problems faced by children in
armed conflict? Malaria kills more children than
conflicts do; AIDS will kill far more, leaving millions
of other children orphaned and destitute. But we do not
deal separately with children and malaria, or children
and AIDS; we tackle the larger challenge, and the
specific problem of children within it. The Preparatory
Committee for the follow-up to the World Summit on
Children, which you also so ably chair, Madam
President, considers their problems in context - of
society, of development, of the life-cycle of the girl
child. The exception is here.

By definition, a close focus blots out the larger
picture, but it is essential, in looking at a global
problem, to set it in perspective. For instance, sanctions
in one country alone, according to the United Nations
Children's Fund (UNICEF), have caused 90,000 deaths
a year over the last decade, and left a million children
malnourished. Assuming that half the dead were
children, perhaps half a million children have been
killed by sanctions over the last decade - far more,
barring the genocide in Rwanda, than by conflicts. But
we do not have a report on children and sanctions. As a
general point, therefore, a sense of balance in
discussing children and armed conflict is in order.

Though in resolution 1261 (1999) the Council
asked the Secretary-General for an implementation
report, what we have before us is far more ambitious.
Very few of its 55 recommendations have much to do
with the maintenance of international peace and
security, and, very properly, only a handful are
addressed to the Council. On those not addressed to it,
their discussion in other forums will no doubt not be
pre-empted by the Council.

I shall speak only on some of those
recommendations made to the Council, and on a few
points in the report, starting with the claim in
paragraph 1 that

"The Security Council has now clearly
acknowledged that the harmful impact of
conflict on children has implications for peace
and security."

I think the Council would agree that, while the
breakdown of peace and security and the conflicts that
ensue have a tragic impact on children, there is no
evidence that their plight affects international peace
and security. We must soften the impact of conflict on
children, and have a duty to do so, because they are
innocent and should not suffer; we do not need to alarm
ourselves into action by summoning up a bogey that
does not exist.

The actions we take should be well thought
through, pragmatic and likely to help. Many of the
well-meaning recommendations are challenged by this
objective. A good example is recommendation 4, the
first of those addressed to the Council, which asks it to
urge armed groups to accept the Convention on the
Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocol and the
codes of international humanitarian law. Let us set
aside for a moment the fact that none of these
Conventions envisage a role for the Council in either
promoting or implementing them. Let us also forget
that most armed groups obey no laws, national or
international, and that if they are to be tried for
breaking them they must first be captured. Let us
assume that the Council acts on this recommendation.
Will this awe rogues into good behaviour? Perhaps in
the world of Harry Potter, but not of Foday Sankoh.
What then?

Targeted sanctions are the answer, according to
recommendation 9, but are they? The Council can
impose sanctions under Article 41 only if it has
established, under Article 39, that there is a sufficient
danger to international peace and security to justify
them. Bear in mind, too, that only States are parties to
Conventions; almost by definition, non-State actors
slip through the net, or, which is almost as much of a
problem, they could offer to join in order to gain a
status in international law to which they are not
entitled. Most importantly, the Council must bear in
mind that a violation of the Convention on the Rights
of the Child cannot automatically be construed as a
threat to international peace and security. In seeking to
hold others to the rule of law, the Council must be
careful not to break those that govern it.

Before acting on recommendations of this nature,
the Council must take stock, as the report could have,
of developments over the year that has passed since it
last discussed this problem. When armed groups have
shown no greater interest in abiding by law, as I think
recent experience throughout the world confirms, these
recommendations cannot be more than placebos.

The other feature of several recommendations is
that they do not delve into the larger implications.
Recommendation 6, for example, urges Member States

"to make any political, diplomatic, financial,
material and military assistance for State or non-
State parties to armed conflict contingent on
compliance with international standards that
protect children in armed conflict."

This implies, first, that Member States should be
providing such assistance to non-State parties in
conflict as a matter of course, and secondly, that, if Mr.
Jonas Savimbi, for instance, gave a sworn affidavit that
henceforth he would only kill those above the age of
16, arms and money could again be lavished upon him.
This is unintended, of course, but we have to be
sensitive to the issue of legitimacy.

A third drawback in these recommendations is
that, in trying to add on a qualifier about children to the
general problems of conflict, to which general
solutions must be found and are being sought, several
end up implying, again no doubt unintentionally, that
action should be taken only if children are at risk.
Recommendation 38 is a case in point. Responsible
States will act within their laws against those who
traffic illegally in arms, currency or natural resources
to inflame conflicts; they do not need the Council to
ask them to do so, and they will do it to root out the
generic problem, not just, as the report recommends,
"where there is gross abuse and brutalization of
children".

There is a lack of clarity in some
recommendations. It is not clear to whom they are
addressed, and the Council should resist the temptation
to claim these for its own. The analysis tends to be
sketchy, the mooring in facts loose. In the section on
peacekeeping, for instance, we are told that two current
peacekeeping operations have child protection advisers
with them, but not what good, if any, they have done.
The United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL) is one of them, and experience has shown
that nothing much has changed there over the last year.
The report would have been useful if it had audited the
mechanisms set up so far and made recommendations
that built on lessons learned. This would add to the
efficacy of these measures.

A number of recommendations ask the Council to
take actions that are well beyond its mandate.
Recommendation 10 is an example. Surely it is not for
the Security Council to ask the international corporate
sector to develop codes of conduct on economic
activity. The Economic and Social Council might do
so, but not this Council. Others, like recommendations
41 and 42, should have been made directly to Member
States rather than to the Council, which has no
jurisdiction in these matters.

Recommendations 21 to 24, on internal
displacement and the Guiding Principles on Internal
Displacement, ignore the fact, established once again
by the difficult negotiations in the current session of
the Economic and Social Council, that these Principles
do not have intergovernmental approval and are not
legally binding. Within countries the law of the land
must prevail. International action, if any, must respect
sovereignty and be at the request of the country
concerned.

The import of recommendation 53 is far-reaching.
India welcomes the involvement of accredited non-
governmental organizations in the work of the United
Nations, but which are these non-governmental
organizations that the Council would consult and
whose information they would take into account? How
would they be chosen? Who would vet their
credentials? And what would the Council plan to do
with the information they provide? What is
recommended here goes well beyond the parameters of
non-governmental organizations' involvement in the
work of the United Nations and needs to be thought
through.

My very good friend Olara Otunnu, who by now I
think believes that the Massacre of the Innocents
should have taken place around the time I was born,
could justifiably ask whether we have proposals or
only a critique of his recommendations. This is what
we would recommend: where armed conflicts can be
stopped or curbed if strong peacekeeping operations
are quickly set up, the Council must do so. Quick
action saves lives, first and foremost the lives of the
children, who are the most vulnerable. We sincerely
admire his tireless advocacy as Special Representative
and would urge him to continue with it. Spreading the
word, and regularly checking if it has had any effect, is
the only sure way of making progress. We wish him
strength and success in this and are ready to support
him in pragmatic action.

Agencies that provide humanitarian aid should be
given the resources that they need, those who have the
resources should contribute generously to this cause.

A number of recommendations need to be
considered by other organs or bodies of the United
Nations. They should do so quickly.

May I take this opportunity to thank the
Permanent Representatives of Malaysia and Namibia
for having taken the time out this afternoon to listen to
their colleagues.

