Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): My delegation has read the concept note for
this meeting (S/2019/385, annex). We appreciate the
efforts made by the permanent delegation of Indonesia
in preparing it.

My delegation has also read the report of the
Secretary-General entitled "Protection of civilians
in armed conflict" (S/2019/373). I would like to
express my Government's absolute reservation about
describing its war, along with its allies, against the
terrorist groups Al-Qaida, Da'esh and the Al-Nusra
Front, as well as armed groups associated with them,
as an armed conflict. We also have many comments
and national Syrian reservations with respect to the
erroneous assessments and incomplete information
and conclusions contained in the report, which we will
transmit to the Secretariat in an official letter.

The protection of civilians is the primary
responsibility ofthe States concerned and their sovereign
institutions, given that they alone are responsible for
preserving security and stability on their territories.
They are responsible for fighting terrorism, violence
and crime, and for putting an end to all forms of armed
presence or illegal weapons. The Indonesian Minister
spoke of this matter in her opening statement, for which
we thank her.

On the basis established by national constitutions
and recognized by the Charter of the United Nations,
the Syrian Arab Republic will pursue its cooperation
with its allies and respect its obligations and right to
protect its citizens from terrorist armed groups that
continue to harbour in their ranks tens of thousands of
foreign terrorist fighters who have come to Syria from
more than 100 States Members of this Organization.
This assessment is documented in reports of
committees and teams associated with the Security
Council and specialized in fighting terrorism. This talk
is not Government propaganda. It is documented in
the reports of the various counter-terrorism subsidiary
committees of the Security Council.

The Syrian people have suffered from a terrorist
war for more than eight years that is supported, funded
and interfered in by certain Governments of States that
are well known as sponsors of trans-border international
terrorism. However, thanks to its genuine allies that
respect the purposes and principles of the Charter, the
Syrian State has been able to preserve the work of its
various national institutions. We have fought terrorism
steadfastly and without hesitation. In parallel, the
Syrian Government, in cooperation with the Russian
Government and other friends, has been able to take
important measures that contributed to putting an
end to bloodshed, protecting civilians and restoring
security. Some of those measures are as follows.

First, the wide range national reconciliation
processes has made it possible for thousands of
fighters to lay down their illegal weapons in exchange
for amnesty.

Secondly, through Astana agreement, we were
able to establish de-escalation zones that contributed
to halting most of the fighting and restoring the
presence and control of the Syrian State over most of
the territories previously under the control of terrorists
who belonged to Da'esh and the Al-Nusra Front and the
armed terrorist groups associated with them.

Thirdly, there is full involvement in the political
process in cooperation with Mr. Geir Pedersen, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General in Syria, based on
resolution 2254 (2015), which states that a political
process should be facilitated under Syrian leadership
and without foreign interference. That criterion is not
respected by many States, however, which are preventing
the process from moving forward by interfering in a
negative and destructive way in the decision-making
process, which is supposed to be a Syrian-led process.

We are still facing a moral and legal crisis as
well as a crisis of trust, all of which is hindering the
collective international efforts in the framework of the
United Nations. Some Governments have destroyed the
capabilities of entire countries, such as Libya, under the
pretext of protecting civilians. Some Governments are
erroneously interpreting the principles of the Charter
and international law to justify military aggression and
occupation under the pretext of protecting civilians.
Some Governments are imposing unilateral economic
measures on populations of countries such as Syria,
Cuba, Venezuela, Iran and North Korea. Those
Governments consider their policies of illegal economic
terrorism to be a part of preventive diplomacy. Some
Governments still strongly and unflinchingly defend
Israel's continued occupation of Palestine and the
Syrian Golan while seeking unsustainable deals that
are doomed to fail.

Protecting civilians and peoples across the world
without exception or discrimination begins with respect
for the Charter, without manipulating it or distorting
its principles to justify military aggression and
interference in the internal affairs of other countries.

We all agree that the key mandate of the Security
Council is to maintain international peace and security,
prevent conflicts and address the deep-rooted causes
of armed conflict. On that basis, we now have a real
opportunity to address the issue seriously and examine
its root causes. This opportunity begins by getting
answers to direct questions. What were the pretexts for
occupying Iraq and destroying all of its potential? That
was 17 years ago. Yet we have not heard an apology
from those who invaded Iraq, or ajustification for what
they did, or the taking of responsibility for that.

What is the justification for the aggression against
Libya and destroying the country? The same pretext.
With all arrogance and insolence, Libya was invaded
under the pretext of protecting civilians. Libya was
partitioned and there is currently an armed conflict
there, which everyone knows about. Libya's resources
are plundered, amounting to hundreds of billions
of dollars in value. The Libyan people were driven
to disagree among themselves about the Libyan
Constitution under the pretext of protecting civilians
in Libya. Why is it that well-known Governments of
certain countries - some of them are permanent
members of the Security Council - participated in the
dirty terrorist war against my country, Syria?

Today we put those questions to the Security
Council. And we want answers. We must have the
courage to recognize that there are Governments of
certain countries with political, military and economic
influence working openly and covertly to make
Member States of this Organization laboratories for
their bloody experiments, in defiance of the Charter.
Those countries are the cause oftensions and conflicts,
igniting fires the world over and then playing the role
of firemen or corrupt policemen.

