Mr. Belle (Belgium) (spoke in French): I should
like at the outset to thank Mr. Koenigs, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, for his report and the very important
information that he gave us. I also thank Mr. Costa of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. Their
briefings were very informative and very, very clear. In
addition, I thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report (S/2007/ 152), which shed light
on not only the progress made in Afghanistan, but also
the remaining obstacles to be overcome. I welcome the
presence at this meeting of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Italy.
My delegation fully subscribes to the statement to
be made later at this meeting by Ambassador Matussek,
Permanent Representative of Germany, on behalf of the
European Union.

Afghanistan and its partners once again find
themselves at a critical juncture in the country's
transition. In order to make Afghanistan a stable and
prosperous country, a comprehensive approach is
absolutely essential, as other delegations have
emphasized. The security component is indispensable,
but it is not enough; it must be accompanied by
progress in economic and social development,
promoting the rule of law and good governance.

Here, I should like to stress the need for intensive
cooperation among all actors on the ground. Those
actors are the Afghan Government, the United Nations,
the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) and
the European Union. That cooperation will be the key
to the success of such a comprehensive approach, and
it is within that comprehensive approach that
Belgium's activities are found. Belgium is contributing
to the efforts of the international community. We have
participated in ISAF since 2003, having contributed
300 personnel, and are also helping to finance
development programmes.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2007/152)
quite rightly emphasizes that moving regional
cooperation forward remains a strategic priority for
Afghanistan. In their briefings, Mr. Koenigs and Mr.
Costa referred to the importance of regional
cooperation. We support the efforts of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
to support and strengthen regional cooperation at the
political and economic levels. In that regard, close
cooperation between Afghanistan and its neighbours,
particularly Pakistan, is essential. Belgium therefore
encourages all parties to further intensify their
collaboration, as much in the area of security as in
terms of development, trade and the economy.

The briefings of Mr. Costa and Mr. Koenigs both
confirmed that the drug problem continues to pose a
serious threat to Afghanistan's development. Forecasts
for 2007 are hardly encouraging and should cause us to
continue our efforts to eradicate that scourge.

However, not everything is negative; indeed, Mr.
Costa referred in his briefing to certain positive
developments. The study to which he referred, carried
out by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,

indicates that there could be a drop in production in
those provinces where the security situation has made
it possible to implement alternative livelihood projects.
My delegation views this as encouraging, assuming
that this trend takes hold.

Good governance, the rule of law and the human
rights situation, as well as reform of the Ministry of the
Interior and efforts to combat corruption and drugs, all
are urgent priorities. By effectively addressing them,
the Afghan Government will further contribute to
promoting the Afghan people's confidence in the
country's institutions. The benchmarks of the
Afghanistan Compact represent the best means of
doing so.

Belgium attaches great importance to the crucial
role played by the United Nations and in particular by
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). It welcomes the fact that the Joint
Coordination and Monitoring Board was recently
reaffirmed in its role as the primary mechanism for
facilitating coordination between the Afghan
Government and the international community.

The opening of new UNAMA offices in the
provinces and the deployment of military liaison
officers are also welcome developments. In that
context, Belgium fully supports the recommendation of
the Secretary-General to renew UNAMA's mandate
once again for a one-year period.

In conclusion, on the occasion of the Afghan New
Year - Nowruz - to which Mr. Koenig referred, I wish
to express the hope that Afghanistan, in the year 1386 of
its calendar, will keep to the course charted in Bonn
and in London. The Afghan people truly deserve this.

