Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I thank the President for convening this very
important debate. We would also like to thank the
Malaysian delegation, which served as President of the
Council in June.

I speak as one of the major concerned parties under
this agenda item.

A number of delegations' statements have been
dominated by a strong dose of surrealism and lack of
contact with reality. Those statements have not respected
the reference points under the mandate given to the
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process.
The Special Coordinator chose this morning to avoid
dealing with Yemen, Libya and Iraq and to completely
ignore the importance of taking up the occupied Syrian
Golan, which is at the heart of the mandate and the
agenda item. The regional mandate for establishing the
Office ofthe United Nations Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process (UNSCO) was outlined in
the Secretary-General's report on the expansion of the
mission's operations. Under that regional mandate, as
noted on the UNSCO website, the Special Coordinator:

(spoke in English)

"will encompass previous functions and also be
the focal for overall United Nations assistance
to the Middle East peace process. The Special
Coordinator's dual diplomatic and United Nations
development assistance coordination functions will
principally cover Jordan, Syria, Lebanon and the
Palestinian authorities areas."

(spoke in Arabic)

In distorting the point of the agenda item and
while attempting to reduce the pressure on Israel,
our colleague the representative of the United States
departed from the rules of diplomacy to transform her
statement into a sort of press release, with aggressive
remarks directed against my country, littered with
mistakes and doubtful claims from her country's
intelligence services. She did so rather than focus on
the content of the agenda item, which is to bring peace
and put an end to the Israeli occupation of the occupied
Arab territories so as to create a Palestinian State. I
would like to take this opportunity to also remind my
United States colleague that Vice-President Biden,
when meeting recently with university students, said
that the United States' problem in Syria was that allies
in the region were sponsoring terrorism there.

The United Nations has a historic, legal and moral
responsibility to implement the relevant resolutions
in order to settle the conflict so that an independent
Palestinian State can be established, fully sovereign,
on its national territory, in conformity with General
Assembly resolution 181 (II) A and B, of 1947,
and Security Council resolution 69 (1949), which
determined the conditions for Israel's membership in
the United Nations. Those conditions are that Israel
must honour the resolution that created the Palestinian
State and honour General Assembly resolution 194 (III),
of 1948, relating to the return of Palestinian refugees to
their land. However, that is the opposite of what has
happened. The United Nations has implemented just
half of General Assembly resolution 181 (II) A and
B, for the creation of Israel in Palestine. The United
Nations has forgotten the returns question found
in General Assembly resolution 194 (III), of 1948,
which has increased the injustice perpetrated against
the Palestinian people, whose fate has become that of
being held hostage to a ferocious racist occupation,
unprecedented in modern history. At the same time,
Israel launched aggressive attacks, one after the other,
against the peoples and countries ofthe region, with the
unprecedented military, political and economic support
of its sponsors and protectors, who always call for
freedom and democracy and justice, albeit a false one.

The successive Governments of Israel have
committed crimes against humanity and war crimes, as
described in United Nations reports. There is no doubt
that Israel's settlement activities have always been a
primary policy of all Israeli Governments, even though
such activities undermine peace 4 as all are aware,
including Israel's sponsors - and any possibility
of creating a geographically contiguous and viable
Palestinian State and guaranteeing Palestinians their
right to self-determination.

If we truly want to eliminate the possibility of
war, end the bloodshed and strengthen the possibility
of peace in the region and the fight against terrorism
through a serious international alliance, the United
Nations must seriously endeavour, in coordination
with the sponsoring countries, to revive the peace
process. Our region will never see stability without the
achievement of a peaceful, just and holistic solution
based on the relevant United Nations resolutions and
the principle of land for peace.

Some of the delegations that claim to support the
rights of the Syrian people have rushed to demand the
convening of meetings and conferences and parallel
meetings, attempting to confirm fallacious accounts
regarding the situation in Syria. Representatives of
those countries have used the dramatic aspects of those
accounts in addressing the rights of the Syrian people,
while avoiding any mention of ending the Israeli
occupation of the occupied Syrian Golan Heights, in
support of which the Council adopted resolution 497
(1981). It might even seem that recovering the occupied
Golan Heights was not one of the rights of the Syrian
people and that the Golan Heights was not an occupied
Syrian territory, on behalf of which various resolutions
have been adopted each year requesting Israel to
withdraw from the area to the 4 June 1967 borders.

What do those delegations think of human rights
and international humanitarian law? What do they
think of the Israeli settlements in the Golan Heights
and the suffering of the Syrian citizens there, who have
been suffering under the occupation now for more than
half a century? Those delegations deny the oppression
practiced by Israel and the theft of the Golan's natural
resources. What do they think of the natural gas
in the area? What do they think of the oil? What do
they think of the water? What do they think about the
Syrian citizens who are being held in Israeli prisons,
in violation of the 1949 Geneva Conventions? In that
regard, we must mention Sidqi Al-Maqt, known as the
Syrian Mandela, who suffered for 27 years in an Israeli
prison.

During the current crisis in Syria, Israel has added
a new chapter to its record number of human rights
violations. It has been supporting terrorists in the
separation zone of the Syrian Golan and providing them
with an opportunity to be treated in Israeli hospitals. At
the same time, it is violating the separation agreements
of 1974, imperilling the lives of the members of
the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
(UNDOF) and violating the 1948 agreements.

The truth has been brought to light in the report
of the Secretary-General on UNDOF and reports in
the Israeli media. Israel has allowed free reign to the
Al-Nusra Front to launch attacks against the Golan
Heights, including the killing of 21 civilians in the
village of Hadar, as well as threatening some civilians
and forcing others to reject the support of the Syrian
Government. Such terrorist movements have more
freedom to manoeuvre owing to the situation, which
requires serious and immediate action.

We congratulate the Islamic Republic of Iran
on achieving a final agreement with the P5+1. It is a
historic agreement that strengthens the importance
of diplomacy and political and friendly solutions to
resolving international differences. Absent in the is
the language of intimidation, war and aggression and
the imposition of illegal sanctions such as those that
have targeted the people of Iran for many years, thereby
depriving them of their right to possess the knowledge
necessary to use technology to enhance their well-
being and promote prosperity.

Syria reiterates the inalienable rights of the States
parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, especially as contained in article IV thereof,
to acquire nuclear technology to "develop research,
production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes".

