Ms. Blum (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me to congratulate you, Sir, on your work as President
of the Security Council during this month, and to
express our gratitude for the convening of this debate.
We also wish to thank Under-Secretary-General John
Holmes for his presentation.

Colombia has taken careful note of the seventh
report of the Secretary-General on the protection of
civilians (S/2009/277). Several of the challenges
identified in the report should receive priority attention

both from States and from other relevant actors. In that
regard, I would like to underscore the challenges
concerning respect for international humanitarian law;
strengthening the capacities of peacekeeping and other
operations; guaranteeing access to humanitarian
assistance in compliance with international norms; and
accountability.

Other matters addressed in the report, such as the
changing nature of conflicts, the proliferation,
fragmentation, identity and motivation of non-State
armed groups, and dialogue with those actors, should
be the subject of further consideration in order to
ensure that they fall within the scope of the provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations and applicable
international law.

All States and relevant actors must give the
highest priority to the protection of civilians and to
abiding strictly by international humanitarian law and
other international norms in that regard.

Through its democratic security policy, the
Government of Colombia has given priority to the
strategic goal of strengthening and guaranteeing the
rule of law throughout its national territory. The
consolidation of that policy has made it possible for us
to put firmly in place conditions to protect Colombians
and allow them to enjoy their rights. These efforts
include a comprehensive policy on human rights and
international humanitarian law that is focused on
prevention and on ensuring appropriate punishment for
any violations, including those involving members of
the security forces of the State.

The strengthening of democratic authority and the
State's control over its territory is reflected in the
continued reduction in the number of all acts of
violence and criminality. Since 2002, 51,407 members
of illegal armed groups have been demobilized. That
process, which is being implemented in the framework
of special legislation, has made it possible to provide
victims with justice, truth and reparations.

Combating drug trafficking, the financial source
of violence and terror, is also a national priority. The
United Nations report issued a few days ago showed a
dramatic reduction in illicit cultivation and drug
production in the country in 2008. These results will
have to better security for Colombians. The commitment
of the international community to combating drug
trafficking and terrorism is essential to consolidating
these achievements.

We support the call of the Secretary-General in
his report on States that are not parties to the Ottawa
landmine Convention to ratify it without delay. Colombia
will host the second Review Conference of the States
Parties to the Ottawa Convention, from 30 November
to 4 December this year in Cartagena. We expect, on
that occasion, to assess the progress made in
implementing the Convention and to define a plan of
action to address the persistent challenges in the
eradication of anti-personnel mines throughout the world.

We also agree with the Secretary-General on the
urgency of implementing controls over the illicit trade
in small arms and light weapons, a prerequisite for
improving the protection of civilians. My country will
continue to promote this issue in the General Assembly
and hopes that the Council will emphasize the
importance of adopting effective measures in this field.

Regarding humanitarian assistance, Colombia
joins in the condemnation of attacks against humanitarian
personnel. In addition, we emphasize the responsibility
and primary role of States in the provision and
coordination of humanitarian assistance within their
territories. We recognize the importance of international
cooperation and the facilitation of access for humanitarian
entities in accordance with international norms.

In Colombia, the Government is the main
provider of humanitarian assistance. This year, Under-
Secretary-General John Holmes visited our country and
verified the progress achieved and the budgetary and
programmatic efforts of State agencies working in this
field. We have taken note of the challenges identified
with his Office to improving the various programmes.
09-38266

I should note that progress in terms of the
security situation in Colombia can also be seen in
improved access and enhanced safety for humanitarian
staff, enabling them to carry out their work throughout
the country. This includes international institutions,
which provide valuable cooperation. The State will
continue to focus on preventing and controlling any
situation that could hinder the provision of
humanitarian assistance.

We note, moreover, that the report emphasizes the
importance of lasting solutions for refugees. It is
essential that States fully honour their international
obligations to protect refugees, including those under
the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and
other relevant instruments. Colombia fulfils its
commitments under this Convention and has supported
the work of institutions working in this field, such as
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees.

Colombia reiterates its support for efforts to
protect civilians and ensure respect for their rights, in
conformity with the United Nations Charter and the
norms of international law. My delegation will remain
actively engaged in the discussions on this subject in
the various bodies and institutions of the United
Nations.

