Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to welcome Mr. Haekkerup and to thank him for
the very valuable information he has provided today. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report. It emphasizes the achievements
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) in recent months.

There are several challenges before us, as we
noted in the meeting of 17 September, and they must be
dealt with in a systematic way. However, right now the
priority should be the 17 November elections. These
elections will consolidate the bases for the
administrative structures that will be responsible for
the political delineations for the future of Kosovo.

For Colombia, minority participation in the
democratic process is basic. The registering of 150,000
Serbians is encouraging. Now it is necessary for these
individuals to continue in this process and indeed go
out to vote on 17 November. The establishment of a
special group to provide information to minority
communities on the electoral system and the functions
of the Assembly to be elected may make a considerable
contribution to ensuring that the communities will
participate on election day.

We also wish to thank President Kostunica and
the Serbian authorities for their appeal to Kosovo Serbs
to participate and to register. We can already see the
positive effect that had. It is very important that this
cooperation be maintained to ensure that those who
were registered continue to participate and to vote.
What is more, given the date of the elections, it would
not be a good idea to change that date in any way, as
might have occurred with registering. Thus the support
of the Serbian authorities and the minority leaders in
encouraging voting would be timely and must start
immediately.

We agree with the Special Representative when
he says that there is no contradiction in criticizing
some aspects of the process and participating in it. In
his report the Secretary-General calls upon all local
political representatives and representatives of civil
society to use their leadership to prevent political
violence on the eve of the election. They must ensure
that there will be a peaceful environment. All this will
guarantee a positive result, which will be more
representative.

When we hear Mr. Haekkerup's comments on
transition activities that all Kosovars, including
UNMIK, have ahead of them after the elections, we
know that this is an even greater challenge than the one
before us now, during the stage that will culminate on
17 November. His account of future tasks shows us that
the Security Council must provide some follow-up. We
are convinced that in a very few weeks Mr. Haekkerup
will be with us again to give a detailed analysis of such
events.

By way of conclusion, let me tell you of my
country's support for the work being carried out by Mr.
Haekkerup as head of UNMIK. We have seen his
perseverance and devotion in recent months, and in
facing the challenges now before him he will once
again demonstrate his commitment to the people of
Kosovo. We also commend the work being done, in
particular by the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, to build the electoral structures
that are necessary for the success of the elections to be
held next month.

Finally, I would like to announce our support for
the text that is to be adopted after this meeting.

