Mr. Lelong (Haiti) (interpretation from French): I
would like first of all to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your presidency of the Security Council during the month
of June, which is coming to an end with deliberations on
the question of Haiti.

The Haitian delegation welcomes the adoption by the
Security Council of resolution 1063 (1996), authorizing the
establishment of the United Nations Support Mission in
Haiti (UNSMIH) for a period of five months. This new
Mission, which will follow the United Nations Mission in
Haiti (UNMIH) when its mandate expires in two days,
should enable the Government to maintain the atmosphere
of security in the country while it proceeds to strengthen
and professionalize the police, with the assistance of the
international community.

The Haitian delegation is grateful to the Council for
having duly appreciated the situation that a withdrawal of
international support at this stage could have created, and
for having acceded to President Preval's request for the
continuation of an international presence in Haiti.

The Government of Haiti and the population as a
whole were apprehensive about the approach of the
deadline of 30 June 1996, when UNMIH's mandate was
due to expire. The departure from Haiti of the United
Nations troops while the National Police, still
inexperienced and under-equipped, are not in a position
to take over, would pose a serious problem for the
Haitian State and could jeopardize all the efforts the
Government has already made to establish the rule of law
and rebuild the country.

Despite remarkable results achieved in combating
crime and maintaining public order, security is still
precarious. In this context, the proliferation in the country
of criminal groups making a living from robbery,
extortion, kidnapping and drug-trafficking creates
upheaval among a population still traumatized by the acts
of repression of past dictatorial and military regimes.

Similarly, the recent attacks on members of the
National Police, eight of whom have been killed, as well
as the street demonstrations organized by members of the
former Haitian army, even though they do not pose an
immediate threat to the Government, must nonetheless be
taken seriously in the context of impediments to
strengthening democracy.

The Government is aware, however, that security
and stability cannot be assured solely by the Police,
however well equipped they might be, and that the
situation calls for dialogue, tolerance, understanding and
above all economic development. The desired results
cannot be seen in the struggle against insecurity and the
strengthening of institutions unless the population's
economic and social conditions are improved.

Measures have been taken to address the serious
economic and social problems facing the country. A very
ambitious programme has been drawn up which should
enable the country to emerge from its economic
stagnation within three years. The success of this plan,
however, will depend on maintaining the atmosphere of
security in the country.

The adoption of this resolution therefore encourages
the Government in its untiring efforts, as it sees the
international community supporting Haiti's economic,
social and institutional development.

My delegation is very pleased to be able to express
its gratitude to the Secretary-General, and in particular to
his former Special Representative, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi,
and to his current Representative, Mr. Enrique ter Horst,
as well as to all the personnel of UNMIH, for their

 

dedication to the cause of democracy in Haiti. We also
extend our thanks to the Group of Latin American and
Caribbean States and to the members of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries on the Council, which have
invariably supported Haiti by unanimously supporting the
requests made by President Preval.

I cannot overlook the vital role played by the group of
Friends of the Secretary-General for Haiti - Argentina,
Canada, Chile, France, the United States of America and
Venezuela. In particular, I thank Canada and the United
States of America, which have demonstrated a special
commitment to assisting Haiti in its move towards peace,
stability and development.

Our sincere thanks also go the delegations of the
People's Republic of China and the Russian Federation
for their understanding and support.

To all those delegations that have participated in one
way or another in the deliberations of the Council, I wish
on behalf of the Government and people of Haiti to
express our deep gratitude.

