Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): For several years now, we have been warning
the members of the Security Council about the
seriousness of the destructive approach to modifying
the content of and references to agenda item pertaining
to the Middle East. That approach seeks to sway us from
our main objectives and to remove the real content of
the agenda item, which is the question ofthe occupation
by Israel of Palestinian, Syrian and Lebanese territories
and its ongoing violations of the various Security
Council resolutions calling for it to withdraw from
the occupied Arab territories, in accordance with the
4 June 1967 borders.

Nonetheless, of particular concern and abhorrence is
the fact that the representative ofthe Secretariat is again
heading down that very path, pointedly overstepping the
bounds of his mandate and deliberately neglecting to
speak about the situation in the occupied Syrian Golan.
The question of the Syrian Golan is at the very core
of the agenda item and a key part of Mr. Mladenov's
mandate as Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process. We have pointed out to Mr. Mladenov
on several occasions the seriousness of this approach to
briefing the Security Council and his failure to address
the situation in the occupied Syrian Golan.

My country stresses its intransigent position in
support of the right of the Palestinian people to self-
determination and to establish an independent State
that encompasses its entire territory, with Jerusalem as
its capital, as well as the right of return of Palestinian
refugees, pursuant to General Assembly resolution 194
(III). The continued, dubious silence of the Security
Council with regard to Israeli policies and practices
has encouraged Israel to pursue its policy of occupation
and colonization.

It has also encouraged Israel to violate the
Disengagement of Forces Agreement and Security
Council resolutions pertaining to the Golan, especially
those related to combating terrorism. Moreover, it
has encouraged Israel to lend all kinds of support to
armed terrorist groups in the disengagement area in the
occupied Syrian Golan, including to terrorists of the
Al-Nusra Front, an entity that the Council considers to
be a terrorist organization and that receives assistance
from Israel in the occupied Syrian Golan. In addition,
Israel facilitates travel by Al-Nusra Front terrorists
across the demarcation line, treats them at Israeli
hospitals and returns them to Syrian territory to resume
their terrorist acts. The Qatari regime finances these
malicious acts. Israel has not only supported this group,
but has also launched several airstrikes, in flagrant
violation of Syrian sovereignty and the Disengagement
of Forces Agreement, in order to support such terrorist
groups. Israel attacked Syria on 17 March in Palmyra
in support of the Da'esh terrorist group, which was
present there at the time.

Such events illustrate that Israel and terrorism are
two sides of the same coin. When we state that Israel
and terrorism are essentially two sides ofthe same coin,
we are talking about a long history of Zionist terrorism,
which is essentially based on a foundation of extremism
and intolerance. Its goal is to kill others, displace them
and violate their rights. It is based on a false myth
of a religious State that is illusory and has not been
accepted under any international laws and norms. It is a
State that does not respect freedom, equality or justice.

When the representative of the Israeli occupation
asks about root causes of terrorism and bloodshed in
the Middle East, we offer facts and evidence to him
and others who deliberately take exploit this forum to
distort facts and distract us from addressing the real
threats facing our region. An entity that occupies
territories and makes people refugees cannot claim
to be democratic or to adhere to human values. Its
representatives cannot speak about chaos and weapons
of mass destruction. The entity itself continues to distort
history by pilfering territories, building settlements
and carrying out massacres against the Arab peoples
who live under its occupation. It is the only party that
possesses an arsenal ofnuclear, biological and chemical
weapons and that is protected by permanent members of
the Security Council that have even repeatedly rejected
any initiative to create a nuclear-free-weapon zone in
the Middle East.

The world cannot ignore the fact that the entity
was established on the basis of the Balfour Declaration,
which has had a serious impact on the history of
humankind by allowing, for the first time in history,
the establishment of a racist entity that excludes others
and is based on an extremist religious ideology, which
makes it no different from Da'esh and even worse. This
entity enjoys the support of permanent members of the
Council that claim to seek peace and the realization of
peoples' interest and rights, yet still support the worst
occupation humankind has ever witnessed.

We reiterate Syria's sovereignty over the occupied
Syrian Golan, in line with the 4 June 1967 borders. That
right is not debatable; it is an inalienable right on which
there can be no compromise. Our occupied territory
and usurped right must be restored and returned to their
legitimate owners. Settlers must leave our territory in the
Golan, sooner or later. Syrian authorities demand that
pressure be exercised on Israel, the occupying Power,
to immediately release the Syrian Sudqi Almaqt, who
is referred to as Syria's Mandela, and Amal Abu Saleh.
Both have been imprisoned in Israel simply for taking
photographs that prove that the Israel, the occupying
Power, cooperates with the Al-Nusra Front in the
occupied Syrian Golan. Such photographs were taken
at the gates of the the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force, whose forces are deployed throughout
the Golan. That is why those two Syrians were arrested
by Israel.

