Mr. Gonzalez de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): My country, which has unfortunately
also fallen victim to terrorism, would like to reiterate
to the international community and, in particular, to
the countries that have suffered its cruel effects last
week, our solidarity and firm readiness to continue
collaborating in efforts to combat this scourge. The
victims suffer, whatever the reason for which they
were attacked, and that should push us all - above and
beyond extending our condolences - to demonstrate
our unity and stoicism as we face the barbarism
of terrorism.

With regard to today's topic, I would like to thank
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2017/223) on
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in Haiti, Ms. Sandra Honore, for
her briefing. I take this opportunity to thank her for
her valuable and effective efforts in Haiti as head of
MINUSTAH over the years.

We warmly congratulate the Haitian people for
concluding the electoral cycle that began in 2015 and for
the restoration of constitutional order. Spain reiterates
its readiness to collaborate with the new Government in
order to overcome the country's challenges. We welcome
the deployment of MINUSTAH's strategic assessment
mission, but we regret that the new Government has been
left with very little leeway to weigh in on the situation.

Ongoing consultations with the Government are a good
practice that should be maintained, in particular when
preparing for the departure of a peacekeeping operation
that has been deployed in the country for 13 years.

We thank MINUSTAH for its efforts and support
the Secretary-General's recommendation for it to exit
the country responsibly and be replaced with a new
peacekeeping operation, focused on promoting the rule
of law, on the ongoing training of the Haitian National
Police and on assessing the human rights situation.

We would like to have details about the Mission's
departure as soon as possible, so that that withdrawal
can take place in the very short time frame of a mere
six months, with the simultaneous drawdown of formed
police units. I do not recall the Security Council ever
stipulating such a short time frame for the departure
of a mission. In any event, the mission's departure will
pose major challenges, as this is a very delicate time
in the country and the process should be conducted as
smoothly as possible.

With regard to the mission that will replace
MINUSTAH, we encourage the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General to keep the communication
channels open with the new Government in preparation
for it. We believe that the mandate to support the Haitian
National Police and promote the rule of law, which the
Secretary-General recommends, should be entrusted
to the new mission. It can be achieved and sustained
only with the leadership, ownership and participation
of the Haitian Government. In addition, preserving the
new mission's role as a deterrent will, no doubt, pose a
challenge, and we will have to procure aviation capacity
on the civilian market for the deployment of additional
personnel where necessary.

In conclusion, I would like to recall that in spite
of the gains made, Haiti still requires international
assistance in this new phase, and Haitians know that
they will have Spain's full commitment.

