Mr. Kolga (Estonia): I would like to start by
thanking the Security Council and the presidency for
having convened an open debate on this urgent matter
today. I also welcome today's adoption of resolution
2177 (2014), and I am proud that Estonia was able to
sponsor it.

Estonia fully aligns itself with the statement made
earlier by the observer of the European Union.

The Ebola outbreak has already claimed more than
2,400 lives and affected millions of people. The peak
has not even been reached. Half of the cases occurred
in the past three weeks. It is not only a public health
emergency but also a humanitarian crisis and a global
security issue. International action is needed now. I am
happy to note that that is taking clear form here today.

Allow me to sincerely thank the health-care workers
in the front line for their tireless and courageous efforts
to bring the crisis to an end. Their work is carried out
under extremely difficult conditions. More than 120
health-care workers have lost their lives and over 240
have now been infected. The high number of infected
health-care workers is also affecting the health systems
in the ravaged areas. The need to strengthen the health
sector is growing every day, as the number of people
affected is progressing faster than the ability to manage
them. The severe shortages of trained medical staff,
health-care facilities, medical supplies and community
education on Ebola must be our main priorities. The
World Health Organization has called for more human
resources in the affected areas.

We welcome the establishment of a system-wide
coordination initiative, established by the Secretary-
General to assist the affected countries in their efforts
to halt the spread of the virus. We highly appreciate
the work that has already been done and encourage the
continued focus on effective strategies and humanitarian
partnerships. We also welcome the plans to set up an
Ebola crisis centre to coordinate the response to the
deadly virus and to strive to halt the spread in West
African countries.

It has already been said here today that any country,
however small, has a role to play. Estonia has already
contributed €60,000 to the World Health Organization
and has decided to contribute an additional €40,000,
which is a total of €100,000. We are also sending
a doctor to one of the ravaged areas to assist in the
important work in the health sector. I can assure the
affected countries that we will actively work within the
European Union and its member States to find possible
options to reduce the growing isolation of the areas in
the region.

If the situation continues, the consequences could
be disastrous not only in terms of lost lives but also in
terms of severe poverty, food insecurity, displacements
and a high risk of the virus spreading to other countries.
The situation is now on the verge of becoming a
humanitarian catastrophe. We can stop the spread
of Ebola, but it will take a coordinated international
response to do that. The international community must
act now if we want to avoid a humanitarian catastrophe.
We cannot afford not to act.

