Mr. Heusgen (Germany): Let me start by
commending Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Yamamoto for his briefing today, as well as for
his work, the dedication he has shown, his patience, his
persistence and his advice. Through him. I would also
like to thank the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for its work. We believe
that UNAMA continues to play a very important role
for us in monitoring the situation. We are very happy
that in September, together with Indonesia, we were
able to rally everyone's support for a new mandate
for UNAMA.

Let me start with the electoral process. What we
heard from the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General regarding the recount is welcome news but, of
course, the electoral process took too long. It has to run
its course. The Independent Election Commission has
to do its work. But we need the process to end not only
so that we have the results but also for the assumption
of the new Government and the transfer of power. We
must end the period of uncertainty that we are still in
and decrease the volatility faced by the country.

We are all struck by what we heard today from
the briefers about the civilian casualties. They are all
individuals. We heard about their fate from the Afghan
Ambassador, as well as the civil society representative,
who spoke of a young father who was killed. We have
heard that the civilian casualty rate is at its highest
as compared to other equally difficult periods. Aid
workers, human rights defenders and civil society
representatives seem to be the targets of the terrorists.
As Mr. Yamamoto said, there is no conceivable
justification for such attacks, which we must condemn.

Germany remains committed to Afghanistan. For
years, we have been the second-largest donor and we are
the second-largest troop-contributor. We feel involved
with the country and its fate. Germany facilitated
intra-Afghan talks in Doha. We are ready to continue
to be engaged and to organize further intra-Afghan
dialogues. In such dialogues, as well as those that we
conducted in Doha, we ensured the inclusion of women.
We believe that there should not be any negotiations
or talks on the future of Afghanistan without the
participation of women.

With regard to achieving sustainable peace in the
country, as in other conflicts, nothing can be achieved
through military means. We must ensure a negotiated,
inclusive political settlement that is Afghan-owned
and Afghan-led. As previous speakers have said, the
outcome of negotiations for sustainable peace in the
country must protect the rights of women. We must
ensure no backslide and go beyond what we have
achieved so far. There must be the full and effective
participation ofwomen and young people in all areas of
Afghan society, including the political sphere. It is very
good that we have two women representatives from
Afghanistan among us, but it would also be wonderful
ifthey were ministers in an Afghan Cabinet made up of
50 per cent women.

I believe that the inclusion of women in an Afghan
Government would also ensure that it focuses on
contributing to the well-being of the country. I hope
that, as a result of the elections, we will not have long
negotiations but a clear result and the rapid formation
of a Government so that what the Ambassador said
the Afghan Government was ready to do, namely, to
provide services to the population and to ensure that
there are functioning institutions, the rule of law and
accountability and that there is no longer impunity
in the country, can be achieved. Only by establishing
such institutions can a Government carry out its work,
provide jobs for all and ensure that good education,
universities et cetera exist.

Let me end with these remarks and again express
our wish that the elections finally come to an end, that
there is a new Government and that work starts again
for the benefit of the people of the country.

