Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): The
United Republic of Tanzania welcomes the initiative of
Argentina to organize this special debate on Haiti and
also welcomes Argentina's commitment to Haiti, which
is demonstrated, Mr. Minister, by your presence among
us today. We thank Mr. Juan Gabriel Valdes, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
informative report. We would also like to thank the
Foreign Ministers of Haiti, Barbados, Brazil, Chile and
the Dominican Republic; the State Secretary for
Foreign Affairs of France; the Assistant Secretary of
State for Western Hemisphere Affairs of the United
States; and the Acting Secretary General of the
Organization of American States (OAS) for their
statements and for the committed involvement and
contribution of their respective countries and
organizations in finding a solution to the problems in
Haiti.

The situation in Haiti is a source of great concern.
The disregard for the rule of law, the worsening
security situation, the abuse of human rights, the
violence against women and children, the arbitrary
arrests and the threats and intimidation directed against
human rights activists are of great concern to all of us.
Tanzania commends the efforts of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and of the
Haitian police in countering the spread of violence
under very trying circumstances. We welcome and
encourage the efforts of the Transitional Government
of Haiti to establish a national commission on
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, as
recommended by the Secretary-General, to facilitate
the work of restoring order and curbing violence. That
must be a priority, as armed former soldiers appear to
be a major factor in the current insecurity.

The people of Haiti have also suffered from
repeated natural disasters - the latest of which was the
devastating tropical storm last September - which
have crippled an already distressed socio-economic
situation. We express our sympathy for the loss of lives
and property and the destruction caused by those
phenomena. We commend the Caribbean Community
and other neighbours of Haiti that sent assistance, and
all the United Nations agencies and other humanitarian
organizations that took immediate steps to respond to
the natural disasters.

We also commend those who pledged funding for
relief following the Haitian floods appeal, as well as all
those - including the international financial
institutions - who had previously made pledges at the
donor conference for the Interim Cooperation
Framework. We believe that timely disbursement of the
pledged funds will have a decisive impact on the
rehabilitation work and the development efforts in
Haiti. In that regard, we support the strengthening and
realization of the three pillars of MINUSTAH and the
establishment of a long-term development strategy for
Haiti. It should be noted that the chronically depressed
state of the economy and the abject poverty in Haiti,
with the resulting widespread unemployment, greatly
contribute to the prevailing insecurity in the country
and need to be addressed affirmatively in the overall
recovery strategy for Haiti.

Tanzania welcomes the commitment made by the
Transitional Government to organize free, fair and
credible elections. It is our hope that the elections will
indeed be held in November and December 2005, as
planned, as the culmination of an inclusive political
process and a reconciliation that the Transitional
Government should be preparing now. We therefore
encourage the continuation of a national dialogue
process among all political parties and civil society,
and we urge them to participate in the coming
elections. We recognize here the contribution of the
OAS in preparing the voter registration, which is an
important and necessary step in the holding of
elections.

We also urge and encourage the full deployment
of troops by contributing countries, police and other
personnel to strengthen MINUSTAH's ability to face
the challenges of re-establishing stability and to carry
out its mandate as well as to build the capacity of the
local institutions.

Finally, Tanzania hopes that, this time around, the
United Nations and the international community as a
whole will remain fully committed to Haiti well
beyond this transitional process to consolidate the
peace process through a comprehensive peace-building
engagement. The proposed mission of the Security
Council to Haiti will indeed sustain the focus and
attention on Haiti.

