Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): I have the honour to
address the Security Council today on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) at this critical juncture
of the Council's efforts to address the situation in the
Middle East. I should like to start by expressing the
Movement's appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
personally presiding over this meeting of the Security
Council, as well as our thanks for the briefing given
today by Assistant Secretary-General Oscar Fernandez-
Taranco.

The Non-Aligned Movement remains firmly
convinced of the urgent need for the international
community to renew its resolve to act collectively to
uphold its long-standing commitment to the realization
of the two-State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict on the basis of international law and the well-
established terms of reference of the peace process.
The international consensus that we must reach is the
independence of the State of Palestine, with East
Jerusalem as its capital. Serious international action in
a timely manner is immediately required, as the
window of opportunity for actualizing the two-State
solution on the basis of the 4 June 1967 borders is
rapidly closing.

It is regrettable that all serious efforts exerted to
date by international and regional parties, including the
latest initiatives by the Quartet in its 23 September
2011 statement (see SG/2178), and the time frame it set
forth, which will end on 26 January 2012, as well as
the valuable efforts by Jordan to revive negotiations
between the two sides, have been unable to make the
desired progress, due to Israel's refusal to respect and
adhere to the well-known, clear parameters and the
occupying Power's insistence to continue illegally and
aggressively changing facts on the ground.

Israel's actions are in total contradiction to the
two-State solution and to its claim that it accepts the
solution, accepts the Quartet statement and the road
map and actually seeks to end the conflict. Quite the
opposite, Israel's illegal measures in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem,
particularly its massive illegal settlement campaign,
are entrenching its nearly 45 years of occupation and
prolonging the conflict and injustice.

In that regard, the Non-Aligned Movement
recalls that the final status negotiations, which began
with great hopes in September 2010 under the auspices
of United States President Barack Obama, with the
participation of the Quartet, Egypt and Jordan, which
aimed at concluding an agreement within one year,
collapsed just a few weeks later, due to Israel's refusal
to renew its moratorium on settlement activities, cease
its illegal settlement campaign and abide by the
internationally endorsed parameters for negotiations,
based on relevant United Nations resolutions, the
Madrid principles, the Arab Peace Initiative and the
road map.

Even while claiming to cooperate with the
Quartet, Israel has continued daily to violate its road
map obligation to cease all settlement activities,
including as regards natural growth, and to dismantle
all settlement outposts. Israel's credibility as a peace
partner consequently remains in serious doubt and,
even more dangerously, the two-State formula - as the
most viable solution at the core of a comprehensive
peace settlement - is gravely threatened.

The Non-Aligned Movement condemns Israel's
continuing pursuit of illegal settlement activities in all
its manifestations, along with the many other illegal
policies and practices it continues to carry out in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, and calls for their immediate and complete
cessation. NAM. stresses that all such unlawful
attempts to alter the demographic composition,
character and status of the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, remains rejected
and unrecognized by the international community. We
call on the Security Council to act for the
implementation of its many resolutions in that regard
and for serious efforts to hold Israel, the occupying
Power, accountable for its violations of international
law, including humanitarian and human rights law.

In that connection, NAM. calls for the immediate
implementation of the recommendations made by
Ms. Valerie Amos, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, in her recent briefing to the Security

Council on 18 January, regarding the humanitarian
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory, and to
address specifically the grave impact of Israel's
settlement policies on the Palestinian people and their
land. Israel's illegal colonization of the occupied land,
its displacement of the Palestinian civilian population
and its imposition of brutal forms of collective
punishment continue to increase humanitarian suffering
among the Palestinian people, deepen hopelessness and
despair, fragment the territory and undermine its
contiguity and integrity, and raise tensions and
instability. It is a critical situation that must be a cause
for serious concern for the Security Council, in line
with its duty under the Charter for the maintenance of
international peace and security.

NAM. believes that such illegal actions are not
only undermining peace efforts and obstructing the
resumption of credible, direct negotiations but, if they
are not stopped and reversed immediately, they will
actually make it physically impossible to realize the
two-State solution on the basis of the 4 June 1967
borders. The announcements in recent months
regarding the establishment of thousands more
settlement units, particularly in and around occupied
East Jerusalem, and the continued Israeli demolition of
Palestinian homes and properties and devious attempts
by the Israeli Government to legitimize its illegitimate
settlement schemes require urgent reaction by the
international community, and specifically by the
Security Council, if the two-State solution to this
conflict is to be salvaged. A strong message must be
sent in rejection of the occupying Power's continued
settlements, annexation and occupation and in favour
of peace, security, respect of human rights and the rule
of law. The future of both peoples and of the region as
a whole is dependent on that message.

The Non-Aligned Movement therefore reiterates
its call for the Security Council to act and demand that
Israel, the occupying Power, abide by its legal
obligations, without exception. Empty pretexts and
illogical justifications for illegal actions must not be
tolerated. It is high time to end the impunity that has
gone on for far too long, to the detriment of regional
and global peace and security. That is why the
Movement firmly believes that calls for compliance
must be backed by credible action, consistent with the
Council's Charter duties, and as a result of the clear
conclusion that the occupying Power is deliberately
obstructing the attainment of peace and security in our
region. Israel must be called upon and compelled to
abide by all of its obligations under the Fourth Geneva
Convention, relevant United Nations resolutions and
the road map. That is the real key to advancing the
resumption of direct negotiations and a peaceful
settlement based on the two-State solution to the
conflict.

With regard to the critical humanitarian situation
in the Gaza Strip, NAM. emphasizes the need to compel
Israel, the occupying Power, to lift fully its illegal
blockade, in accordance with its obligations under
international law, resolution 1860 (2009) and other
relevant United Nations resolutions. Member States
must remain firm in their demand that this
unacceptable and unsustainable situation be brought to
an end, as it continues to inflict deep suffering on the
Palestinian people and to negatively impact
international and regional efforts to promote peace.

NAM. also wishes to utilize this opportunity to
express its support to the Palestinian reconciliation
efforts, which continue to be shepherded by Egypt. We
hope that Palestinian unity will soon be restored in the
interest of the legitimate national aspirations of the
Palestinian people. NAM. looks forward to that
achievement and to the holding of Palestinian
legislative and presidential elections in the coming
period.

The members of the Movement share the global
hope that comes with each new year. We are hopeful
that this will finally be the year that brings peace and
justice to the Palestinian people and that finally brings
an end to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict in all aspects.
We are convinced that achieving the two-State solution
to this conflict requires respect for international law
and United Nations resolutions. We insist that the
Security Council has a leading role, which it must play,
in this regard.

The Security Council must demand that Israel
respect its legal obligations. It must also assist the
parties by setting forth clear parameters, as enshrined
in its own resolutions, for peace negotiations that will
actually bring to fruition the two-State solution on the
basis of the 4 June 1967 borders, thereby achieving the
independence of the State of Palestine, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, living side by side in peace
and security with Israel and all its neighbours.

The larger United Nations membership also has a
crucial role to play in upholding international law and

United Nations resolutions and advancing a peaceful
settlement to the conflict. In that regard, NAM
continues to believe that concrete efforts by the high
contracting parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention to
ensure respect for the Convention in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, would
be a vital contribution. Accordingly, as mandated by
the Movement, on 16 January, the Chair of the
Coordinating Bureau addressed another letter to
Switzerland, in its capacity as depositary of the Geneva
Conventions, requesting the undertaking of measures,
in conformity with relevant United Nations resolutions,
to convene a conference of the high contracting parties
for that purpose.

At a time when the two-State solution is being
severely weakened and should be strengthened, we
recall the application submitted by Palestine on
23 September 2011 for admission to United Nations
membership. We await Security Council action that
recognizes the legitimate and historic rights of the
Palestinian people and contributes to the peace effort.
Indeed, we are at a critical juncture and must do all we
can collectively to prevent further destabilization and
continuation of this tragic and destructive conflict, and
instead promote peace, justice and security.

Turning now to Lebanon, the Non-Aligned
Movement condemns Israel's ongoing violations of
Lebanon's sovereignty and the recurrence of serious
breaches of resolution 1701 (2006). The Movement
calls on all concerned parties to implement fully
resolution 1701 (2006) in order to end the current
fragility and to avoid the recurrence of hostilities.

Concerning the occupied Syrian Golan, the
Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms that all measures
and actions taken, or to be taken, by Israel, the
occupying Power, to alter the legal, physical and
demographic status of the occupied Syrian Golan, as
well as the Israeli measures to impose jurisdiction and
administration there, are null, void and have no legal
effect. The Non-Aligned Movement demands that
Israel abide by resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw
fully from the occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of
4 June 1967, in implementation of resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973).

Finally, in my national capacity, let me say that it
was really regrettable that Ambassador Ron Prosor,
Permanent Representative of Israel, whom I have
known for many years and in different capacities,
chose to characterize the uprising by the Arab peoples,
including in my country, Egypt, towards democracy,
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms as
conflicts, and to more blatantly use the Arab uprising
as a pretext to prolong the Israeli occupation of
Palestinian occupied territory and other Arab occupied
territories. To Ambassador Prosor, for whom I have a
lot of respect, I say that the winds of freedom in my
country and in many other Arab countries will only
solidify our determination to achieve a comprehensive
and just solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict -
but a solution that should be negotiated among equals.
The slogan frequently heard from the Israeli delegation
that Israel is the only democracy in the Middle East
will not be sustained for long.

