Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): Let me congratulate you,
Mr. President, and thank you for this debate, as the first
of this year.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. The Central and Eastern European
countries associated with the Union - Bulgaria, the
Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania,
Poland, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia - and the
associated countries Cyprus, Malta and Turkey align
themselves with this statement.

The European Union deeply shares the concern of
the Secretary-General at the grave humanitarian
emergency the world is facing, particularly in Africa, with
the spread of HIV/AIDS. In Africa, the European Union
has been helping countries deal with this disease and its
tragic effects for many years, and we are well aware of

 

its devastating consequences. In fact, AIDS now risks
becoming a destabilizing factor in the development of many
African States. The effects of this disease are compromising
economic development and tearing at the social fabric of
entire communities, which in turn presents risks for peace
and security in specific regions and beyond. Furthermore,
situations of instability and conflict make it harder to
combat the scourge of HIV/AIDS and to implement
effective policies designed to control and stem the spread
of the disease. It is clear, therefore, that AIDS presents a
challenge to the entire international community and, with
regard to its effect in Africa, is deserving of the attention
of the Security Council.

As a global problem it therefore requires a global
strategy based on collaborative partnerships and
responsibility. This is why the European Union supports the
idea of developing strong national and international
partnerships to address this issue. To this end, the European
Union reiterates that the adverse impact of the epidemic on
individuals, communities and nations can be overcome only
through the combined efforts of Governments, the
international community, non-governmental organizations
and civil society as a whole - religious organizations, the
corporate sector and foundations - the United Nations
system and people living with HIV/AIDS.

However, efforts must be coordinated, and the
European Union believes that the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) has an important role
to play in this regard. The European Union fully supports
UNAIDS and its co-sponsoring organizations in their joint
efforts against HIV/AIDS. The Union also looks forward to
the further development of the strategy of International
Partnership Against AIDS in Africa.

Education, information, counselling and sexual health
services accessible to young people are of the essence. In
this respect, we welcome the Programme of Action for the
Decade of Education by the African Ministers of Education
and the Organization of African Unity (OAU) summit in
Algiers that acknowledged the need for education on
HIV/AIDS. Knowledge is and will remain the best
preventive measure against this deadly disease. This is
proof that a growing number of African Governments are
demonstrating a stronger political commitment to fighting
HIV/AIDS than ever before. This is a welcome
development that should be encouraged and supported by
the international community.

For our part, the European Union has, over the last 10
years, allocated a total of 1.5 billion euros through its
Programme on Health, HIV/AIDS and Population (HAP)
for African, Caribbean and Pacific countries. This is in
addition to a number of national programmes being
carried out by European Union member States. In 1998
alone, close to 120 million euros were committed by the
European Development Fund for this purpose and another
22 million euros were committed for AIDS and
population under specific budget lines. This European
Union support for the Programme on Health, HIV/AIDS
and Population presently represents more than 10 per cent
of total European Union aid and is expected to increase.

In 1999, at the special session of the General
Assembly for the overall review and appraisal of the
implementation of the Programme of Action of the
International Conference on Population and Development
(ICPD+5), the international community set a new
internationally agreed target for addressing HIV/AIDS in
the world. The European Union fully supports the
attainment of the goals set during the special session and
will continue to work in cooperation with African
Governments to attain them, and it encourages all
involved to lend their support to this task.

And what can the Security Council do? Given its
threatening impact on social and economic development,
HIV/AIDS has a destabilizing effect on peace and
security in the region. Therefore, the Security Council has
a responsibility to take HIV/AIDS into consideration in its
work. HIV/AIDS cannot be dealt with effectively by
single United Nations bodies, but needs instead to be
handled in a holistic manner by all sectors of the United
Nations aiming at stable peace and security and long-term
social and economic development.

The European Union commends the United States
for initiating this debate in the Council. The debate will
strengthen the urgency of implementing the imperatives
for action on the security aspects of HIV/AIDS as
proposed by UNAIDS.

The suffering of HIV/AIDS victims in Africa should
not go unheeded, and efforts are under way to increase
the effectiveness of national and international action
addressing this difficult problem. The Security Council's
awareness of the effects of HIV/AIDS in Africa is
necessary for effectively addressing issues of peace and
security on that continent. The prevention of conflicts is
now regarded as a priority task of the United Nations, and
there can be little doubt that tackling the challenges posed
by HIV/AIDS in Africa constitutes preventive action at its
best.

 

