Mr. Guillermet (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Let me begin, Mr. President, by thanking you and your
delegation for having convened this debate. I thank you
also for this month's programme of work, which
includes a number of very important open meetings
that will provide an opportunity for interaction between
the States concerned and other Members of the United
Nations. I wish also to thank Mr. Pascoe for his
briefing, and I welcome the presence among us of
Mr. Riad Al-Malki, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Palestine, and of Ambassador Gabriela Shalev,
Permanent Representative of Israel.

I wish to set out my country's position on the
Council's discussion of the report of the United
Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict, the
Goldstone report (A/HRC/l2/48). The Mission was
mandated to investigate violations of international
human rights law and international humanitarian law
during the military operation in Gaza. It is important to
discuss the report, which merits the close attention of
the international community.

Our initial appraisal is this is a serious report
prepared by a Mission led by an upright man with an
unquestioned track record, and that it is worthy of our
full consideration.

However, it is premature for the Council to
discuss the substance of the report when the Human
Rights Council itself has not taken the relevant
decisions. To do so without being able to produce a
concrete outcome following our consideration would
only contribute to trivializing it. For that reason, we
welcome the fact that the Human Rights Council in
Geneva has decided to take action on the Goldstone
report this week. We will follow closely the Human
Rights Council's decisions with respect to the report's
recommendations. We hope that in some way Justice
Richard Goldstone's report will contribute to assigning
responsibility.

A key element of the report, drawn from its
conclusions, is that there is a need to establish
responsibility through accountability mechanisms. It is
essential to prevent impunity, and in that connection
we urge the parties to continue their efforts. In
particular, we urge the Israeli Government to pursue
the investigation that, as it has informed the
international community, it has undertaken, and to
make public its outcome.

We also underscore the Goldstone report's
comprehensive approach, which makes
recommendations to a number of bodies of the United
Nations system, to the parties and to insurgent groups.
We reaffirm, as we have done on prior occasions, that
the Security Council bears the obligatory responsibility
to protect civilians in armed conflict whenever and
wherever necessary. The Council must employ all its
deterrent potential to persuade all State and non-State
parties to respect international law and permit
unhindered access for humanitarian assistance.

The Security Council's silence for reasons of
individual convenience should not signal impunity for
those who ignore international law. Nor should it
signify cruel indifference to those who call upon the
Council for help. The search for justice is essential: no
State or armed group should be above the law.

A month ago, we had hoped to see genuine
progress in the Middle East peace negotiations, leading
to the renewal of direct talks between the parties. That
hope was nourished by the announcement of important
meetings underpinned by diplomatic efforts on the
margins of the General Assembly. Unfortunately, this
did not happen. Negotiations have not progressed at the
pace that the international community had hoped for.
That, unfortunately, is the only truth that we can speak
on this conflict.

Costa Rica welcomed the downturn in violence in
the course of this year, along with the relative easing of
the security situation and the growing responsibility of
Palestinian security forces for keeping the peace in the
West Bank. We also see as positive the authorization of
entry into Gaza of construction materials and a lifting
of obstacles to movement in the West Bank. We look
favourably on those gestures and successes. We hope,
however, that they are not mere mirages giving rise to
baseless hope. The progress will not be significant
unless there is a political process that constantly moves
forward. Increased responsibility for civilian security
on the part of the Palestinian Authority can be
meaningful only if it leads to the prompt establishment
of a Palestinian State within recognized borders

09-5573]
resulting from a dynamic political process of
negotiations between the parties. Goodwill gestures are
highly appreciated, but they will be nothing more than
gestures unless they lead to a lasting change in attitude
towards partners in dialogue.

We are most hopeful with respect to diplomatic
efforts founded on growing consensus regarding a
comprehensive approach to resolving the conflict.
Costa Rica has been suggesting such an approach for
more than 20 months: it would abandon a sequential
methodology and embrace a comprehensive one. We
know that if there is to be success in resolving the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict there must also be an easing
of tensions in other conflicts in the region that have a
negative impact on the resolution of that one. The
States of the region must also demonstrate their
commitment to lasting peace by recognizing the State
of Israel and by adopting policies of good-
neighbourliness towards Israel based on mutual
security.

In that regard we are hopeful at 4 and encourage -
the endeavours of the Obama Administration through its
Special Envoy, George Mitchell.

Seven months have passed since the current
Israeli Administration was formed. The clock seems to
have been turned back. There has been an attempt to
ignore prior agreements and consolidate gains based on
cunning arguments - despite the international
community's unanimous condemnation of such conduct
and its warning that this approach will not bear
legitimate fruit.

The Palestinian party too should contribute to the
success of the process towards resolving the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict. It should strengthen its measures
to confront extremism and respond to Israel's
legitimate security concerns. Palestinian reconciliation
is another pending issue: Hamas cannot remain outside
the peace process, and it must not sabotage the political
process. Costa Rica hopes that Egypt's efforts will lead
to unity among the Palestinian people and to a
commitment to a negotiated solution of two peoples
living side by side in peace. The current leaders of the
Palestinian Authority merit our support, but in our View
it is important for them to prevent their territory from
being used by those wishing to thwart the process. It is
imperative that neighbouring moderate Arab countries,
as dedicated partners for peace, help the Palestinian
Authority in its endeavours to prevent the conflict from
being used as a platform for extremist acts and defiant
statements against Israel by others in the region.

It may be that the time has passed for
implementing prior agreements. But these are the sole
foundation for new agreements. Once again, we must
deplore the continuing Israeli policy of settlement
activities, demolitions and expulsions that affect
Palestinians in the East Jerusalem. Such actions are
illegal and unacceptable; they exacerbate tensions and
are an obstacle to the peace process. Costa Rica
recognized Palestine as a State almost two years ago,
and we believe that the international community should
contribute to the resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict by universalizing such recognition and
accepting the Palestinian State as a full Member of this
Organization. If the parties fail to reach an agreement
within a reasonable timeframe, the most sensible
course of action would be to assume the responsibility
of establishing a Palestinian State and granting it
membership in this Organization.

We reiterate the concerns that we have already
expressed with regard to the humanitarian situation in
Gaza and our call for the respect of international law,
in particular international humanitarian law as
established by the Geneva Conventions and their
Protocols.

Finally, I should like to take this opportunity to
express that, while my delegation will be studying the
reports of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of Security Council resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701
(2006) over the coming weeks, we believe that the
explosions on 12 October in Tayr Felsay in southern
Lebanon reflect the need to step up efforts to clear the
area south of the Litani River of weapons and armed
personnel. We urge that this situation be monitored
closely, alongside the investigations being carried out
by the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon.

