Mr. Takasu (Japan): I thank Special
Representative Zannier for his very helpful briefing. I
also wish to extend a warm welcome to President Tadic'
of Serbia and to Foreign Minister Hyseni of Kosovo,
and to thank them for their statements.

At the outset I wish to express my appreciation to
the Secretary-General and to Mr. Zannier for their
leadership role of the United Nations on the ground.
The United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and + partner organizations such as
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX), the Kosovo Force (KFOR) and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) are all supporting a multi-ethnic, democratic
Kosovo in the Western Balkans region. Japan pays
tribute to the contributions of all those organizations.

We are encouraged by Mr. Zannier's report that
the situation in Kosovo has generally been developing
in a positive direction. We highly value the mediation
role that UNMIK has been playing between northern
Kosovo and Pristina, and also between Pristina and
Belgrade. We have yet to see agreement in the areas of
justice, customs and the protection of cultural heritage.
We very much hope that the collaboration between
UNMIK and the European Union will assist the
countries in creating an agreement between Pristina
and Belgrade in those areas.

We congratulate EULEX, whose contribution is
bearing fruit in the rule of law, security and
reconciliation. We welcome the recent increased
presence of EULEX in northern Kosovo and the
positive role of the European Union in stabilizing
Kosovo's entire Western Balkans region.

The municipal and mayoral elections were
conducted in a peaceful manner, with the participation
of multiple ethnicities. That was a significant step for
Kosovo, an effort to consolidate multi-ethnic
democracy and a decentralization process. At the same
time, we look forward to greater progress on
outstanding issues, in particular protection of
minorities and the return of internally displaced
persons. We hope all parties will intensify their
cooperation on those issues.

Japan has supported the efforts of United Nations
programmes for peaceful inter-ethnic coexistence and
development in Kosovo from a human security
perspective. A human-centred approach is particularly
relevant in the northern provinces in order to reduce a
sense of vulnerability in the population, irrespective of
ethnicity.

As part of the follow-up in recent consultations
on bilateral support for a capacity-building
environment, Japan will start a new programme to
invite trainees from Kosovo to Japan. We are
committed to supporting Kosovo's development as a
vibrant, multi-ethnic and truly democratic country. We
are also committed to support the stabilization of the
Western Balkans region as a whole. We will do so in
close cooperation with international partners, but
particularly Serbia and countries in the region.

