Mr. Sargsyan (Armenia): My delegation requested
the floor to reply to the comments made by the
delegation of Azerbaijan.

We regret to see that disseminating misinformation,
distorting facts and simply spreading lies have become
that delegation's habitual methods. All allegations
against my country and nation are strongly rejected.
Instead of watching Azerbaijan's showcase of bankrupt
State propaganda, I think this respected organ would
be very interested in learning about the real situation
on the ground across the line of contact with Nagorno
Karabakh and the border with Armenia.

The Azerbaijani delegation's claims and accusations
are simply baseless and fabricated, including accusing
Armenia of violating the relevant Security Council
resolutions and alleging an occupation. We advise
the Azerbaijani delegation to read those resolutions
carefully, as it appears that they have not done so over
the past two decades, and try to find a single sentence
about aggression by the Republic of Armenia. On the
contrary, it is Azerbaijan that repeatedly violates a
number of provisions of the relevant Security Council
resolutions, particularly by refusing to establish
confidence-building measures between conflicting
parties, declining to create investigative mechanisms
into ceasefire violations, withdrawing snipers, ceasing
warmongering at the highest level and using heavy
artillery to target civilians, civilian infrastructure and
institutions along Armenia's border and the contact line
with Nagorno Karabakh.

The attempts at pointing fingers at others are
known to be a useful tool for distracting from
domestic problems. To divert attention from the unrest
of its population resulting from the deteriorating
socioeconomic situation in Azerbaijan, the leadership
of that country has chosen the route of intensifying
the ceasefire violations and massive shelling of
civilian-populated border areas of Armenian Nagorno
Karabakh. It is well-known and properly documented
that about 20 years ago Azerbaijan unleashed a full-
scale war against Armenian Nagorno Karabakh, with
the intention of totally exterminating its Armenian
population. However, the military aggression by
Azerbaijan had unforeseen consequences for itself.
As a result of the military aggression by Azerbaijan,
hundreds of thousands of ethnic Armenians, including
women and children, had to leave their homes and
became refugees and internally displaced persons. They
suffered unspeakable acts of violence and State terror
by Azerbaijan. That aggression continues today. Due to
the indiscriminate shelling of Armenian villages by the
heavy artillery of the Azerbaijani military in the past
year, the casualties of Armenian Nagorno Karabakh
have doubled, and many civilians, including elderly
women, have been killed.

We all know about the importance of civil
society participation in the peace process, ensuring
that sustainable solutions to the conflict are found
and effective protection of the civilian population is
achieved. The practice of systematic repression against
civil society representatives, human rights defenders
and peace activists and free media in Azerbaijan
hinders the prospects ofusing people-to-people second-
track diplomacy tools for conflict resolution. The
strategy and tactics applied by the country concerned
with respect to the Nagorno Karabakh issue prove
that Azerbaijan is not interested in finding a lasting
solution to the conflict and has chosen the option whose
consequences are detrimental to peace in the region
and result in further casualties, including among the
civilian population.

The meeting rose at 7p.m.
