Sir David Hannay (United Kingdom): My delegation
welcomes the signing of the Accra Agreement as a positive
step towards the solution of the Liberian conflict. It is right
that, in the light of this development and, in particular, the
implementation of a cease-fire, the United Nations should
maintain its involvement in the peace process in Liberia,
and it is for this reason that my delegation was pleased to
vote for the resolution just adopted.

The successful conclusion of the Accra Agreement is
due in very large part to the efforts of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and, in
particular, its current Chairman, President Rawlings of
Ghana, who has shown admirable persistence and
commitment in bringing all the factions together to hammer
out a solution. We commend his efforts and those of the
ECOWAS Military Observer Group (ECOMOG), which has
been playing a valuable peace-keeping role in the country.
The efforts of ECOWAS, ECOMOG, the United Nations
and its Member States represent an enormous
commitment on the part of the international community to
reaching a settlement to the conflict in Liberia. We urge
the Liberian factions now to demonstrate similar
commitment and to uphold the cease-fire and implement
the other provisions of the Accra Agreement in
accordance with the agreed timetable, including the
prompt installation of the Council of State.

One of the very important issues covered in the
resolution we have just adopted is that of reminding all
Member States of their obligation strictly to abide by, and
comply with, the arms embargo. The damaging effect of
the brutal conflict in Liberia, not only on the people of
that country but also on Liberia's neighbours, is a matter
of great concern to my delegation. The conflict is
sustained by arms traffic across and within Liberia's
borders, which can only increase the risk of regional
destabilization. My Government attaches great importance
to the effective implementation of this arms embargo by
all.

Finally, let me say that, as the Council adopts this
resolution today, my delegation has to admit to the feeling
that we have been here before. Throughout the Liberian
conflict we have seen a number of agreements signed,
each one seeming to offer a way out of the impasse
reached. Each time, the Security Council has expressed its
support for the peace process and underlined its
willingness to work with the factions and with ECOMOG
to help bring about a solution to the conflict which is
having such a devastating impact on the lives of the
people of Liberia. It is our sincere hope that this time the
agreement into which the mediators have put such
commendable effort will be translated into deeds and that
by the time we review the mandate of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL) again in April
we will have seen concrete evidence of the commitment
of the Liberian factions to the peace their country
desperately needs.

The news we have heard this morning, alas, of the
failure of the Accra talks so far to reach a decision on the
installation of the Council of State is discouraging indeed,
and it hardly augurs well for that review or for the hopes
for peace in Liberia.

