Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia is grateful for the
briefings delivered by Mr. Michel Kafando, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, and Ambassador Jiirg
Lauber, Permanent Representative of Switzerland, in
his capacity as Chair of the Burundi configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission.

Bolivia appreciates and supports the Special Envoy's
efforts to continue the inter-Burundian dialogue in an
inclusive environment. We also appreciate the efforts
to facilitate that goal led by the former President of
Tanzania, Mr. Benjamin Mkapa, and the President of
Uganda, Mr. Yoweri Museveni, in accordance with the
Arusha Accords, which must remain the cornerstone of
that process. We reiterate that dialogue and respect for
the Accords are key to enabling Burundi's emergence
from its crisis. In that regard, and in view of the fact that
Burundi presents no threat to international peace and
security, since its situation remains stable, we believe
that the road map proposed by Mr. Mkapa should be
implemented in order to reach a consensus and create
the conditions necessary for a peaceful environment for
the next elections, to be held in 2020.

The Security Council, and the international
community in general, must act on a basis of respect
for Burundi's sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity. In that regard, we consider that Burundi's
referendum and constitutional reform are both internal
issues that must be consolidated by Burundians for
Burundians. We must take into account the progress
made in the negotiations in the inter-Burundian
dialogue. We should not forget that there is consensus
on several points. It is important to analyse those where
there is still a lack of agreement, and the international
community should support that dialogue constructively
with a view to reaching a peaceful settlement. Burundi's
contribution to peace and security through its troop
contributions, which demonstrate its institutional
capacity, should also be taken into account.

The international community should support
Burundi in strengthening its capacities and assisting
it with its socioeconomic development and the
humanitarian challenges it is facing. In that regard, we
commend the tripartite agreement signed by Burundi,
Tanzania and the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees on the return of refugees to Burundi
from Tanzania, which prioritized the repatriation of
19,148 refugees. We also encourage the international
community to continue funding the humanitarian
response programme in Burundi.

In order to overcome these challenges, we need to
create an environment of trust, and that means lifting
the unilateral sanctions that have negative effects on the
lives of vulnerable groups such as women and children
and are detrimental to the implementation of the
Sustainable Development Goals. We should point out
here that such unilateral actions are illegal according to
the Charter of the United Nations.

We acknowledge the efforts and work of the East
African Community (EAC), the African Union Special
Envoy, the Chair of the Burundi configuration and the
United Nations country team in Burundi. We encourage
them to continue their work and to coordinate their
efforts to achieve better cooperation in order to
continue supporting the mediation under the auspices
of the EAC, which should continue to lead that process.

