Mr. Empole (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): 1 would like to thank you, Mr. President, for having taken the initiative to organize this meeting on the situation in the Great Lakes region. It is testimony to your commitment to improving the situation in the region. I take this opportunity to thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for his report on the implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region (S/2020/951), which is before the Council today. I would also like to thank all the members of the Security Council for their availability every time they are called upon to address issues related to the situation in my country and in the Great Lakes region. My delegation wishes to express its appreciation for the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the Framework agreement, which Mr. Huang Xia, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region, introduced earlier. We welcome him today and commend him for his sustained commitment. My delegation regrets, however, that the report was not made available earlier on the United Nations website, which would have been useful. We take this opportunity, following the briefing, to make a few key observations. I would like to briefly take up the topic of the political, security, humanitarian and human rights situation, and then conclude with some remarks on the implementation of the Framework agreement. At the political level, the situation in the Great Lakes region remains driven by the new momentum of the diplomatic efforts made since early 2019 by Mr. Joao Manuel Goncalves Lourengo, President of Angola; Mr. Felix Antoine Tshilombo Tshisekedi, President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo; Mr. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, President of Uganda; and Mr. Paul Kagame, President of Rwanda. Their efforts have significantly contributed to easing tensions in the region, thereby strengthening relations among their countries and restoring confidence among their Governments. Despite the difficult context of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), the four Heads of State have adapted to the new normal and held a mini-summit via video-teleconference, on 7 October, at the initiative of the President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in order to maintain the spirit of dialogue initiated at the start of 2019 as the main path for the easing of tensions and pacification in the African Great Lakes region. The actions carried out by national and foreign armed groups, peace and security in the region, diplomatic relations, as well as economic recovery in the current context of combating COVID-19, were the main topics of discussion of the Heads of State mini- summit meeting. Indeed, in view of the troubling security situation in the region, the Heads of State not only condemned the actions of negative forces and armed groups operating in the Great Lakes region, but also reaffirmed their willingness to pool their efforts to eradicate them. As part of diplomatic efforts to improve relations with and among all the countries of the Great Lakes region, President Tshisekedi visited his counterpart in the Republic of the Congo, Mr. Denis Sassou Nguesso, on 15 July. In addition, a delegation from the Democratic Republic of the Congo, led by Mrs. Marie Tumba Nzeza, Minister of State and Minister for Foreign Affairs, travelled to Bujumbura, Burundi, on 4 and 5 October, for a working visit within the framework of the second session of the bilateral ministerial consultation on peace and security between the Republic of Burundi and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Moreover, the Secretary-General's report also highlights the efforts made by the Forces armees de la Republique democratique du Congo (FARDC), in collaboration with the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), to neutralize the armed groups still operating in the region. My delegation reassures the Council that those efforts will continue until those groups are totally eradicated, because peace and security remain critical factors for the stability of the Great Lakes region. That is the reason for the President of the Republic's visit last week, from 5 to 8 October, to North Kivu province - to express his solidarity and support for the hard-pressed population in the east of the country, as well as his determination to restore peace there. That is also why the FARDC's offensive operations against armed groups in the provinces of North and South Kivu must be enhanced, in accordance with the commitment made by the President of the Republic and Head of State bringing peace and stability to the region. These large-scale military operations, launched on 30 October 2019, enabled the FARDC to seize several bases of the Allied Democratic Forces and significantly weaken several other armed groups, both national and foreign. These Government and FARDC efforts have produced compelling results, but insecurity remains. In its distress, the enemy has even increased retaliatory attacks against the civilian population. In order to enhance its offensive and increase pressure on the residual armed groups, my country hopes to, first, strengthen the offensive capacities of MONUSCO, in general, and of the Force Intervention Brigade, in particular; secondly, secure the collaboration of the countries of the region and; thirdly, garner the support of the international community in the fight against the illicit exploitation and trafficking of minerals from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. With regard to the strengthening of the offensive capacities of MONUSCO and its Force Intervention Brigade, as we have already stressed to the Council, the wish of the Democratic Republic of the Congo is to see enhanced collaboration on the ground within MONUSCO units and with the FARDC in order to secure sufficient firepower to effectively protect the population and restore peace, security and full State authority throughout the national territory, including in localities with an armed group presence. In his address to his counterparts on 7 October, regarding the collaboration of the countries of the region, President Tshisekedi called on them to pool their efforts and take constructive measures to jointly overcome obstacles and challenges for the benefit of the people of the four countries, insisting that "in the current context, there is no alternative to pooling our efforts to meet these numerous challenges and putting an end to the recurrent cycles of armed violence that threaten the security of the States and people of the region". The illegal exploitation of natural resources in the Democratic Republic of the Congo has consequences for peace and security in the region and for theprotection of the environment. The support of the international community in the fight against the illegal exploitation of the country's minerals - which is the main cause of instability and violence in the east of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, a source of mistrust and tension among the countries of the region and the main source of funding for the illicit activities of armed groups - is crucial. All actors - countries of origin, individuals, companies, civil society, transit countries and destination countries - have for quite a few years been involved in and are responsible for this flourishing traffic. We will never win the battle for peace in the Great Lakes region if armed groups are not cut off from the livelihoods that allow them to continue their harmful activities. Resolution 2502 (2019) called on the Office of the Special Envoy and MONUSCO to work with all stakeholders to reach a solution to stop the cross-border flow of armed combatants and the illicit exploitation and trade of minerals. Against the backdrop of combating illegality, my delegation welcomes the reaffirmed willingness of the four Heads of State to campaign for strengthening the capacities of existing mechanisms in the subregion in order to cut off the negative force of sources of financing for armed groups' activities and jointly combat both regional and international mafia networks that contribute to the exploitation of and illicit trade in natural resources in the Great Lakes region. Further, my delegation would like to reiterate President Tshisekedi Tshilombo's appeal to the international community at the General Assembly to ensure that appropriate, targeted and effective sanctions are applied to those armed groups and mafia networks, which, through their harmful activities, are also wiping out all efforts to preserve and sustainably manage biodiversity and the protected areas located in the eastern part of our country. Beyond these options involving military pressure, my delegation considers it necessary that all countries of the region be able to join non-military mechanisms. In this regard, the Democratic Republic of the Congo is engaged in discussions with some armed groups, some of which have already signed cessation of hostilities agreements with the Government and laid down their arms. The Government reiterates its appeal to all other armed groups that continue to hesitate to follow suit and lay down their arms. The issue of human rights violations and restrictions on democratic spaces is at the heart of the actions of the President of the Republic who, since coming to power, has committed himself to working to promote the rule of law. This commitment has already been translated into action through the implementation of several measures. Indeed, in the quest to improve the human rights and social justice situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Government, working under the leadership of the Head of State, has achieved a great deal. The political will to promote human rights, in accordance with the constitutional requirement to guarantee respect for and defence and promotion of all human rights, has been sufficiently demonstrated and the Government continues to implement its programme on the subject, with particular emphasis on fighting corruption and strengthening the rule of law. The humanitarian situation in the region is dominated by the coronavirus pandemic and the problem of displaced persons and refugees. In order to contain the spread of the coronavirus disease, countries of the region reacted quickly with effective prevention measures. They are mobilizing to fight the pandemic by putting in place shared protective mechanisms, which was reaffirmed by the Heads of State of countries of the region at the mini-summit held on 7 October. Furthermore, it should be noted that the displacement of populations remains one of the main factors of insecurity and instability in the region, hence the importance, as stated by the Secretary-General in his report, of redoubling efforts to find durable solutions for refugees and displaced persons in line with the recommendations of the high-level ministerial meeting on the situation of refugees in the Great Lakes region held in Kampala in March 2019. The Democratic Republic of the Congo remains committed to the Framework agreement, which it considers to be the way forward as it is the best regional strategy to follow to definitively end the situation of instability that has affected the region for quite a few years and for which it continues to pay a heavy price, with several million deaths. The implementation of this mechanism will also make it possible to avoid incursions by both sides into the territories of neighbouring countries, as described by the Secretary-General in paragraphs 5 to 12 of his report. For its part, the Democratic Republic of the Congo will continue to work to implement all its national, regional and international commitments under the Framework agreement and assume its share of responsibility in ensuring that peace and harmony return fully to the region. In this regard, as noted by the Secretary-General in paragraphs 36 to 38 of the report under consideration, the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo has taken concrete steps to implement its national commitments under the agreement. Several examples were cited, including the renewal by the Government of the national stabilization and reconstruction programme for areas emerging from armed conflict, with a view to further consolidating State authority, and the continuation by the Government and MONUSCO of dialogue at the community level in Ituri, as part of the implementation of the agreement signed with the Front de resistance patriotique de I'Ituri on 28 February for its disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. Also, as part of its ongoing efforts to engage the region in the implementation of the provisions of the Framework agreement, on 19 October the Democratic Republic of the Congo will host the tenth summit of the Regional Oversight Mechanism as a video- teleconference, owing to the coronavirus pandemic. The meeting was initially scheduled to take place in Kinshasa on 28 October 2020. It is during this summit that His Excellency Mr. Felix-Antoine Tshisekedi Tshilombo, President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, will assume the presidency of the Regional Mechanism. In conclusion, allow me to reaffirm that the Government and the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo remain committed to the Addis Ababa Framework agreement in which they have placed much hope. The Democratic Republic would like to take this opportunity to call on the countries of the region and the guarantors of the Framework agreement to take advantage of the regional momentum observed in recent months to implement the commitments that they have all undertaken. It should be noted that if the provisions of the Framework agreement are turned into concrete action, they will enable the region, through a logic of integration, to better manage peace and security issues, including and especially, cooperation and development issues. It is high time, indeed more than high time, that we offer the people of the Great Lakes region the well-being, peace and economic development to which they aspire. The meeting rose at 11.40 a.m.
