Mr. Doutriaux (France) (interpretation from French): I thank Mr. Bernard Miyet for briefing the
Council on the situation in Sierra Leone on behalf of the
Secretary-General. I also thank Ambassador Dahlgren for
briefing us following his visit to the region, inter alia in
his capacity as Chairman of the sanctions Committee on
Sierra Leone.

We note from those briefings that considerable and
serious difficulties remain, with an impact on the
humanitarian situation of the population. Human rights
violations persist, and executions have taken place; we
have condemned these. In the military sphere, as
Mr. Miyet has noted, attacks by rebel forces continue.

But when we read the report of the Secretary-
General, we note that there have been some encouraging
developments - particularly the recent summit that
brought together President Kabbah of Sierra Leone,
President Taylor of Liberia and President Conte of
Guinea - which make it possible to envisage
rapprochement among those three countries. It is clear
that the internal situation in Sierra Leone depends also on
what takes place on the regional level, so we should
support anything that can be done to promote
rapprochement among the three leaders and among their
countries. Let me note in passing that those three
presidents, along with many other African leaders,
participated in the Franco-African Summit held at Paris
a few weeks ago.

On the internal level, there is clearly only one
solution: dialogue. Of course, the prerequisite for such
dialogue is a cessation of hostilities by the rebels. Let us
acknowledge that in Sierra Leone, as in many other
countries in Africa where there is civil war, hostilities
must cease and dialogue must be promoted between the
Government and those contesting its authority.

The solution should also include support for regional
initiatives, namely, for the work and actions of the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
and its Monitoring Group (ECOMOG). This is what we
are doing in our resolutions and also what some donor
countries supporting ECOMOG are doing. France is also
providing its support through bilateral assistance to
support the Guinea-Conakry contingent participating in
ECOMOG activities in Sierra Leone.

Finally, allow me also to refer to what the Chairman
of the sanctions Committee on Sierra Leone has said. We
must continue to question ourselves about the

 

effectiveness of our policy of embargo on the supply of
arms to rebels in Sierra Leone. We must ask ourselves
about its effectiveness and whether it should perhaps be
strengthened to promote an abatement of tension and an end
to conflict in Sierra Leone.

I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this open debate on an item that remains a
matter of concern despite some encouraging signs.

