Mr. Martins (Angola): Like other members,
Angola abstained in the voting on draft resolution
S/2016/1085, which sought to target sanctions and an
arms embargo against the Government and authorities
of South Sudan. Recently, the Government of South
Sudan has continued to show its commitment to the
implementation of the joint communique between the
Transitional Government of National Unity and the
Security Council on the deployment of the Regional
Protection Force. And in our latest Council discussion
on the topic, which took place on 19 December
(see S/PV.7846), Angola noted with appreciation
the steps taken by the Government to support the
operationalization of the Force.

Angola welcomes the decision that President Kiir
recently announced to launch a national inclusive
dialogue. At this stage, the Council, instead of moving
in the direction of applying sanctions, should continue
to monitor the decisions announced and encourage the
Government to move forward on that path. Several
positive developments were recorded in the various states
of the country, such as the approval of the deployment
sites in Central Equatorial. We believe that in due time,
again through dialogue, the parties, namely, the United
Nations and the Government of National Unity, will
agree on the necessary arrangements and agreements.

In our view, sanctions against South Sudan must
not be the priority of the United Nations. Rather, the
United Nations should focus in South Sudan more
on supporting the political dialogue with the aim
of implementing the peace agreement. That would
be in line with the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), which underscored that an
arms embargo or sanctions on South Sudan would not
provide the requisite solution leading to permanent
peace and stability in the country. IGAD stressed again
that what is required is dialogue, reconciliation and the
commitment by all the South Sudanese parties to fully
implement the peace agreement. The African Union
has also adopted the IGAD position. We feel that the
Council should reinforce and encourage that position.

Angola is fully committed to the path of sustainable
peace and stability through dialogue, which is a better
way to solve conflicts, including this particular conflict
in South Sudan. For that reason we abstained in the
voting on the draft resolution.

