Mr. Mantovani (Italy): I wish to thank Under-
Secretary-General Holmes for his briefing and
commend him on the extremely vital work he has
carried out during his visit and to encourage the
humanitarian community operating in such difficult
circumstances, which the Council witnessed directly
some months ago.

I also thank the Permanent Representative of
Chad for his contribution to our discussion.

The briefing has conveyed the disturbing message
that five years since the breakout of conflict in Darfur,
the situation continues to be critical and we need to
prepare ourselves for massive, long-term involvement.

The situation in Chad is also difficult because of
banditry, as we just heard. The deployment of the
European Union-led peacekeeping force and the United
Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and

Chad has made an important contribution to improving
security in the region as well as in the refugee and
internally displaced persons camps. These results must
be consolidated by maintaining an effective
international presence. More promising is the situation
in southern Sudan, although problems in the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement are reflected in people fleeing and poor
security conditions.

The humanitarian crisis in the Sudan and Chad
were produced by the conflict, and we share fully
Under-Secretary-General Holmes' view that we need to
reinvigorate the peace process for Darfur and that all
parties need to comply with the monitored ceasefire.
We also agree with Under-Secretary-General Holmes
that access, protection, as well as the security of
humanitarian workers, are of crucial importance.

We just heard that the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) has
been able to make a difference in the Kalma camp. We
hope that UNAMID can strengthen its presence in
other camps as well. However, a solution to the current
access and security problems lies not only in the full
deployment of international forces, but also in greater
efforts by Government authorities and full respect of
international humanitarian law by all parties, including
the rebel movement.

Italy is pleased to see progress in the cooperation
between the Sudanese Government and UNAMID. In
the humanitarian sector, we welcome the extension of
the moratorium on fast-track procedures for
humanitarian workers in Darfur, while calling for its
full implementation.

I would like to add a few words on Italy's
commitment to the stabilization process in the Sudan.
In the framework of our pledge at the 2005 Oslo
Donors' Conference, my Government has disbursed an
average of €20 million Euros per year.

Before concluding, I would like to raise two more
points. The long-term solution to the humanitarian
problem depends on the return of 2.7 million people
displaced by the fighting. Their return must be
voluntary. How can we facilitate the conditions for
their return? We are also concerned about land and
property issues and an ensemble of issues important for
the daily life of these people.

We also noticed a reference in the briefing to the

significant impact on the environment of the current

conflict, which in itself a consequence, at least in part,

of scarcity of natural resources. Is there any room for

greater attention to this dimension of the crisis by the
humanitarian community?

