Ms. Mohammed: Let me start by congratulating
your delegation, Mr. President, on the convening of
today's open debate on a very pressing and important
subject. I would like also to thank all the briefers for
their insightful presentations.

Climate change is undoubtedly one of the most
important global challenges of our time. No country
or region can be considered immune to its devastating
consequences, which not only undermine development
gains but also threaten the very existence of our
communities. This is indeed a critical issue to which we
must devote all the attention it deserves. While in some
domains it is still debated whether climate change and
conflict have a direct or indirect causal relationship,
there is no doubt, as many speakers before me have
stated today, that we must recognize that climate
change could create conditions for conflict, or act as
a threat multiplier in certain circumstances. Those
conditions could become tipping points for difficult
situations and could also narrow options for solving
problems. The situation in the Lake Chad basin and
in the Sahel region, where poor communities heavily
depend upon ever-shrinking natural resources for their
livelihoods, is a clear manifestation of the complex
relationship between climate change and conflict.
Against that background, allow me to emphasize the
following three points.

First, although they are by far less responsible for
the emergence and fast aggravation of this phenomenon,
developing countries suffer the most from the impacts
of climate change. For example, Africa's contribution to
the greenhouse gases is insignificant, yet our continent
remains one of the most vulnerable areas to the
adverse impacts of climate change, which threaten the
realization of the development aspirations as outlined
in Agenda 2063: The Africa We Want. Some African
countries have, and will, confront risks from sea-level
rise and extreme weather, including stifling heat,
intense rains and powerful storm surges. Others have,
and will continue to, face the risks of more challenging
conditions in terms of food and agriculture, water,
health, fisheries, infrastructure, transportation and
other sources of livelihood. Climate change is also
partially to blame for increased migration, particularly
by our youth.

Secondly, if we are to seriously address climate
change-induced conflicts and security risks, Member
States have no alternative but to fully implement
their respective commitments made in the various
frameworks aimed at tackling the adverse impacts
of climate change. In accordance with the principle
of common but differentiated responsibilities, all
countries - particularly developed ones - should
take concrete measures to honour those obligations and
pledges in line with the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change, by providing sufficient and sustained climate
financing to developing countries, particularly the most
vulnerable ones. The timely provision of a clear means
of implementation for both mitigation and adaptation,
as well as the facilitation of the transfer of appropriate
technology, cannot be overemphasized. Such efforts,
in our view, would complement national and regional
efforts to address the adverse impacts of climate change
and prevent climate change-related security threats
and conflicts.

Thirdly, the African Union's response to climate
change is demonstrated through its sustained
commitment to international environmental regimes
and its own environmental framework. Three years
after the conclusion of the Paris Agreement, Africa
continues to consolidate its efforts, focusing particularly
on partnerships, to ensure that African nations are
able to pursue a low-carbon and climate-resilient
development path through the implementation of their
nationally determined contributions. Let me seize this
opportunity to reiterate Africa's strong commitment
to the Paris Agreement, which provides an ambitious
framework for addressing this global threat.

Most recently, building on presidential statement
S/PRST/2018/3, adopted on 30 January 2018 on West
Africa and the Sahel, which acknowledged the link
between climate change and violence, the African
Union (AU) dedicated the 774th meeting of the Peace
and Security Council, held on 21 May 2018, to an open
session on the link between climate change and conflicts
in Africa and addressing the security implications.
The Peace and Security Council also highlighted the
linkage between climate change and peace and security
in Africa and its threat to global peace and security.

In that context, and noting that no country or region
is immune to climate change, Peace and Security Council
members stated the importance of coordinated efforts
in mitigating the adverse effects of climate change and
provided a set of recommendations to member States
and AU partners. Those recommendations included,
notably, the following: first, the need to enhance
cooperation among stakeholders at the national, regional
and international levels to develop coping mechanisms
and enhance resilience; secondly, the need to develop
institutional frameworks, both at the national and
continental levels, to proactively respond to the security
repercussions of climate change-related conflicts; and,
last but not least, the need to strengthen early-warning
mechanisms to prevent climate-related conflicts.

In conclusion, I would like stress that our endeavour
to fight climate change will not be genuine unless it
is anchored in a multilateral approach, of which the
Paris Agreement remains one of the best illustrations.
Let me assure you, Sir, that the African Union will
continue to advance multilateral cooperation and work
constructively with its partners towards addressing the
root causes and negative effects of climate change and
related security threats and conflicts.

