Mr. Rastam (Malaysia): I offer my sincere
congratulations to you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month and
to the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom on his stewardship of the Council last month.

My delegation is pleased to address the Security
Council on the situation in Timor-Leste six months
after the adoption of Security Council resolution 1543
(2004). We express our sincere appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his progress report (S/2004/888)
on the activities of the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor (UNMISET), and to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Sukehiro
Hasegawa, for his clear and comprehensive
presentation of the report. We commend the Special
Representative and the members of UNMISET's
civilian, military and police components for their
dedication and their invaluable contributions to the
nation-building process in Timor-Leste.

Malaysia is pleased to recognize that UNMISET
continues to play an important role in Timor-Leste,
providing security and facilitating the country's
advancement towards progress and development. The
Mission has assisted in nurturing the development of
political, economic, social, legal and judicial
institutions. We note in particular that, since the
inception of the UNMISET consolidation phase in May
2004, Timor-Leste has made further progress in
developing key State institutions and security agencies,
which includes the adoption of a number of important
pieces of legislation. Voter registration has been
completed in preparation for the local elections to be
conducted before July 2005. Those advances could not
have been achieved without the full commitment, the
determination and the strong resolve of the country's
leadership and the support of the Timorese people in
general, coupled with sustained assistance and
cooperation from the international community.

We recall that, in his previous report
(S/2004/669), the Secretary-General noted that the
progress achieved in Timor-Leste had permitted a
downsizing in the international presence on the ground.
However, in his report before the Council today, the
Secretary-General emphasizes that the situation on the
ground does not warrant any modification of
UNMISET's tasks as mandated by resolution 1543
(2004). We note his assessment that any change of the
composition or size of UNMISET, including those of
the police and military components, could compromise
the ability of the Mission to carry out its
responsibilities. At the same time, we take note of the
Secretary-General's recommendation to retain
UNMISET with its current tasks, configuration and
size until its mandate expires on 20 May 2005.

We agree that the coming final period of six
months would allow UNMISET's key tasks to be
completed and the gains made thus far to be
consolidated. It is essential that the transition from the
phase of peacekeeping operations, aimed at conflict
resolution, to the next phase of development activities
be conducted with the cooperation and the
contributions of all bilateral and multilateral partners.
In that regard, Malaysia will do its utmost, within its
capacity, to further assist Timor-Leste in fulfilling its
nation-building endeavour, including through the
continuation of bilateral technical assistance.

My delegation notes that during the next six
months UNMISET will also be focusing on its exit
strategy as it completes its mandate in Timor-Leste.
This is a crucial period for UNMISET in ensuring that
the country continues to function without any
significant impact from the Mission's withdrawal. It is
thus important to make a thorough and comprehensive
assessment of whether Timor-Leste has largely
achieved self-reliance before UNMISET's
responsibilities are handed over to the Timorese. In
that regard, we believe that UNMISET needs to
redouble its effort to encourage the involvement and
the ownership of the Timorese in the Mission's three
programme areas and to identify bilateral and
multilateral partners that could help move the process.

Malaysia has taken note of the donors'
conference scheduled to be held in March next year.
We hope that the United Nations system and other
partners that have complemented the role of UNMISET
in assisting the institution-building process will
continue to support and facilitate the smooth transition
from a peacekeeping operation to a sustainable-
development-assistance framework. My delegation
joins the Secretary-General in appealing to all bilateral
and multilateral partners of Timor-Leste to enhance
their cooperation with UNMISET for a successful
transition process.

It is encouraging to note the growing relations
between Timor-Leste and Indonesia, as manifested in
the recent visit of Prime Minster Alkatiri to Jakarta in
October and the participation of Foreign Minister
Ramos-Horta in Indonesia's independence celebration
in Kupang in August. The strengthening of relations
between the two neighbouring countries augurs well
for them, including in their continued efforts to delimit
the land borders between them. We are confident that
both countries will continue to be able to resolve their
pending bilateral issues in a spirit of friendship and
cooperation.

With regard to the ongoing investigations by the
Serious Crimes Unit to bring to justice the perpetrators
of serious crimes committed in 1999 in East Timor, my
delegation is of the View that the issue is best dealt
with bilaterally between Timor-Leste and Indonesia.
Undue external pressure from the international
community, especially from the United Nations, may
not be the right approach in dealing with the issue.

My delegation notes in the Secretary-General's
report that maritime boundary negotiations with
Australia have been conducted recently, in September
and October, but that a mutually beneficial
arrangement has yet to be concluded. Malaysia
continues to express its hope for a mutually beneficial
arrangement that permits the successful exploitation of
petroleum and natural gas, which could provide badly
needed financial resources for Timor-Leste.

My delegation has noted the conclusions and the
observations of the integrated technical assessment
mission during its recent visit to Timor-Leste to review
the situation on the ground, as mandated by resolution
1543 (2004), with a view to determining the feasibility
of modifying UNMISET's size, composition and tasks,
including the configuration of its police and military
components. My delegation is concerned that, despite
the notable progress achieved during UNMISET's
consolidation phase, the mission has concluded that
Timor-Leste has yet to reach the critical threshold of
self-sufficiency, in particular in the areas of
professional skills and values, policing experience,
necessary equipment and infrastructure, and
management and coordination capabilities. In that
regard, Malaysia continues to offer assistance in
training and development for senior and middle
management of the Timorese police force, as well as
the assistance given in the training of trainers at the
police college and to the newly formed Police Reserve
Unit and Rapid Intervention Unit.

