Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): On 28 February
(see S/PV.7893), I asked a simple question of the
Security Council, namely, would we take action
against those who used chemical weapons in Syria?
We had a chance that day to adopt a draft resolution
(S/2017/l72) that would have done exactly that - a
draft resolution that would have taken action against
the Al-Assad regime and against Da'esh, proven to have
used chemical weapons by the mechanism that we set
up. We could have sent a clear message that day, a clear
signal that there would be consequences for using these
horrific weapons and for violating international law,
a clear signal that there was Security Council unity,
global unity, against any use of these weapons. But
after Russia and China vetoed the draft resolution, it
seems that the only message sent to Al-Assad was one
of encouragement.

Yesterday we saw the consequences ofthose vetoes.

Those consequences are painted on the stricken faces of
the children of Khan Shaykhun, killed potentially by
a regime that will stop at nothing to hold on to power.
History willjudge all of us for how we respond to those
unforgettable, unforgivable images of the innocent, who
had already suffered so much even before yesterday's
attack. How long are we going to sit here and pretend
that actions in this Chamber have no consequences, that
vetoes have no bearing on the lives of innocent men,
women and children?

Russia has said that the opposition is responsible,
that a regime airstrike struck an opposition munitions
depot. But we have seen nothing to suggest that any
non-State actors in Syria have the sort of chemical
weapons that would be consistent with the symptoms
that we saw yesterday. Russia will say simply that we do
not have enough information about the attack. And yet
we have every indication that this was a sustained attack
using aircraft over a number of hours. We see all the
signs of an attack using a nerve agent capable of killing
over 100 people and harming hundreds more. If that is
not enough to demand action, what is? There is only
one air force that has used such weapons in Syria. There
is only one party to this conflict that the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) says
has "gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies" in its
Chemical Weapons Convention declaration. Only one
party still refuses inspectors access to its facilities.
This does not look like the work of terrorists. This does
not look like the work of the opposition. This bears all
the hallmarks of the Al-Assad regime, and the use of
chemical weapons is a war crime.

Make no mistake: this regime seems intent on
making a mockery of the Russian-backed ceasefire.
Russia has blocked Council action, claiming that we
might undermine the Astana process. Yet the only
thing undermining the Astana process is Al-Assad, the
very man they seek to protect. Russia deployed the full
weight of its armed forces to help him. They reduced
Aleppo to ruins and displaced hundreds ofthousands of
men, women and children - all in the name of fighting
terrorism. And what does Russia get as repayment?
Al-Assad humiliates Russia in the eyes of the world
by intensifying his attacks and by reducing the Astana
ceasefire to ruble. Al-Assad humiliates Russia by
showing just how empty Syria's promise was to remove
all its chemical weapons.

If Russia is to restore its credibility, it will need
to join us in condemning this attack and in urging the
OPCW to investigate it as soon as possible. They will
join us in calling for the fullest support and cooperation
for the investigation team. They will help, not hinder,
our efforts to strengthen accountability through the
vital work of the Joint Investigative Mechanism. There
can be no further delay in staffing the leadership of
the Mechanism. It must have the right technical and
analytical capacity to take on the task ahead. If Russia
fails to do so and falls back on its old ways, defending
the indefensible, we will not be deterred. The United
Kingdom, with our allies, will continue to seek justice
for the victims of chemical-weapon attacks, in Syria and
elsewhere. We will continue to pursue other avenues
for action. The European Union sanctions announced
last month against Syrian military persons show that
we can still take steps to hold individuals to account,
that we can still show that the use of chemical weapons
brings consequences.

But until Russia changes its ways, the Security
Council will remain blocked. That is the sad reality
that the world has gotten used to. They view us as a
table of diplomats doing nothing, our hands tied behind
our backs, beholden to Russian intransigence. But the
world should be under no illusion. What Russia does
in this Chamber does not cause inaction; defending the
indefensible causes suffering. Each and every abuse
of its veto has consequences. For the people of Khan
Shaykhun, those consequences have been unspeakable.

Let me conclude by asking Russia: what is its
plan to stop these horrific, senseless attacks? We had
a plan and we had the support. They rejected it to
protect Al-Assad. It is now time to stop blocking and
start helping, by joining Security Council consensus.
Our draft resolution condemns this attack and calls
for consequences. All 15 Security Council members
should be able to confirm this and every use of chemical
weapons. We expect members' unanimous support.

