Mr. Zhang Dianbin (China) (spoke in Chinese): China welcomes the Foreign Minister of the Niger to today's meeting. We listened carefully to the briefings by Special Representative Sori-Coulibaly and Ambassador Costa Filho. We have noted the Secretary-General's report on the developments in Guinea-Bissau and the activities of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) (S/2020/105). The National Assembly of Guinea-Bissau adopted the Government's policy programme last October, and two rounds of presidential elections were held smoothly at the end of last year and early this year. Political stability in the country was maintained during that period, which China was pleased to see. We highly commend the positive role by the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and countries of the region. We have also noted that there remains controversy at the domestic level regarding the election results. We hope that all parties in the country will act in the interest of the country's peace and stability, strengthen dialogue and coordination and resolve the differences appropriately in order to ensure the smooth completion of the election process and maintain security and stability in the country. China stands for African solutions to African problems. We hope that all parties in the country will consolidate the hard-won positive momentum, continue to implement the Conakry Agreement and the ECOWAS six-point road map and vigorously advance reforms with a view to improving people's livelihoods and promoting the country's development and stability. We call upon the international community to lend tangible support to Guinea-Bissau in combating drug trafficking and transnational organized crime. China supports the people of Guinea-Bissau in exploring a development path that fits their national conditions. A development perspective must be incorporated into conflict prevention efforts. The international community must assist the country in its capacity- building, while giving priority to such issues as poverty eradication, education, health care and infrastructure with a view to achieving sustainable development and lasting peace and stability. UNIOGBIS and the Peacebuilding Commission can play a greater role in that regard. China supports the African Union, ECOWAS and other regional and subregional organizations and countries in the region in continuing their constructive role. We call on UNIOGBIS to strengthen coordination with ECOWAS, the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel and other United Nations agencies, to respect the national sovereignty and aspirations of the country and, on that basis, to lend tailored support and assistance to the country in its efforts towards peace and development. China will continue to support the work of UNIOGBIS, including its phased restructuring and transfer of responsibilities as mandated by resolution 2458 (2019). We hope that UNIOGBIS will enhance its cooperation with the national Government and fully heed the Government's opinions to ensure a seamless transfer of responsibilities and maximize the benefits of its work for the people of Guinea-Bissau.
