The Secretary-General: Mr. President, I warmly
welcome your leadership in presiding over today's
meeting.

After more than four years of slaughter, the
Syrian conflict has become a shameful symbol of the
international community's divisions and failure. I am
profoundly disappointed that none of the Council's
resolutions on Syria - whether aimed at ending the
violence, easing humanitarian suffering or combating
terrorism and foreign fighters - has been implemented.

Syria is the world's largest humanitarian crisis,
as the Council heard yesterday in harrowing detail
from the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs (see S/PV.7493). At least a quarter of a
million Syrians have been killed. Almost half of the
country's population - 12 million men, women and
children - have been forced to flee their homes. Thanks
to a massive cross-border exodus, Turkey, Lebanon,
Jordan and Iraq are hosting an ever-growing number
of refugees, and increasing numbers of Syrians are
making desperate journeys across the Mediterranean in
so-called death boats.

Atrocious crimes are now almost an hourly
occurrence, fed by a lack of accountability for the
major human rights violations committed over the
past four years and through decades of repression. The
Syrian people have been exposed to chemical weapons
that should have been things of the past, and to new,
indiscriminate killing devices such as barrel bombs and
hell cannons. The conflict has given rise to terrorist
groups such as Daesh and the Al-Nusra Front, and it has
fuelled sectarianism and radicalization throughout and

beyond the region. Funding for humanitarian activities
continues to be outpaced by the gargantuan and ever-
growing scale of people's needs. The situation is a clear
threat to international peace and security that should
compel us all to consider what more we can do to end
the carnage and uphold our responsibilities.

It was in that context that, on 28 March, I instructed
my Special Envoy for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura,
to intensify the efforts of the United Nations to find a
political settlement to the conflict. Specifically, I asked
him to work to operationalize the Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex). The Security Council unanimously
endorsed the Geneva communique in its resolution
2118 (2013). The document contains principles and
guidelines for ending the violence and launching a
Syrian-led political process leading to a transition that
meets the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people.
The communique remains the only internationally
agreed basis for a political settlement to the Syrian
conflict, and it is the foundation for recent initiatives
such as the Cairo and Moscow processes.

Mr. de Mistura will brief the Council today on his
consultations. I would like to highlight four key points.
First, his description of the state of the Syrian crisis
synthesizes what we have heard from an inclusive
and representative group of Syrian and non-Syrian
stakeholders.

Secondly, amid gaping fault lines, there are points
of consensus on which a credible political process
could be constructed. Syrians and external actors alike
share a sense of concern regarding the threshold that
the conflict has now reached. No one wants to risk the
chaos of an uncontrolled transition in Damascus. All
reject the possibility of a future Syria divided along
sectarian lines. Many of the Syrians we spoke to warned
that the country is entering a cycle of fragmentation and
radicalization that will be hard to get out of. Our Syrian
interlocutors also lamented that their country is caught
in a regional proxy war that is beyond the Syrians'
ability to resolve by themselves. Almost all pointed
to the urgent need for the international community to
act now if we want to save and preserve what is left of
Syria. As the situation deteriorates, the Syrians predict
that the prospects for achieving a political solution will
also recede.

Thirdly, the Syrians with whom we spoke share
many of the same aspirations. They want to protect
the country's sovereignty, territorial integrity and
independence, and to determine their own future
free from external intervention. They consider it
impossible to return to the past. They reject violent
extremism and terrorism, and support a non-sectarian,
multi-confessional and inclusive society. And they
yearn to build a genuinely democratic Syria based on
human rights and the rule of law.

Fourthly and finally, the consultations made it
clear that the major stumbling block in the political
process remains the issue of forming a transitional
governing body with full executive powers that can
create a suitable environment and safety for all during
the transition.

Such a body is the top priority for the opposition,
while the Syrian Government has told us that such an
institution would be unconstitutional.

Although difficult, these are not insurmountable
obstacles and differences. Mr. De Mistura will therefore
present a proposal to launch a political process aimed at
enabling Syrians to negotiate a framework agreement
on how to implement all aspects of the Geneva
communique. The main goal of these preparatory
negotiations will be to reach an intra-Syrian agreement
on the elements of the Geneva communique, including
on the issue of the transitional governing body, as
well as to effectively fight terrorism. I stand ready
to convene a high-level international conference to
endorse any recommendations or agreement that this
Syrian-led political process may reach.

The status quo in Syria is unacceptable. Some argue
that we must wait to end this nightmare until there is a
more propitious alignment of regional and international
circumstances. This would be both immoral and
irresponsible. We must not condemn the Syrian people
to even deeper despair. We must not condemn the
region to unending turmoil. Today I ask the Security
Council to endorse Mr. De Mistura's recommendations
and work with the Syrian parties to convince them to
participate constructively in this proposed process.
Just as important, the Council has a responsibility to
support the political process by acting to de-escalate
the conflict. We must ensure that these preparatory
negotiations are meaningful and not cynically exploited
as a licence to continue the killing.

I urge the Security Council, Syria's neighbours and
regional sponsors ofthe Syrian parties to stem all flows
of arms and foreign fighters pouring into the country.

While ending the bloodshed remains primarily the
responsibility ofthe Syrian parties, especially President
Bashar Al-Assad, there is much that the region and the
international community can do to starve the fire of its
fuel. We must also build on the political momentum that
has been generated by the nuclear agreement between
Iran and the P5+1 countries. The unity that generated
that agreement can help point the way towards conflict
resolution in Syria and greater stability across the
region.

For the moment, the greatest obstacle to ending the
Syrian war is the notion that it can be won militarily. It
is our failure to act with a unified voice that perpetuates
this harmful illusion and allows the Syrian parties to
think that there is some alternative other than coming
to the negotiating table.

Today Mr. De Mistura and I will outline a way
forward to reach the political solution that all claim to
support. I urge the Council to give this proposal its full
support. If it does not, the world expects this body to
present a viable alternative.

