Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Special Representative Salame' and Ambassador

Schoulgin Nyoni for their briefings. China also listened
attentively to the statement made by Ms. Sharief.

At present, Libyans are striving to restore peace
and stability. However, the country still faces multiple
challenges, including difficulties in their political
process, a fragile security environment and rampant
terrorist activity, as well as the large-scale movements
of refugees and migrants. All Libyan parties should
place the overall interests of the country and the vital
interests of its people above all else and jointly take
active measures to promote the peace process. The
international community should continue to provide
concrete support to that end.

First, all actors should remain committed to
the overarching objective of seeking a political
settlement to Libyan issue. The future of Libya should
be determined by the Libyan people themselves.
The international community should respect the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Libya, and continue to promote a Libyan-led and
-owned political process. All Libyan parties should
resolve their differences through inclusive dialogue and
find a solution that accommodates all interests through
political means. The Libyan Political Agreement is a
fundamental framework for ending the Libyan crisis
and contributes to national reconciliation and the
restoration of national governance.

Secondly, the international community must
create favourable security conditions for Libyan
political dialogue. China supports Libya's efforts
towards safeguarding national security and stability.
We hope that all actors in Libya will bolster dialogue,
continuously build mutual trust, work towards building
unified national armed forces and take united and
concerted counter-terrorism action so as to effectively
reduce the threat of terrorism.

Thirdly, the United Nations role as the main
channel of mediations should be preserved. Special
Representative Salame has led the phased return of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya to Libya. In
line with the United Nations action plan of promoting
the Libyan political process, he has facilitated extensive
dialogue among all Libyan stakeholders, conducted
in-depth discussions on such issue as drafting a
constitution and made headway in the electoral
process. Some progress has been achieved. The
international community must enhance its confidence,
maintain its patience and continue to support Special
Representative Salame's efforts to press ahead with the
action plan prudently.

We hope that Libya's neighbouring countries,
the African Union, the League of Arab States and
the European Union will increase their support to
the Libyan political process. China will continue to
follow developments closely and support all efforts
to stabilize the situation on the ground, promote the
political process for settling the Libyan question and
help all parties to unite in combating terrorism. China
stands ready to enhance its contribution to the early
restoration of peace, stability and prosperity in Libya.

