Mrs. Juul (Norway): Norway welcomes the
report of the Secretary-General on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict (S/2009/277), and especially
the recommendations on improving humanitarian
access, upholding humanitarian law, the safety of
humanitarian workers and holding violators of
international humanitarian law accountable. A key
issue ahead will be how to translate the
recommendations of that report into decisions by the
Council and, ultimately, into results on the ground.

Norway also looks forward to the independent
study on protection mandates for peacekeeping
operations, to be presented shortly by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations. We expect
that the study will provide concrete guidelines on
protection that can quickly be effectuated in the field.
Here Member States - and not only troop-contributing
countries - should pull together to provide the
necessary systematic training, based on the
forthcoming guidelines on protection.

Norway would like to take this opportunity to
focus on two main issues, namely the need for
increased respect for international humanitarian law
and the need to effectively combat sexual violence and
rape in armed conflict. The many violations of
humanitarian law that we have seen in the past few
years, in particular with regard to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, is a cause for grave
concern. The targeting of civilians has serious
humanitarian consequences and represents a threat to
peace and security. There is an urgent need to
strengthen respect for international humanitarian law in
order to improve the protection of civilians in armed
conflict.

A key concern is to secure humanitarian access to
those in need of assistance. We also need to ensure that
those who violate international humanitarian law are
held accountable. There is a need to strengthen the
obligations of States and non-State actors with regard
to international humanitarian law. Promoting respect
for international humanitarian law requires engaging
also non-State actors. We welcome the proposal by the
Secretary-General to hold an Arria formula meeting to
discuss the experiences of the United Nations and
non-Governmental actors in engaging armed groups.

Women and children are often forced to bear the
heaviest burden when it comes to the consequences of
armed conflict. Sexual violence and rape occur every
single day in armed conflicts and have tragic
consequences not only for the individual, but for the
whole community. Sexual violence leaves lasting scars
for many generations to come, making peacebuilding
extremely difficult. It is crucial that these acts not be
viewed as separate, individual crimes. In many cases,
they are calculated tactics of war and should be treated
as such. Crimes of rape and sexual violence in armed
conflict must be placed higher on the international
agenda. The systematic use of rape has rightly been
recognized as a war crime both by the Council and by
the International Criminal Court.

An important step towards preventing sexual
violence in conflict was taken in June last year, when
the Security Council adopted resolution 1820 (2008),
on women, and peace and security and sexual violence
in situations of armed conflict. The Security Council
recognized sexual violence as a security problem - a
problem that requires a systematic security response.
We are satisfied that the adoption of resolution 1820
(2008) has ended the debate on whether or not sexual
violence belongs on the Security Council agenda. We
look forward to the Secretary-General's report on the
implementation of resolution 1820 (2008). We expect
the recommendations to be forceful and
comprehensive, resulting in a strong response from the
Council.

Norway would also like to see the Security
Council make use of the most effective measures at its
disposal, including targeted sanctions, to make it clear
that sexual violence is unacceptable and that
perpetrators will be held accountable. It is
unacceptable that impunity for these extremely severe
crimes seems to be the rule, not the exception. Norway
supports the referral of such crimes to the International
Criminal Court and consideration of sanctions against
Member States, as well as non-State actors, that
perpetrate these criminal acts. It is also our obligation
as Member States to ensure that violators are brought
to justice. It is our duty to ensure that the whole United
Nations family - funds and programmes and
peacekeeping missions - strengthen its focus and
allocate resources in order to protect women and girls.

The protection of civilians is a comprehensive
issue that requires comprehensive analysis and a
concerted international response. That implies
improving respect for international humanitarian law. It
also implies providing United Nations peacekeeping
operations with strong mandates, as well as the
resources required to fulfil those mandates. Combating
impunity and holding perpetrators accountable are key
to protecting civilians in armed conflict and ending
sexual violence.

