Mr. Christian (Ghana): Ghana would like to join
other members of the Council in thanking the Special
Adviser of the Secretary-General on Myanmar, Under-
Secretary-General Ibrahim Gamabari, for his briefing,
which has highlighted some very significant and
general positive developments in the country. In the
same breath, we wish to commend the Secretary-
General for his active support of the process of
democratization in Myanmar, especially the leadership
he has shown during the current crisis.

I would also like to pay tribute to the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and other key
players in the region, both for the principled position
they have taken in response to recent developments
and, more importantly, for lending the Special Adviser
much critical support in his interventions in Myanmar.

Ghana welcomes the recent moves by the
authorities in Myanmar to reduce tensions in the
country. We are pleased with the cooperation extended
to Mr. Gambari in his efforts to bridge the gap between
the Government and the opposition. That underscores
the fact that the Government and people of Myanmar
are ultimately the masters of their own destiny.

However, we note from the report of the Special
Adviser that serious concerns remain about ongoing
reports of human rights abuses. Moreover, the
Government has not provided any assurances on lifting
the restrictions on Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, neither is
there an indication of the commencement of dialogue
nor of the proposed time frame for the next step in the
political road map. We therefore call on the
Government of Myanmar to embark on a purposeful
track of dialogue with opposition groups. That will
mean carrying out the aforementioned measures and
others mentioned in the report of the Special Adviser.
The Government must create the enabling conditions
for national reconciliation and continue along the path
that will bring about peace and genuine democracy in
Myanmar.

We must also stress the unity of this Council. Its
support for the Human Rights Council has been
decisive, and we call on the Government of Myanmar
to cooperate fully with the Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in Myanmar, Mr. Pinheiro,
during his visits to the country for the sake of the well-
being of the people of Myanmar.

Ghana reiterates its full support for the Special
Adviser, whose tireless efforts are now yielding
tangible results. We hope that everything will be done
to sustain the new momentum for peace in Myanmar.

