Mr. Qazi: The report before the Council details
the work of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Iraq (UNAMI) from June to August 2005. I would like
to take this opportunity to draw the Council's attention
to its key observations and to comment on the efficacy
of the role of the United Nations in Iraq.

Our meeting is taking place shortly after the
designation by the Transitional National Assembly of
Iraq of a draft national constitution, which marks an
important benchmark in Iraq's political transition, as
outlined in Security Council resolution 1546 (2004).
Iraq can now move forward to the remaining steps in
its transition: a national referendum on the draft
constitution scheduled for 15 October and general
elections scheduled for 15 December.

In writing a constitution, underlying political
issues are often the hardest to tackle, especially in
countries undergoing a transition from dictatorship to
representative government. In such situations, it is
almost a prerequisite that the constitution-drafting
process contribute to the development or restoration of
political trust among the main political constituencies,
without which the necessary compromises on sensitive
issues will be difficult to achieve.

In the case of Iraq, the Transitional National
Assembly has also been given the task of drafting a
constitution in a security environment that remains
extremely challenging and which can easily contribute
to a hardening of attitudes on all sides. In these
circumstances, the restoration of mutual political trust
among parties and communities through an inclusive,
transparent and participatory political process has
been, and remains, a challenge.

Given all this, it is remarkable that the initial
number of sensitive issues on which differences were
known to exist was significantly reduced within a very
demanding time frame, rendered even more tight due to
the delay in the formation of a Transitional
Government. Even so, we cannot but acknowledge that
the major shortcoming of the 30 January elections -
that is, the relative non-participation of one major
segment of Iraqi society - inevitably affected the
subsequent drafting of the constitution, despite
measures taken to include representatives of Arab
Sunni groups in the process.

The lack of sufficient mutual accommodation
within the National Assembly's Constitutional
Committee eventually led to outstanding political
issues being referred to meetings of senior political
leaders. This process developed a political dynamic of
its own that carried discussions on the draft text of the
constitution beyond the prescribed deadline of
15 August. As a result, the process had to depart from
formal procedures in order to allow negotiations
among all parties to continue as constructively as
possible. In effect, several deadlines for the
designation of a text by the National Assembly were
set aside, and the text which was designated on
28 August continued to be discussed and changed.
Changes to the text were finally read out to the
National Assembly on 18 September.

The issues of federalism, modalities for the
formation of regions in addition to the existing
Kurdistan region, the identity of the State, the role of
Islam as a source of law, and the distribution of powers
with respect to natural resources, including oil and
water, were among the major points of contention.
Several commentators noted the deferral of a large
number of important institutional arrangements to the
next elected national assembly for legislative action.
Given the short time frame available, there was
probably no alternative to this. Building upon the
efforts made during the drafting process, it is now
hoped that all parties will be able to work
constructively with one another in implementing an
approved constitution in the common interest of the
Iraqi people.

A copy of the constitutional text that is to be put
to the people of Iraq in the referendum on 15 October
was formally communicated to me by the Acting
Speaker of the National Assembly, with the request
that UNAMI facilitate the publication and distribution
of 5 million copies to Iraqi households throughout the
country. This process, which will enable the Iraqi
people to make an informed choice on whether to
accept or reject the draft constitutional text, is now
under way. In that regard, UNAMI is also providing
technical support to a broad public education campaign
on the draft constitution.

The referendum is only one of two major
electoral events that are being prepared simultaneously
by the Independent Electoral Commission of Iraq
within a very tight time frame. Preparations are also
under way for the general election that is to follow.
Here, too, the process has been affected by prolonged
negotiations in the National Assembly over the choice
of electoral system, which delayed the adoption of a
new electoral law until 12 September.

As a result, the timelines for implementing all the
preparatory steps for the referendum and elections have
been severely compressed. In addition, there is an
urgent need for international funding for the electoral
process.

The United Nations does not and should not take
positions on questions such as the merits of the draft
Constitution, which lie exclusively within the
sovereign political domain of the Iraqi people. It is
important that all recognize that the facilitation work
of the United Nations, including the publication of the
draft constitutional text, does not constitute advocacy.
Although the timetable for a nationwide public
discussion and debate on the completed draft text has
been much shorter than initially hoped, a healthy
turnout for the referendum would, nevertheless, be a
very positive development.

Accordingly, I hope that the Security Council will
support the Secretary-General's call to the people of
Iraq to exercise their democratic rights, as well as his
call to the Iraqi authorities and all Iraqi political
groups, to ensure the Iraqi people's participation, free
from intimidation or threats to their security.

Outside the formal political process, the reality of
life for the vast majority of Iraqis remains difficult. Of
paramount concern is the high toll of innocent civilian
casualties caused by the ongoing Violence, including
terrorist and insurgent activity. The Secretary-General
has unequivocally condemned terrorist violence against
innocent civilians, which no cause can ever justify, and
has repeatedly called on all parties to observe their
international humanitarian obligations in this regard.

Also of great concern is the deteriorating human
rights situation, to which the report again calls your
attention. From our experience around the world, we
have learned that addressing both past and present
abuses, based on the rule of law and international
norms, can go a long way in promoting national
reconciliation efforts. We have, therefore, encouraged
the Iraqi Government to step up its efforts to promote
and protect human rights, as well as to ensure that it is
perceived as being equitable and fair in all its actions
towards all communities in Iraq. At this sensitive
political juncture, this is particularly relevant to the
Iraqi security forces that are often required to operate
in challenging and provocative circumstances. The
forthcoming referendum and election will provide an
opportunity for them to demonstrate their neutrality,
impartiality and effectiveness in respecting human and
political rights for all Iraqi citizens.

Similarly, the need for greater security is not
limited to the security of life, but encompasses the
general welfare of Iraqis and their prospects for a
better life in terms of basic living conditions,
employment and public services.

Restoring the confidence and dignity of the Iraqi
people requires urgent tangible improvements in these
areas. In this regard, the outcome of the last
International Reconstruction Fund Facility for Iraq
(IRFFI) Donor Meeting in July made it possible for
UNAMI to focus its efforts on selecting quick-impact
projects. They are aimed at improving the quality of
life of Iraqis in the areas of health, education, water
and sanitation and have been formulated and
implemented by United Nations agencies on a fast-
track basis. UNAMI also facilitated the prompt
provision of emergency assistance to the survivors and
families of those who lost their lives in the tragic
Aemma Bridge stampede in Baghdad on 31 August.
Strengthening the Government's capacity to coordinate
international assistance and to deliver effectively on
the needs and expectations of its people will remain a
priority for UNAMI. However, meeting Iraq's
immediate reconstruction and humanitarian needs, and
investing in its long-term development, will require
continued and generous support from the international
community.

While the referendum and the elections are
necessary instruments in Iraq's transition to democracy,
they are only staging posts along an evolving
transition. Irrespective of their outcome, there are a
number of overarching challenges on which we will
need to continue to focus if we are to see the dividends
of our efforts over the past two years. These include,
first, promoting national reconciliation through
inclusive, participatory, transparent and responsive
politics that impact positively on security; secondly,
respecting Iraqi ownership of the political process and
strengthening the security of the State; thirdly,
developing good governance practices and institutional
capacity-building; and fourthly, encouraging
international and regional engagement and consensus
in support of Iraq's transition.

The Security Council has a particularly important
role to play in each of these areas. As the current
process outlined in resolution 1546 (2004) is nearing
its scheduled completion, consideration will need to be
given to how best the international community,
including the United Nations, can continue to support
the Government and people of Iraq.

With a tenfold increase of our presence in Iraq
since operations resumed last year and the planned
expansion of activities beyond Baghdad to Erbil and
Basrah, UNAMI is a committed partner of Iraq and is
ready to continue to provide its assistance, as
circumstances permit and as requested by the Iraqis.

We have come a long way in Iraq, and UNAMI
could not have achieved what it has without the
support it has received from a large number of
countries. I should like, therefore, to conclude by
thanking the Government of Fiji for providing three
United Nations Guard Units to protect UNAMI
facilities; the Governments of Romania, Georgia and
the Republic of Korea, which have provided dedicated
forces to support our security; and the Governments of
Jordan and Kuwait for hosting UNAMI facilities on
their territory and their consistent support for essential
UNAMI operations. I am also grateful for the efforts of
the Multinational Force and the Iraqi security forces in
supporting our activities on a daily basis. And,
needless to say, thanks to the Government of Iraq.

Finally, I wish to pay tribute to all UNAMI staff
for their hard work and dedication in implementing our
mandate, often in exceptionally challenging
circumstances.

