Mr. Mladenov: Today I devote my regular briefing
to the Security Council to reporting, on behalf of the
Secretary-General, on the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016) during the period from 25 March to
19 June. I will focus on developments on the ground
in accordance with the provisions of the resolution,
including on regional and international efforts to
advance peace.

Let me once again note that nothing in the report
can be divorced from the broader context in which it is
occurring - the half century of occupation, the stalled
peace process, the lack of dialogue between the parties,
as well as the continued illegal settlement activities,
terror, violence and increased radicalization.

Allow me to note that this month's briefing
coincides with the fiftieth anniversary of the Arab-
Israeli war, which resulted in Israel's occupation of
the West Bank, East Jerusalem, Gaza and the Syrian
Golan. Achieving a negotiated two-State outcome is the
only way to lay the foundations for enduring peace that
is based on Israeli security needs and the Palestinian
right to sovereignty and statehood. Now is not the time
to give up on that goal. Now is the time to create the
conditions for a return to negotiations so as to resolve all
final-status issues based on the relevant United Nations
resolutions, mutual agreements and international law.

Resolution 2334 (2016), in paragraph 2, calls on
Israel to take steps to

"cease all settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem".

No such steps were taken during the reporting period.
In fact, since 24 March there has been a substantial
increase in settlement-related announcements as
compared with the previous reporting period, with
plans for nearly 4,000 housing units moving forward
and 2,000 tenders issued. The United Nations considers
all settlement activities to be illegal under international
law. Resolution 2334 (2016) states that the international
community will not recognize any changes to the
4 June 1967 lines, including with regard to Jerusalem,
other than those agreed to by the parties themselves
through negotiations.

Plans for approximately 3,200 units were advanced
through the various stages of the planning process in
22 settlements in Area C of the occupied West Bank.
Those plans include 2,000 housing units in the major
population centres of Ma'ale Adumim and Ariel, and
over 800 units in Kerem Reim, Oranit and Beit E1. One
hundred units were advanced for the new settlement
of Amihai, established in the eastern Shiloh Valley
for the former residents of the Amona outpost, where
the Israeli authorities also declared 241 acres as State
land in the same zone. Both acts would further sever
the territorial contiguity of a future Palestinian State,
thereby solidifying a line of settlements dividing the
northern and central West Bank. As construction on
the new settlement began today, the Prime Minister
stated that

"There will never be a Government that is more
pro-settlement than our Government".

Separately, tenders were issued for close to
2,000 housing units in four settlements close to the
1967 line - Alfei Menashe, Beitar Illit, Beit Arie
and Kamer Shomron. Infrastructure tenders for the
future construction of more than 200 settlement units
in Kochav Yaakov, located between Ramallah and
Jerusalem, were also re-issued. In East Jerusalem 770
housing units in the Gilo southern slopes reached the
final approval stage, and building permits for more
than 360 housing units were granted in Ramat Shlomo,
Pisgat Ze'ev and Ramot.
Meanwhile, according to the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), the
reporting period witnessed a sharp decline in the
number of demolished Palestinian-owned structures
in Area C. Twenty-nine structures were demolished
or seized - down from 149 in the previous reporting
period. East Jerusalem saw a less pronounced decrease
in demolished structures, from 49 to 32. However, the
monthly average of demolitions in East Jerusalem since
the beginning of 2017 remains at the same level as in
2016, when demolitions reached a 15-year record.

Allow me to turn to the problem of violence, which
remains a hallmark of the conflict. Resolution 2334
(2016) calls on all sides to refrain from such acts and
undertake efforts to combat them. During the reporting
period, the security situation on the ground remained
relatively calm. No rockets were fired from Gaza
towards Israel, and the Israeli Defence Forces did not
conduct any air strikes in Gaza.

However, according to OCHA, 17 Palestinians
were killed by Israeli security forces in various
incidents, including reported terror attacks, clashes
and military operations. One Israeli soldier was killed
in a car-ramming attack on 6 April outside the Ofra
settlement, to the north-east of Ramallah, and, on
16 June a policewoman was killed in a shooting and
stabbing attack by Palestinian assailants in the vicinity
of the Old City of Jerusalem. On 14 April, a British
exchange student was killed by a Palestinian assailant
in a stabbing attack in Jerusalem.

The Israeli security forces killed a Jordanian
citizen reportedly involved in a stabbing incident in the
Old City on 13 May, and a Palestinian fisherman off
the coast of Gaza on 25 May. The reporting period also
witnessed the shooting of two Palestinian men during
protests at the fence along Gaza's northern border.

On 24 March, a senior Hamas military commander
was assassinated by unknown assailants in Gaza City.
That was followed by a lockdown of Gaza by Hamas in
which the de facto authorities did not allow Palestinians
or internationals to leave the Strip for several days. In
April, Hamas executed six Palestinian men for alleged
collaboration with Israel - an act that was condemned
by the international community.

Settler-related violence continued during the
reporting period, as well. According to OCHA,
31 incidents were documented, resulting in one
Palestinian killed, 10 injured and damage to Palestinian
property. Much of the violence has centred around the
West Bank settlement of Yitzhar near Nablus - a
recurrent source ofviolent actions against neighbouring
villages in the past. Against the backdrop of Israeli
security officials reportedly warning of the increased
risk of another terror attack by Jewish extremists, like
the one against the Dawabsheh family two years ago,
a Rabbi from Yitzhar was indicted for incitement to
violence against Palestinians, while a number of others
were arrested.

In paragraph 7 of resolution 2334 (2016), the
Council called on both parties

"to refrain from provocative actions, incitement
and inflammatory rhetoric"

and, in paragraph 6,
"to clearly condemn all acts of terrorism".

Regrettably, such calls continued to go unanswered
during the reporting period. Palestinian officials
and media outlets affiliated with Fatah continued to
commemorate the lives of perpetrators of past terror
attacks against Israeli civilians. One community centre
was recently named after a Palestinian woman who was
involved in an attack in which 38 Israelis, including 13
children, were killed in Tel Aviv in 1978. UN-Women
and Norway withdrew support from the organization.

Hamas leaders have also continued their deplorable
practice of celebrating recent attacks against Israeli
civilians as heroic, including the 1 April stabbing in
Jerusalem's Old City in which two civilians were injured,
and only a few hours following the complex attack at
Damascus Gate last Friday, in which a policewoman
was killed, Hamas was quick to praise "the three
martyrs from today's heroic Jerusalem operation".

Some Israeli officials have also employed
provocative rhetoric. Politicians have repeatedly
declared that there will never be a Palestinian State,
while pledging to take the idea of statehood "off the
agenda". In a regrettable incident, an Israeli Minister
spoke at an event attended by other members of the
Knesset, celebrating the publication ofa book promoting
abhorrent views concerning Israel's Arab citizens. The
book was condemned by the Anti-Defamation League
as dangerous and inhumane, and a number of the
participants expressed regret at their attendance.

Resolution 2334 (2016) reiterated the call by the
Middle East Quartet on both parties to take affirmative
steps to reverse negative trends on the ground that
are imperilling the two-State solution. In May, Israel
approved a number of positive measures to improve
the Palestinian economy. Those included the 24-hour
opening of the Allenby Bridge for a three-month period
effective as of today, as well as extended operating
hours at the Tarkumiya, Ephraim, Gilboa, Maccabim
and Reihan crossing points and the construction of a
vehicular crossing point at Eyal. Furthermore, the
package envisions the development of an industrial
zone that includes bonded warehouses and a natural
gas and fuel terminal aimed, at enhancing Palestinian
authority over trade and customs issues.

The measures also included the demarcation of
approximately 4,000 acres ofland in Area C, including
nexttothreemajorPalestiniancities-Ramallah,Nablus
and Tulkarem - in which the regulation of planning
and zoning will undergo changes with potentially
positive implications for Palestinian development.

The Palestinian and Israeli Finance Ministries
held a number of meetings to discuss fiscal leakages,
which is a critical issue given the Palestinian
Authority's $800 million-financing gap. The parties
have progressed in discussions on value-added tax
clearance revenues. In early June, in accordance with
the electricity agreement signed in September, Israel
transferred $30 million to the Palestinian Authority
in lieu of equalization levies and health stamps, and
agreed to conduct monthly transfers in the future. In
May, the Joint Water Committee held its first meeting
in seven years.

During the reporting period, the situation in Gaza
heightened intra-Palestinian tensions, thereby creating
an increasingly dangerous humanitarian situation
and raising serious concerns about the prospects of
another conflict. By establishing an administrative
committee to run civilian affairs, Hamas tightened its
control of Gaza and further antagonized the legitimate
Palestinian authorities, reducing the prospects for
reconciliation. Meanwhile, a stand-off between Fatah
and Hamas over the payment of taxes on fuel led to
the shut down of the only power plant in Gaza, leaving
residents with four hours of electricity per day. Basic
services, including health facilities, water supply and
wastewater management have almost ground to a
halt, increasing the risk of health and environmental
disasters. Today Gaza depends exclusively on Israeli
electricity lines, which normally provide 60 per cent
of supply, on Egypt and on a United Nations-managed
emergency fuel operation that, given the funding
available, will expire in two to three months.
On 15 May, the Palestinian Authority informed
Israel that it would reduce its payment for the electricity
supplied to Gaza by 30 per cent. One month later, Israel
agreed to the Palestinian request. An initial 5 per cent
reduction was implemented on 19 June, and further
cuts are expected to have catastrophic consequences for
Gaza's population.

Going beyond the scope of today's report on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016), once again, I
would like to warn all parties that Gaza is a tinderbox.
If and when it explodes, it will have devastating
consequences for the population and derail all efforts at
advancing peace. Two million Palestinians in Gaza can
no longer be held hostage by divisions. They have lived
under the control of Hamas for a decade. They have
had to deal with crippling Israeli closures, Palestinian
divisions and have lived through three devastating
conflicts. Perpetuating that situation breeds radicalism
and extremism. We have a collective responsibility
to prevent that situation; we have a duty to avoid a
humanitarian catastrophe.

Returning to resolution 2334 (2016), during the
reporting period there were no developments related
to Member States' distinguishing, in their relevant
dealings, between the territory of the State oflsrael and
the territories occupied in 1967. There were, however,
continuing efforts by the international community to
advance peace.

On 29 March in Jordan, at the Summit ofthe League
of Arab States, Arab leaders committed to relaunching
serious peace negotiations on the basis of a two-State
solution, establishing a Palestinian State "on the lines
of June 4, 1967 with its capital in East Jerusalem" and
reaffirmed their commitment to the 2002 Arab Peace
Initiative. In May, on his first trip abroad, United
States President Trump visited Israeli and Palestinian
leaders and made clear that resolving the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict is critical to combating the threat
of violent extremism and terrorism. He expressed his
personal commitment to helping both sides achieve a
peace agreement that would begin the process of peace
throughout the region. The Secretary-General looks
forward to working with the United States, Russia,
the European Union and regional partners towards
improving the environment for peacemaking, including
by engaging with all sides to improve the Palestinian
economy in the West Bank and Gaza.

In conclusion, I would like to share some broad
observations on the reporting period.
First, once again, I must stress the urgency of
addressing the rapidly deteriorating situation in
Gaza. We must acknowledge the significant budget
constraints the Palestinian Authority is currently
facing and the need to support the Government in
addressing them. However, all decisions must be taken
with due consideration of their humanitarian impact. I
therefore call on Palestinian leaders to urgently reach
the necessary compromises that will return Gaza to the
control of the legitimate Palestinian authorities. Last
month, I warned the Security Council that the crisis
was leading us towards another conflict - a conflict
that no one wants. I urge all parties to act before it is
too late.

Secondly, the policy of continued illegal settlement
construction in the occupied Palestinian territory
contravenes resolution 2334 (2016). The large number
of settlement-related activities documented during
the reporting period undermine the chances for the
establishment of a viable, contiguous Palestinian State
as part ofa two-State solution.

Thirdly, the continuing terror attacks, violence
and incitement remain a very serious concern to all.
Leaders have a responsibility to implement measures
demonstrating their commitment to combating violence
and any acts of provocation and inflammatory rhetoric.

Fourthly, while Israeli initiatives to improve the
Palestinian economy are positive steps forward, it
remains to be seen whether or not they will significantly
increase Palestinian civil authority, in line with Quartet
recommendations and prior commitments between
the parties.

In this symbolic month, it is time to turn the
challenges of the past into opportunities for the future.
As the Secretary-General recently stated,

"The occupation has shaped the lives of both
Palestinians and Israelis. It has fuelled recurring
cycles of violence and retribution. Its perpetuation
is sending an unmistakable message to generations
of Palestinians that their dream of statehood is
destined to remainjust that, a dream; and to Israelis
that their desire for peace, security and regional
recognition remains unattainable".

Every day that passes without peace is another day
we neglect our collective responsibility to advance a
meaningful strategy towards a negotiated two-State
solution that meets the national and historic aspirations
of both peoples. The United Nations will continue its
determined engagement with the parties and all key
stakeholders to achieve that objective.

