Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): It is with great pleasure that, on behalf of
the Republic of Equatorial Guinea, I take the floor
at this meeting on the presentation of the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2018/80) on the threats to
international peace and security caused by terrorist
acts. I would like to begin my statement by expressing
our deepest condolences to, and solidarity with, the
countries that have become victims ofterrorist acts and
all those who have lost loved ones as victims ofterrorist
attacks, among them our own country. We would like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Vladimir Voronkov,
Head of the United Nations Office of Counter-
Terrorism, for the substantive and strategic briefing he
has just delivered on strengthening coordination and
coherence in the efforts of the United Nations.

This is the first time that the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea is participating in this very important biannual
meeting. Like all the other Member States represented
in the Chamber, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
believes that the problem of terrorism is fundamental
and requires special attention. To that end, we recall
the Millennium Declaration, which emphasizes peace
and security for the peoples of the world, and in
particular notes the need to adopt effective measures
against international terrorism, given that criminal
acts driven by political reasons, designed or planned
to provoke a state of global terror over the population
in general, a group of people or particular persons, are
unjustifiable under all circumstances, whatever the
political, philosophical, ideological, racial, religious
or ethnic nature may be, or any other reason used to
justify them. The fight against terrorism therefore must
always remain a global priority.

It is very encouraging that there are both
international cooperation and military pressure
currently being applied in the context of several
groups of international terrorists, such as the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)/Da'esh, Al-Qaida,
the Taliban and other terrorist groups, such as Boko
Haram and Al-Shabab. Such collaboration and pressure
are reducing the expansion and ability of those
terrorist organizations to continue to conquer and
control territories.

Although according to the report that has just been
presented to us Da'esh still has the capacity to continue
perpetrating attacks internally in some of the countries
where it is present, the international community's effort
has managed to significantly limit its presence in urban
areas, its financial capacity, its ability to take over and
hold territorry, its mobility and its ability to recruit
and train new members. The new phase that the report
describes, which has been achieved through many
sacrifices that have ultimately increased the number
of strategic military setbacks for Da'esh in most of the
world's regions, presents another type of threat insofar
as Da'esh cells are becoming more autonomous.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea recognizes the
efforts of the Secretary-General and the United Nations
in reforming and strengthening the architecture of
the United Nations to tackle the serious threat of
terrorism. In that regard, the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea joins the call of the Secretary-General,
and of all the other Member States present in the
Chamber, for the implementation of Security Council
resolutions - including resolutions 1373 (2001), 1267
(1999), 2395 (2017) and 2396 (2017). In that regard,
we appreciate the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate in updating the
Technical Guide to the Implementation of Security
Council resolutions 1373 (2001), 1624 (2005), 2178
(2014) and other relevant Council resolutions and
decisions to bolster the efforts of Member States to
counter a broad range of terrorist threats.

The existence of new and innovative global
strategies and initiatives to combat terrorism,
together with the implementation of the resolutions
I mentioned, are the essential instruments to combat
terrorism from all possible angles - the financial
aspect; international cooperation in the area of law
enforcement; the prosecution, rehabilitation and
reintegration of foreign terrorist fighters returning
to their countries or relocating to third countries; the
prevention and eradication of the spread of violent
extremism in prisons and through digital technology;
and the protection of the human rights of all those
affected by terrorism, especially children, refugees,
migrants and asylum seekers.

Despite the various initiatives and the advances
made, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea remains quite
concerned about the chain of threats posed by terrorism
and other groups associated with it, since many Member
States and subregions lack the tools to face those threats,
namely, a system of biometric data - fingerprints,
photographs and facial recognition technology, as well
as other means or relevant instruments for gathering
such information. That creates blind spots in areas such
as protecting porous marine and terrestrial borders in
many regions, such as in Central Africa. As called for in
the report, it is extremely crucial to prevent contact and/
or collaboration among the various existing terrorist
groups. For that reason, collaboration, cooperation,
training and the transfer of advanced technology are
critical to effectively fight terrorists.

Another significant threat to national and
international peace and security is the return of foreign
fighters to their countries of origin, which could have
very serious consequences, such as the organization and/
or reorganization of terrorist cells or the radicalization
of vulnerable people and those susceptible to terrorist
propaganda. Preventing the movement of foreign
fighters is both essential and very difficult. As the
report also notes, in some Member States judicial
institutions do not laws available to prosecute their
nationals who had once travelled abroad to fight for
Da'esh or some other terrorist group, or they are unable
to prosecute due to a lack of evidence and collaboration
among different sectors. In that regard, we encourage
Member States to support relevant efforts to ensure
the implementation of the plan for capacity-building
for countering the flow of foreign terrorist fighters, in
accordance with resolution 2396 (2017).
Terrorism does not recognize borders nor
nationalities, nor does it distinguish between religions,
the rich or the poor. The fight against terrorism
therefore requires greater cooperation. Only through
a collective and shared effort and commitment among
Member States, in collaboration with public-private
alliances, non-governmental organizations and other
groups, can we sustain the progress made against
terrorism, including against groups such as Da'esh and
their ilk, and arrive at lasting solutions.

The African continent is being bled dry at the
hands of the crimes committed by terrorist groups,
such as Boko Haram in north-east Nigeria, which is
also affecting its neighbouring countries of the Niger,
Chad and Cameroon - also neighbouring countries of
Equatorial Guinea. There is also the case ofAl-Shabaab
in the East of the continent. Countries such as Mali
are falling victim to groups supported by Al-Qaida in
the Islamic Maghreb. All those phenomenoa lead to
enormous damage and serious challenges to the life
and economies of the countries most directly affected
and, to a lesser extent, to their neighbours, and, by
extension, to all of Africa.

Because terrorism results in internally displaced
persons, damage to infrastructure and the tourism
sector and harm that is difficult to quantify with
accuracy, combating it is vital to our survival as States.
As the Council knows, there was a recent attempted
terrorist attack in our country, whose aim was to
violate and undermine its independence and stability
and destroy its legitimate institutions. Fortunately,
it was quickly neutralized by our national security
forces, with the cooperation and support of the sisterly
Republic of Cameroon. That example demonstrates
that cooperation is necessary and beneficial in the area
of security and in the fight against terrorism.

In recent years, Equatorial Guinea has meaningfully
participated in multilateral counter-terrorism
mechanisms, including through the United Nations and
the Economic Community of Central African States
and the Economic Community of West African States
joint mechanism. Equatorial Guinea stands ready to
continue to participate in and promote multilateral and
bilateral cooperation in the fight against terrorism and
to improve sharing of counter-terrorism information.
A good example is Operation Obangame in the Gulf
of Guinea, in which various States of the subregion,
including Equatorial Guinea, fight to prevent piracy,
which could be used by terrorists or potential terrorists.
Equatorial Guinea is willing to work with all countries
to provide a collective response to the threat of terrorism
and violent extremism and to maintain international
peace and stability.

Nonetheless, the situation requires more in-depth
reflection. There is an increasing number of conflicts
and victims. To ease the situation, the Security Council
must continue to work with the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union, redouble its efforts to
adopt policies that promote conflict-prevention and
use all the instruments, mechanisms and methods
established by the two organizations.

