Mr. Hyseni: I asked to make a second
intervention because I deem it necessary to react to
some of the points made by President Tadic.
Listening to Mr. Tadie, one gets the impression
that the Republic of Serbia is the sole victim of all the
wars and horrible tragedies caused throughout the
former Yugoslavia by the regime of the Republic of
Serbia. Listening to Mr. Tadic', one gets the impression
that 10,000 Croats have not been slaughtered and that
200,000 Bosnians have not been slaughtered. One gets
the impression that close to 15,000 Kosovar Albanians
have not been slaughtered and that close to 1 million
Kosovar Albanians have not been deported to
Macedonia, Albania or Montenegro. Listening to
President Tadie, one gets the impression that everyone
is to blame except the Serbian State, the Serbian
regime.

I will start by once again condemning, on behalf
of the Republic of Kosovo, the events of 17 March
2004. I invite the Council's attention to the statement
made by the Government of the Republic of Kosovo on
17 March this year.

Hundreds of mosques and churches were
destroyed during the wars in the former Yugoslavia. In
times of conflict, religious sites very often become
either deliberate targets or targets of indiscriminate
fire. And there is no justification for any action on the
part of anyone against sacred objects or religious sites.

However, Mr. Tadie failed to take stock or to
present an account of how many mosques have been
destroyed and how many Albanian Catholic churches
have been destroyed. He failed to state how many
casualties have been caused. I would just remind the
Council of a number of key events that preceded,
triggered, prompted the NATO intervention: the
massacre of the Yashari family, the Racak massacre
and the widespread repression of the civilian Albanian
population throughout Kosovo. Hundreds of thousands
of Albanians who had socially owned jobs with
socially owned enterprises were forced out of their
jobs. All Albanian students were forced out of their
schools. President Tadie came up with the figure of
200,000 Serbs forced out of Kosovo. According to the
population censuses conducted by the Serbian regime,
at the most, there were only ever 197,000 Serbs living
in Kosovo. We still have over 130,000 Serbs living in
Kosovo.

I say this with reluctance, but to say that all
Albanians are still living in Kosovo but Serbs are not
begs the simple question: Are the 12,000 to 15,000
Albanians who were killed during the war really still
living in Kosovo? What about the 2,000 missing
Kosovar Albanians? Why is the Government of Serbia
not offering information to the panellists? At least
100,000 Kosovar Albanians are directly affected. Why
do they have no idea of the whereabouts of their loved
ones?

Justice is independent in Kosovo. The new
Kosovo, the Republic of Kosovo, is committed firmly
to preserving, protecting and honouring the
independence of our justice system. It is entirely up to
the courts, be it our national courts or the international
courts, to decide who will be convicted or not
convicted. I am not a judge and I am not going to
convict anyone a priori.

Kosovo is going through an important,
challenging period in many ways. Its economy is one
of the key challenges, and we are striving very hard to
build our market-oriented economy on the basis of the
highest standards known in the world.

Again, reference was made to some sort of mafia
in Kosovo. I wish to tell this Council that not
everybody in Kosovo is an angel, on any side, but the
very core of organized crime, of smuggling of all sorts,
and trafficking of all sorts is in the North because of
the lawlessness there and the support of the Serbian
authorities to those parallel structures.

Being very cognizant of the value of the
Council's time, I will wrap up by pointing out very
clearly once again that we remain ready to work with
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo,
the International Civilian Office and the international
community in general to advance Kosovo's prospects
for the future.

We also remain very open to talking to Serbia on
many issues of common interest. We have many issues
to discuss together, to resolve and to work on together
for the benefit of regional peace and safety and for the
benefit of our joint European perspective.

It is very easy to refer to the past, and as long as
we do so with the intention of learning lessons for
building a better future, it is worth it. But we in
Kosovo are committed to putting the past behind us
and working for the benefit of the future. We are not
going to forget the many casualties. We are not going
to forget what we have been through. My family and I,
like every other family in Kosovo, have lived through
the horrors of war, suppression, oppression and crimes
by the military, paramilitary and police forces of the
Republic of Serbia. It was a State-planned and State-
sponsored crime - a crime against humanity carried
out by the State.
