Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran ): Allow
me at the beginning to join previous speakers to
convey our condolences and sympathy to the

delegation of China for the tragic earthquake that
occurred today in its country.

At the outset, I wish to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your presidency and for having
convened this open debate at this critical juncture. The
issue under discussion is of paramount importance, and
this meeting is all the more important because it is
being held at a time when the fate of the Palestinian
people is at stake due to different ineffectual peace
proposals and the continuation of the most heinous
brutalities against that people, particularly in Gaza and
East Jerusalem. Although more than a year has passed
since the end of the brutal attack on Gaza,
reconstruction of the destroyed and damaged areas,
buildings and infrastructure remains nearly impossible
due to the Israeli regime's continuing blockade. Relief
agencies in Gaza continue to work in a very harsh
environment to help those in desperate need, in
particular the children, women and other vulnerable
people in the region.

The problem of the Middle East is not a lack of
peace plans, but rather the lack of a correct
understanding and reading of the root cause of the
crisis. As we have mentioned repeatedly, the
fundamental problem of this long-standing crisis is the
illegitimate occupation of Palestinian and other Arab
territories and the Israeli regime's intransigence with
respect to every single principle of international law.
Furthermore, persistent attempts to introduce external
elements as the main factors hindering the so-called
peace process and the preservation of stability in the
region, with a view to diverting attention from the root
cause of the crisis and to evading its crimes and
responsibilities, have been an integral part of the Israeli
regime's policies since its unblessed birth.

Israeli officials, in line with this policy, instead of
answering to world public opinion of their unparalleled
record of non-compliance with all humanitarian and
human rights principles and their long and dark
catalogue of crimes and atrocities - including
occupation, aggression, militarism, State terrorism, and
crimes against humanity - have always embarked on
making inflammatory remarks and baseless allegations
against other countries. It is now widely recognized
that the Israeli regime's clandestine development and
unlawful possession of between 100 to 300 nuclear
warheads, and its constant threats to use them against
certain countries, pose a uniquely grave threat to
regional and international peace and security.

The blatant support of certain Powers for the
Israeli regime is one of the bitterest realities of our
world today. By blocking any action against the
inhumane policies and acts of this regime in each and
every corner of the world, its supporters have given it a
blank check to freehandedly violate, in an atmosphere
of impunity, all internationally recognized rights of the
Palestinian people and other peoples of the region.

Turning to the issue of Palestine, it is regrettable
to witness that the inaction of relevant United Nations
organs in dealing with the Israeli regime's illegal
policies and practices has emboldened that dangerous
regime to continue its crimes against the defenceless
Palestinian people. The systematic acquisition of
Palestinian lands through unlawful policies and
practices, the killing and injury of hundreds of
Palestinians, and causing an unprecedented
humanitarian crisis in Palestine are part and parcel of
the normal activities of this brutal regime.

Persistent assaults against the Islamic and
Christian holy places in Jerusalem; the continued
construction of the separation wall and excavation
work in and around the Holy Mosque; the revocation of
Palestinian residency rights in the city; the forced
eviction of Palestinian families from the city; and the
imposition of severe restrictions on movement are but
some of the illegal acts carried out by the Israeli
regime in the West Bank.

Despite strong international condemnation, illegal
settlements are being expanded much faster than they
were in the past, and more and more Palestinian houses
are being demolished. The illegal decision of the said
regime to build new housing units is a move that is
undoubtedly geared at altering the demographic
composition and architectural, cultural and religious
character of the Palestinian territories, particularly in
Jerusalem and its surrounding areas.

There is an urgent need to put an end to these
acts. There should be no room for criminals who are
motivated to commit atrocities. This Council should
live up to its responsibilities in supporting the
Palestinians and relieving them of their long suffering
under occupation.

With regard to the follow-up to the Goldstone
report (A/HRC/ 12/48), we particularly hope that,
within the coming months as United Nations bodies
review the report again, those members of the Security
Council who rock-solidly and unwaveringly support
the Israeli regime in total disregard of the norms and
principles of international human rights and
international humanitarian law will adjust their
positions to the growing international demand for
justice and the prosecution of the Gaza war criminals.

The Israeli regime has persisted in its aggressive
and expansionist policies towards Lebanon by
constantly violating Lebanon's land, sea and air space
and by refusing to withdraw from occupied Lebanese
land in the Sheba'a, the Kfar Shouba hills and the
northern part of Al-Ghajar village. It is also continuing
its occupation of the Syrian Golan. That regime should
immediately and fully withdraw from those occupied
territories in compliance with the basic principles of
international law and the United Nations Charter.

Before concluding, I would like to react to the
reference made about my country by the representative
of the Israeli regime this morning. I would like to put it
on record that my delegation rejects the baseless
allegations and distortions she expressed. This is yet
another tired practice by that regime to distract the
attention of the international community from its
nuclear arsenal, as well as its criminal policies and
abhorrent atrocities in the region, including its recent
heinous crimes against the people of Palestine and
Lebanon.

Attaining a peaceful and just settlement of the
question of Palestine is imperative for the realization
of a comprehensive and lasting peace and stability in
the Middle East and beyond. In our view, a lasting
peace in Palestine and the region is possible through
justice, an end to discrimination and an end to the
occupation of Palestine and other occupied territories.
Today, we need to act collectively to demonstrate our
wholehearted support for the cause of Palestine and
rally to assist those who have been deprived of their
rights. Let us hope that the oppression and occupation
will end and justice and freedom will prevail in the
occupied Palestinian territory.

