Ms. Goolab (South Africa): I would like to thank
Ms. Ursula Mueller for her briefing to the Security
Council this morning, and join others in welcoming
Deputy Foreign Minister Vershinin of the Russian
Federation to the Council Chamber.

South Africa remains deeply concerned about
the humanitarian situation in Syria. We appeal to all
parties to cease bombings of infrastructure in Idlib and
elsewhere in the country and ensure that the civilians
in those areas are not used by non-State actors as
human shields.

As we have previously stated, South Africa is
concerned that a number of aid agencies have suspended
their operations in the north-west of the country owing
to the increase in violence. The large numbers ofpeople
fleeing the area are adding to the already overburdened
humanitarian response. In that regard, we call on all
parties to cease hostilities. We hope that they are able
to take the necessary actions to allow for agencies to
resume their important work. Additionally, we urge
all parties to fully engage in the political processes
currently under way, as the situation in Syria cannot be
solved through military means.

South Africa urges all parties to respect their
obligations under international humanitarian law and
international human rights law for the protection of
civilians and civilian infrastructure. It is also important
that the signatories of the September 2018 ceasefire
memorandum adhere to its provisions. Attacks
on education and health facilities are particularly
disturbing, as they significantly impact the lives of
the most vulnerable sectors of society, namely, women
and children.

While we acknowledge the threat and violence
committed by terrorist organizations, it is also necessary
to state that actions taken to counter terrorism activities
cannot be undertaken at the expense of innocent civilian
lives, and any such action should be taken only within
the parameters of international law. The situation and
conditions in Al-Hol camp, in north-east Syria, is
particularly distressing. The camp has expanded from a
population of 10,000 in December 2018 to over 73,000
currently, of whom approximately 50,000 are children.
All possible efforts must be made to assist all those
who wish to return home, be they Syrian, Iraqi or third-
party nationals.

Turning to Rukban, South Africa welcomes the
reports of increasing numbers of people leaving the
camp, aided by the Syrian Government with the
oversight of United Nations agencies and based on
the principles of voluntary, safe, dignified and well-
informed returns. However, my delegation also notes
that so long as people remain in Rukban there is a
need for humanitarian and medical assistance, which
is quickly diminishing. We reiterate our call for the
necessary approvals to allow additional and essential
humanitarian assistance to be delivered to Rukban.

It is important to note that presence of any foreign
military forces operating in the country without the
permission of the Government of Syria undermines and
violates Syria's sovereignty and territorial integrity.
We urge all States Members of the United Nations
to identify their nationals through relevant United
Nations agencies and repatriate them to their countries
of origins and utilize their domestic law to deal with
such individuals.

In conclusion, South Africa is deeply concerned
by the reports of the spread of Islamic State affiliates
from Syria onto the African continent as the group
seeks new areas of operation and recruitment following
its territorial defeat in Syria. All possible action must
be taken to ensure that those individuals are detained
before they are able to incite further violence and terror.

