Mr. Fedotov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): The Russian delegation notes with satisfaction the
current positive developments in the situation in Liberia,
which once again are reviving the once-dashed hopes of the
world community that the many years of devastating
conflict in that country might soon be brought to an end.

A key role in these developments has been played by
the Summit of the member States of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) in Abuja,
which has made possible the renewal of the peace process,
the culmination of which must be the holding of free and
fair elections by the end of May 1997.

We recognize the complexity of the implementation of
these tasks, especially since in the past Liberian parties
have repeatedly violated the agreements they themselves
had signed. We hope that this time that will not happen,
since the member States of ECOWAS, judging by the
decisions they took in Abuja, are firmly determined to
achieve strict implementation of the settlement plan.

We would also like especially to highlight those
measures designed to enhance the vitality of the
ECOWAS Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) as a genuine
peace-keeping force: the establishment of a monitoring
mechanism for the implementation of the agreement; the
threat of harsh sanctions against the leaders of any faction
that might presume to violate the rules of the game
established in Abuja; the decision not to recognize any
Government that might attempt to come to power by the
use of force; and the desire to ensure full compliance with
the arms embargo on Liberia.

It is exceedingly important that the member States of
ECOWAS show the necessary determination and
consistency in implementing this policy, clearly
coordinating their activities. It is also necessary to have
proper cooperation between ECOMOG and the United
Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL) in
carrying out their respective mandates; there lies the key
to the success of the peace process.

Noting the substantial objective difficulties to the
implementation of the Abuja Agreement, we believe it
important that the efforts of the regional peace-keepers be
supported by the necessary additional resources. At the
same time, we are firmly convinced that responsibility for
the establishment of peace in Liberia lies ultimately with
Liberians themselves and with their leaders. We expect
that they will make use of this last chance offered them
for the speedy realization of the peace plan in all its
aspects; otherwise, as is emphasized in the report
(S/1996/684) of the Secretary-General, the international
community will have no option but to leave Liberia.

The Russian delegation is prepared to support the
draft resolution before the Council, giving a green light to
the extension the mandate of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Liberia until 30 November 1996, and we note
with satisfaction that this draft resolution clearly directs
the Liberian parties to comply scrupulously with the
commitments they have entered into and provides strong
political impetus in support of the efforts to make
progress in the peace process and in national
reconciliation in Liberia.

