Mr. Caballeros (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank the United Kingdom for having organized
this meeting and we appreciate your gesture,
Mr. President, in presiding over it. We are also grateful
to the Secretary-General for his presentation to us.

I must say that the theme chosen for our debate
today, while captivating, poses a great challenge.

Unlike other very specific topics that we have
discussed in the past and that give rise to more or less
definite reactions, on this occasion the United
Kingdom has proposed to us a more general topic that
runs the risk of diluting any message that we would
wish to convey.

It would be presumptuous on our part to offer
interpretations on the significance of what has come to
be called the Arab Spring, whose model vision, which
captured the world's attention, took place in Cairo's
Tahrir Square in January 2011. The people's
extraordinary courage, their calmness, their solidarity,
the persistence of their demands and their peaceful
nature, in particular, were a source of inspiration for all
humankind. While taking note of the huge difference
between those singular events compared to the
transitions that occurred in my own region between
1980 and 1990, from authoritarian regimes to
democratically elected civilian Governments, I would
like to respond to the challenge that you have posed to
us, Mr. President, with a brief comment on lessons
learned from our own experiences that may contribute
some tangible inputs to today's debate. With a certain
modesty and aware of the great historical, cultural,
religious and political differences existing between our
respective regions, even within them, I draw on the
changes in my own country to mention seven points.

First, each case in Latin America was unique, and
certainly each situation in the Middle East will also be
so. For example, in my own country, we faced the need
to adopt a project for a multi-ethnic, pluricultural and
multilingual nation, responding to the specific realities
of Guatemala, which are not necessarily the same as
those of other countries in Latin America. That is why,
although it sounds trite to say that there are no
universally valid formulas for transitions, while
democratic values are similar everywhere, their
concrete expression in terms of internal organization,
juridical and institutional arrangements and forms of
popular participation can vary greatly from one
situation to another.

Secondly, cultural values matter, in particular in
multi-ethnic societies that seek to build a nation where
mutual respect and tolerance prevail. Such cultural
values must be compatible with democratic societies
and commitments to economic and social development.
By way of example, it is important that everyone,
regardless of their gender, ethnicity, local affiliation,
race or creed, has access to the same opportunities. I

am pleased to affirm that such values have been
established and strengthened in our region, and trust
that the same will happen in the countries that are the
subject of our debate.

Thirdly, progress is clearly not linear. It is not
easy to build plural and participatory systems of
governance where there is no fully established
democratic culture. It requires the strengthening, and
sometimes the creation, of institutions in various areas,
including a firm constitutional and legal basis, the
development of representative political parties and the
guarantee of freedom of expression. The agenda is
complex. It involves vested interests, often gives rise
to unforeseen consequences and from time to time
requires changes of direction. What is important is to
persevere and trust that age-old cultures that have
contributed so much to the civilized world will find the
strength, creativity and leadership to bring their
democratization to fruition.

That brings me to my fourth point.
Democratization processes must respond to the
aspirations, and have the consent of, the peoples and
national societies concerned. They must be the product
of a sense of ownership akin to national consensus, not
something imposed from outside. Achieving a model
with which the citizenship feels comfortable often
involves long periods of trial and adjustment, which
only confirms my previous points that we are dealing
with long-term processes. Those processes only
respond to the wishes of their own citizens. Also,
representative democracy requires that citizens have
confidence in the Governments that they elect.

Fifthly, today it is fashionable in the United
Nations to talk about the rule of law - a topic that did
not figure as prominently on our agenda a few years
ago. From the perspective of my own country, I would
like to affirm the crucial importance of having solid
institutions that combat impunity and lack of
transparency in the management of public finances
and, in general, the administration of justice. We
foresaw that in our peace accords, but state it more
directly in addressing the threat posed to the rule of
law in our country by the appearance of transnational
criminal cartels. Combating that scourge requires
strengthening our capacity in criminal prosecution, our
judicial system, our civil police and even our prison
system. The same will certainly be true for the
democratization processes under way in the Middle
East.

Sixthly, in the case of Latin America, in general,
and Central America, in particular, the transition to
democracy was accompanied by a strong boost to
interregional cooperation. The emergence of
Governments with shared values facilitated agreements
and fostered regionalism. In our case, cooperating to
resolve common problems and promoting mutual
support strengthened democracy in each country and
contributed to its joint defence. We believe that that
phenomenon of cooperation is relevant to the countries
that are the subject of our debate today, which is
already taking shape in the increasing role played by
the League of Arab States.

Lastly, let us not forget the imperative of
promoting economic and social development. It is true
that people seek freedom and dignity, but they also
demand greater well-being, in particular in societies
marked by high levels of inequality. It is interesting to
note that, in accordance with the main source of public
opinion polling in our region, Latinobarometro, there is
a close correlation between economic performance and
the level of satisfaction with democracy. Seemingly,
the population not only aspires but also demands that
more plural and representative Governments generate
tangible benefits for the citizens. When that does not
happen, the rate of satisfaction with democratic
institutions falls dramatically.

The so-called Arab Spring evokes feelings that
are, overall, of a positive nature. That is why I have
concentrated more on the opportunities than on the
challenges in my statement. That is also why I have
deliberately avoided touching on other topics that some
would consider obligatory when discussing the Middle
East, such as the imperative of ending the conflict
between Israel and Palestine or the situation in Syria,
since we have addressed those matters in other
meetings of the Council.

