Mr. Suescum (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
Panama regrets that we have had once again to face the
decision to impose sanctions on Iran. As we stated
during prior negotiations, we hold that the imposition
of coercive measures reflects a failure of diplomacy on
this issue. I stress that this is a failure by all parties, not
only those of us seeking clarity about the nature of the
Iranian nuclear programme with a View to making
substantive progress towards the resolution of this
disturbing situation.

Our decision to vote in favour of today's
resolution was based on the following reasoning. Iran
has been a State party to the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) since 1970,
and as such it must adhere to restrictions on the
production, development and proliferation of nuclear
weapons. Panama recognizes that, under the NPT, Iran
has the right to develop atomic energy for peaceful
purposes and to carry out processes that are
indispensable to that end, such as uranium enrichment.
But the exercise of that right involves equally
important obligations, in particular open and
transparent inspections by the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) of activities and processes
linked to the peaceful use of atomic energy.

In that connection, it is timely to echo the words
of the most recent report of the IAEA:

"With regard to its current programme, Iran
needs to continue to build confidence about its
scope and nature. Confidence in the exclusively
peaceful nature of Iran's nuclear programme
requires that the Agency be able to provide
assurances not only regarding declared nuclear
material, but, equally importantly, regarding the
absence of undeclared nuclear material and
activities in Iran".

The report goes on to say that

"Although Iran has provided some additional
detailed information about its current activities on
an ad hoc basis, the Agency will not be in a
position to make progress towards providing
credible assurances about the absence of
undeclared nuclear material and activities in Iran
before reaching some clarity about the nature of
the alleged [green salt] studies, and without
implementation of the Additional Protocol".

In short, as the report notes, "the Agency is not yet in a
position to determine the full nature of Iran's nuclear
programme".

Despite the noteworthy and commendable
progress in the process, Panama believes that until we
have comprehensive clarity about the present scope of
its nuclear programme, Iran will not have fully met its
obligations.

In conclusion, the Security Council unanimously
required Iran to suspend its activities related to
uranium enrichment. The IAEA report acknowledges
that, "Contrary to the decisions of the Security
Council, Iran has not suspended its enrichment related
activities". The report goes on to enumerate the
activities now being carried out by Iran in
contravention of what has been stipulated.

Iran has not complied and continues to be in
non-compliance with the mandate of the Security
Council, thereby flouting the obligations that the
Charter of the United Nations imposes on each and
every Member State. It does not help Iran to say, as it
did today, that it suspended the activities that it agreed
to suspend. As stated in the report from which I have
quoted today, Iran has not suspended the activities that
it must suspend in fulfilment of its obligations under
the Charter.

For the foregoing reasons, Panama decided to
vote in favour of the draft resolution that was before us
today. Nevertheless, we hope that this worrisome
situation will be resolved soon. Nothing could make us
happier than to avoid having Iran face the difficult
consequences flowing from sanctions, thus sparing the
rest of the world the unfortunate task of imposing new
coercive measures.

