Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Let me begin by thanking
the Kazakh presidency for convening this open debate.

As we mark a new year, the global peace and
security landscape remains plagued by mounting and
complex challenges; conflicts have intensified and
new dangers have emerged. In fundamental ways, the
world has gone into reverse. Nowhere is this fraught
and volatile situation more apparent than in the Middle
East. The two-State solution is in peril. The plight of
the Palestinian people is being betrayed at the altar
of narrow and myopic political interests and the quest
for peace and stability in the region is becoming more
elusive than ever.

This morning, we have witnessed an unfortunate
but glaring flight from reality, with some speakers
trying to deflect attention away from the tragedy of
the Palestinian people. We know why, and such actions
are unsurprising. Occupiers have no case to make other
than to create and present alternative facts.

The recent decision of certain countries to relocate
their embassies to Jerusalem has further inflamed
the situation. That decision has been justified as an
expression of their sovereign right. That is a false
determination. The legal status of Jerusalem is
unambiguous. Several Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions affirm that all legislative and
administrative measures taken by the occupying Power
to alter the character and status of Jerusalem are null
and void. In fact, resolution 478 (1980) calls on States
that have established their diplomatic missions in
Jerusalem to withdraw them from the Holy City. Any
action to the contrary is therefore not only a manifest
violation of that resolution, but also a blatant attempt to
legitimize Israel's illegal occupation of East Jerusalem.

When principles are trumped by self-serving
interests, rationality and reason are invariably
supplanted by threat and intimidation. We have
witnessed that unfortunate spectacle with disturbing
frequency in recent days, including at the United
Nations. Yet, despite those provocations, members
of the international community have stood firm and
unfazed in their support for the Palestinian people.
My country, Pakistan, will continue to support the
legitimate aspirations of the Palestinians and of people
living under foreign occupation elsewhere, for example
in Kashmir.

The Middle East can seek the dividend ofpeace only
ifit is built on the foundation ofjustice - an imperative
that entails a viable, independent and contiguous State
of Palestine on the basis of internationally agreed
parameters and the pre-1967 borders and with Al-Quds
Al-Sharif as its capital.

Pakistan is also deeply concerned over the continued
financial constraints faced by the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA). The unfortunate situation has
been aggravated by the unilateral decision of a major
donor to withhold more than half of its funding to the
agency. The international community must not fail
the Palestinian refugees. We must act now to ensure
sufficient, predictable and sustainable financing for
UNRWA in order for it to continue its activities, which
are indeed a lifeline for Palestinian refugees.

As we all know, peace in the Middle East is
essential to global peace and security. Yet, the region
continues to be caught in a vortex of conflict, turmoil
and intense rivalry among regional Powers. The
cumulative consequence of that is plunging the Middle
East into chaos and further disorder. In Yemen, a surge
in diplomacy is essential to kick-start an inclusive
political process. The prompt replacement of the
outgoing Special Representative will be critical. That
must be complemented by a massive humanitarian
surge to address the suffering of the people of Yemen,
including women and children. In Syria, the continued
engagement of all sides in genuine, representative and
direct intra-Syrian negotiations is the only way forward
towards finding a political settlement of the conflict.
We hope that the latest round of talks, which started in
Vienna today, will produce concrete results.

In conclusion, allow me to say that this organ
must live up to its responsibilities and ensure the
implementation of its own resolutions on Palestine and
other long-standing disputes, such as Kashmir, so that
the people of the world do not lose entire faith in the
United Nations.

