Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): I will be
brief, because many of my colleagues have already
said what I wanted to say. I align myself with the
statement to be made later by the Permanent

S/l'V.5457

 

Representative of Austria on behalf of the European
Union.

What happens in Timor-Leste affects us here in
the Council in a special way. We have therefore
followed the events of recent weeks with a great deal
of apprehension, as well as with sympathy. I would like
to ask the representative of Timor-Leste to convey that
message to his Prime Minister, Jose Ramos-Horta, in
response to the message that he conveyed to us today.

What immediate lessons can be learned from the
events of recent weeks, and what can we do? I would
like to draw three preliminary lessons.

First, the United Nations must not withdraw too
soon or prematurely from a situation in which it is
clearly playing a pivotal role. That is clear.

Secondly - to go a little further - when the
United Nations withdraws from such a situation, that
has consequences in terms of the balance among local
actors, as well as repercussions for the interest
manifested by international donors. Thus, a poorly
planned withdrawal is indeed a withdrawal that could
have negative repercussions on the ground and that
could discourage donors. I believe that all of us in the
Council are looking for an exit strategy; our work in
that regard should include an analysis of the impact of
our withdrawal.

The third lesson that I think we should bear in
mind is one that could do much to bring about a
departure from our normal practices. We note that, in
the case of Timor-Leste, we possessed no in-depth
analysis of the country's political problems. Here, I
thank Mr. Ian Martin for his briefing; I was unable to
be here to listen to it, but I read the text very carefully.
It shows the extent to which we underestimated the
political rifts in Timor-Leste society. Those rifts
became apparent in a particular situation related to the
police and the armed forces. This gives us food for
thought. Aristotle observed that man was a political
animal, and we should not think that we can solve
political problems by increasing humanitarian and
development assistance and by providing security from
outside the country. We must tackle the political
problems.

What, then, are we to do? It is now clear that the
United Nations will be re-engaging in Timor-Leste, and
we are all determined to do so. As to the modalities,
everyone understands that we must take some time to

reflect in order to formulate them. That time for
reflection will actually be a period of intensive action:
we expect, in particular, that the Secretariat will
continue the assessment that Ian Martin began and,
above all, will pursue its contacts with all the
authorities concerned. The Secretariat should propose
to the Council one or several options that have been
carefully tested vis-a-vis our Timorese partners.

My next comment relates to the message we must
send at this stage of the crisis. There has been a great
deal of talk about the success of the United Nations in
Timor-Leste; I myself always had doubts about this,
because the time period had been quite short and it was
therefore premature to speak of success. Let us recall
Zhou Enlai's comment about the impact of the French
revolution: "It is too soon to say". That is all the more
true of a country that is only four years old. Hence, it
was too soon to speak of a success. But let me add that
it is far, far too soon to speak of a failure.

The message we must send to the entire world is
that it was not abnormal for a newly independent
Timor-Leste to encounter difficulties; that is in the
natural order of things. The important thing is for
Timor-Leste to show a determination to take the
measures necessary to return to the path of progress
and State-building. Also important, as the Secretary-
General and Ian Martin have both said, is that the
international community be mobilized as manifested in
the immediate action by the four countries that have
provided forces, and that the United Nations remain
mobilized and remain by the side of Timor-Leste. The
Organization must be entirely determined to do its
share to help Timor-Leste.

