Mr. Ajumogobia (Nigeria): I wish to commend
His Excellency Mr. Eriya Kategaya, Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister of East African Community
Affairs of Uganda, and the Ugandan delegation for
convening this important debate to assess the support
to African Union (AU) peacekeeping operations.

Let me also express my appreciation to the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for his
leadership and commitment to peace and security in
Africa, in particular, and for his presence here for this
debate and his insightful remarks. I am also grateful for
the illuminating AU perspective so ably presented by
the Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union.

This debate benefits from the contents of
resolution 1809 (2008), the landmark Prodi report of
2008 (S/2008/813), and the Secretary-General's reports
S/2009/470 of 18 September 2009 and S/2010/514 of
14 October 2010. While the validity of the findings of
these reports is undeniable, what remains lacking is the
will to act resolutely to address the complex challenges
we face in Africa. I hope that today's debate will lay a
strong foundation for the set of actions required to
substantially enhance the peacekeeping capacity of the
African Union and contribute to the observance of the
Year of Peace and Security declared by the African
Union.

Conflicts in Africa bear the hallmarks of the
emerging threats to international peace and security.
Their root causes are, however, multifaceted, and we
must therefore recognize the need for a comprehensive
approach to resolving them. Above all, our response
must be situated within the rubric of the quest for
collective security, responsibility for which does not
rest on any one country or region, but on the
international community acting in concert.

Going forward, we must have a shared strategic
vision of our goals, recalling that peacekeeping in
Africa is an integral part of the maintenance of
international peace and security, for which the Security
Council has primary responsibility. When the African
Union undertakes a peacekeeping operation authorized
by the United Nations, it fulfils a dual responsibility to
the people of Africa and humankind at large,
represented by the ideals of the United Nations.

Nigeria's experience in Sierra Leone and Liberia
has taught us myriad of lessons on the challenges of
regional peacekeeping. I would subsume them into
three core areas of financing, equipping and mission
support arrangements.

Let me illustrate the quandary the African Union
all too often finds itself. I need not remind Council
members that Africa constitutes 70 per cent of the
matters on our agenda. Invariably, these matters are
also on the agenda of the African Union, which is
frequently called upon to respond. Indeed, over time,
the AU and its regional economic communities have
demonstrated an increasing ability to initiate and lead
subregional peacekeeping operations, as Nigeria has
done in West Africa.

Yet, at best, the AU is but a part of our collective
security system facing multiple demands to deploy,
mediate or support post-conflict processes across a vast
continent. These demands placed on the AU far
outweigh its resources and capacities to effectively
respond. The consequences of this mismatch include
mission failure, increased instability, retarded
economic development and a reluctance among
potential partners to contribute to what is perceived to
be a failing system. If we are to do things differently,
we must use our political authority to ensure that,
where regional capacities exist, appropriate support
follows.

We appreciate the growing understanding of the
partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union, including their key organs and
institutions. Without a truly strategic partnership and
relationship, vision and clear guidance, our enormous
investments in conflict prevention, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding will continue to be short term and ad hoc.

As the Secretary-General has observed, the extent
to which the administrative bodies of the United
Nations and AU can fully realize a meaningful
strategic partnership depends on the clarity of guidance
and direction of legislative mandates. The burgeoning
partnership between the United Nations Secretariat and
the AU Commission crystallized in the establishment
on 25 September 2010 of the Joint Task Force on Peace
and Security - an excellent point of departure.

Furthermore, under Nigeria's presidency last July,
the Council reached agreement with the AU Peace and
Security Council on the format and modalities of the
annual consultative meetings of the two bodies. We
welcome the view of the Secretary-General that these
meetings will require preparatory and follow-up
mechanisms, using the Ad Hoc Working Group on
Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa.

Financing AU peacekeeping operations remains a
daunting challenge. But, as the Prodi panel report
reminded us, "financing options are not difficult to
identify" (see 8/2008/813). The problem persists
because we, the stakeholders, have failed to adopt the
far-reaching and creative alternatives required. Given
that the current financial frameworks for partnership in
peacekeeping are not conducive to building a
sustainable long-term strategy, it is imperative that the
Council endorse a financing option that guarantees the
predictability, sustainability and flexibility of funding
for AU peacekeeping operations mandated by the
United Nations.

The AU remains an organization in transition,
whose institutions are still building their capacities. In
that respect, we appreciate the knowledge-sharing and
information exchange envisaged in the Secretary-
General's report, in particular in relation to preventive
diplomacy efforts, such as mediation and early
warning. In Nigeria's view, a hybrid mission like the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) would benefit from a collaborative
field mission to enhance synergy in monitoring, the
assessment of results and response strategies. Through
such collaboration, the AU might also benefit from best
practices within the United Nations system in
reforming its processes and institutions.

Too frequently, AU member States are able to
muster sufficient troop numbers to address crisis
situations, only to then have a lack of equipment and
logistical support let them down. In this regard, we
should stress that the capacity development of
peacekeeping personnel, though essential, is not a
substitute for adequate equipment, logistics and
training. We are thus encouraged by the range of
initiatives under consideration, particularly the
prospect of giving the African Union access to the
United Nations Logistics Base capacities and the
United Nations strategic deployment stocks and of
making a surge capacity team of experts available to
the African Union at the initiation of a peace support
operation.

If we act on the recommendations put forward,
we would undoubtedly add substance to AU's mission
capabilities. We encourage the AU to continue with its
institutional reform process, as well as development of
a long-term capacity-building road map. We believe the
United Nations Secretariat can play a key role in
pulling this framework together in order to improve the
technical support to the African Union. There may also
be scope to support initiatives like the Nigerian Army
Peacekeeping Centre in Jaji, Kaduna, to enhance its
capacity to train and prepare AU troops for the planned
African Standby Force. Nigeria encourages the
Secretary-General to carefully analyse the scope for
and implications of these options.

We strongly urge the Secretary-General to
intensify his efforts to find sustainable funding to bring
the support package for the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) to the level of that of United
Nations peacekeeping operations. During the
mini-summit on Somalia last month, Nigerian
President Goodluck Jonathan reminded us it is only
when all parties commit to peace and take practical
steps to consolidate it that change will endure. The
security situation in Somalia, he added, will improve
dramatically if there is a strong, coordinated
international presence.

By acting together, we would demonstrate the
shared responsibility of the international community
for the maintenance of peace and security. But in the
final analysis, the African Union can only play an
effective role in response to crises if there is sufficient
political will and commitment of both its own member
States and the international community as a whole.

