Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): My delegation is very
pleased to see you, Sir, presiding over our debate here
today.

Let me begin by paying my profound respects to the
families of the victims of the bombings of the Pan Am
and UTA flights, who are still waiting for justice to be
done. We must not forget the reason why measures were
imposed on Libya by the Security Council nor their goal
of delivering justice to those directly affected by those
horrendous acts. The Council measures remain in force
because Libya has not yet complied with its obligations
under the relevant Council resolutions by submitting to
the appropriate jurisdiction the two individuals accused of
those crimes.

My delegation welcomes the fact that this problem
is being discussed here at this open debate of the Security
Council, permitting all United Nations Members to
express their views on the matter.

Portugal supported this initiative from the very
beginning. We believe that it is not only an effort to
enhance the transparency of the working methods of the
Council and its democratic exposure to the views of the
general membership of our Organization. More
importantly, we believe that it is also a way of
contributing to a better general understanding of the
matter under consideration. Furthermore, we also believe
that it is an appropriate manner of allowing Libya itself
to put forward its position before the Council as,
according to the Charter, it is entitled to do.

The crux of this question - which should not be
seen as a dispute between Libya, on the one hand, and the

 

United Kingdom and the United States of America, on the
other - lies in the fact that Tripoli has so far refused to
surrender the two Libyan citizens suspected of the bombing
of Pan Am flight 103 to a trial in a United Kingdom or a
United States court, as demanded by the relevant Security
Council resolutions. Therefore, this is a confrontation that
pits Libya against the Security Council.

We have considered all the arguments put forward by
the Libyan authorities and, in particular, we listened
attentively to the statement made here today by the
Secretary of the General People's Committee for Foreign
Liaison and International Cooperation of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya. In this respect, my delegation would like to
make the following remarks.

While we register and welcome the concern shown by
the Libyan authorities for the human rights of the two
suspects, we cannot accept the argument that a Scottish
court does not offer guarantees of impartiality and fair trial.
According to the conclusions of the report on the Scottish
judicial system submitted by the representatives of the
Secretary-General sent to Scotland, Mr. Dumbutshena and
Mr. Schermers,

"the accused would receive a fair trial under the
Scottish judicial system. Their rights would be
protected in accordance with international standards.
The presence of United Nations and other international
observers can be fully and easily accommodated."
[S/1997/991, p. 15]

We note that the British authorities have already indicated
that they will accept international observation of the trial.

Furthermore, we would like to point out that the
human rights of the suspects are doubly guaranteed in a
trial in Scotland, since a decision by a British court is
subject to the control of the European Court of Human
Rights in Strasbourg, under the European Convention on
Human Rights.

Based on the recent decisions of the International
Court of Justice, Libya claims that the Security Council
should suspend its own resolutions on this matter. We have
carefully studied the Court's decisions and have come to
the conclusion that these decisions change nothing on the
substance of the matter. They merely address preliminary,
procedural questions and do not decide on the merits of the
case. And, obviously, they do not question the validity of
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council. My
delegation thinks that the Council and the entire United
Nations membership cannot, evidently, accept these
claims by Libya.

We all know that sanctions are a means of pressure
to compel States to abide by international law and fulfil
their obligations, as required by Security Council
resolutions. But we also believe that these sanctions are
hurting everyone in Libya, both economically and
psychologically, and are not just targeted at those who are
responsible for Libya's refusal to comply with Security
Council demands.

The report of the fact-finding mission sent to Libya
by the Secretary-General, headed by Director-General
Petrovsky - and we thank the Secretary-General for this
initiative and Mr. Petrovsky and his team for the mission
they undertook - reflects the fact that the Libyan people
are being affected by the sanctions regime. But the report
also shows that the Libyan authorities are not making use
of the appropriate mechanisms established by the Council
and the sanctions Committee to address the consequences
of the sanctions, namely, those affecting vulnerable
groups or the health sector. Paragraphs 7 and 11 of the
report are very clear in this respect.

I take this opportunity to acknowledge the
determination of the sanctions Committee on Libya to
continue to pay special attention to all humanitarian issues
arising under the relevant Security Council resolutions
and to respond promptly to requests for humanitarian
exceptions within the scope of its authority. My
delegation will spare no effort to support the activities
and decisions of the Committee in this regard.

Portugal has noted the proposals put forward by the
Organization of African Unity and the League of Arab
States, which are certainly meant to be a constructive
political effort to find a compromise solution which will
delay justice no longer and will put an end to the
suffering of the Libyan people. But any compromise
solution must not, in our view, depart from the crucial
legal and political aspects enshrined in the relevant
Security Council resolutions. This is clearly what
international law demands. And Libya, like any other
United Nations Member, must comply with it.

Like others, we believe that, indeed, justice delayed
is justice denied - first of all, to the relatives of the
victims who have suffered the loss of their loved ones.
Justice delayed is justice denied also to the international
community, which is defending itself against terrorism
and upholding international law. Finally, justice delayed

 

is justice denied also to the innocent people of Libya, who
are enduring sanctions imposed on their country and are
thus kept as hostages to the will of those two individuals
accused of terrorism who refuse to surrender to trial.

The time has come for the United Nations, and the
Security Council in particular, to think of more efficient
ways to bring Libya into compliance. In this context,
Portugal believes that the Secretary-General' s assistance can
be of great value.

My delegation is aware of the positive statements and
steps undertaken by Libya regarding the repudiation of
terrorism in all its forms. We welcome the cooperation
which the Libyan Government has extended to the French
and British judicial authorities in this regard. These steps
should ultimately lead to the full cooperation that the
Council is seeking from Libya.

Portugal joins other voices here today that appeal to
the Libyan authorities to cooperate fully with the Council
and to fulfil their obligations promptly. This is the way to
render justice to the families of the victims; the way to
ensure a fair trial for the accused themselves; and also the
way to enable the Council to lift the sanctions affecting the
Libyan people.

