Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for his
briefing and also listened closely to the statement made
by Director Sirkin. China has been closely watching
the humanitarian developments in Syria and supports
the United Nations and all relevant parties in their
unremitting efforts to improve the situation in Syria.

The Syrian people yearn to see an end to the conflict
as soon as possible so that they can return to a country
of regained peace and order so as to rebuild their homes.
China would like to make the following observations.

First, there is a need to work together to seek
comprehensive and lasting solutions to the counter-
terrorism and humanitarian issues in north-western
Syria. Given the complex situation on the ground in
Idlib, the parties should engage in dialogue to reach
consensus. China supports Russia and Turkey in their
continued implementation of the memorandum of
understanding to realize de-confliction in Idlib. As
Idlib is experiencing rampant terrorist activity, the
international community should, in accordance with
the relevant Council resolutions and international law,
adopt a common standard in resolutely combating
terrorist groups. China supports the United Nations
and all relevant parties in continuing to scale up
humanitarian assistance to internally displaced persons
(IDPs) in north-western Syria.

Secondly, we must tackle in an adequate manner
the humanitarian issues confronting all parts of Syria,
especially IDP camps. Al-Hol and Rukban camps are
facing humanitarian challenges owing to complex
causes. The military hostilities in north-eastern Syria
have led to the displacement of civilians, especially
women and children, and made Al-Hol what it is
today. Given the complex composition of the camp's
population, it is important to devise a responsible,
tailored solution for the settlement of its inhabitants.
The vast majority of those living in Rukban camp
want to go home. The international community should
therefore, through coordinated actions, help them end
their displacement.

Thirdly, there is a need to support the Syrian
Government's social and economic reconstruction
efforts in parts of the country where the security
situation is relatively stable. The Syrian Government
has been actively clearing explosive remnants of war,
rebuilding infrastructure, restoring public services,
promoting development and improving lives. These
efforts deserve recognition. Economic sanctions
have dealt a heavy blow to the Syrian people and do
not help to improve the humanitarian situation across
Syria. Enabling more and more Syrians to emerge
from the shadow of war and lead peaceful, stable and
orderly lives should be the common objective of the
international community.

Humanitarian relief operations in Syria should
fully respect the country's sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity and should be carried
out in strict accordance with Council resolutions, the
United Nations Guiding Principles on the Right to
Humanitarian Assistance and the relevant provisions
of international law. In this process, communication
and coordination with the Syrian Government should
be strengthened. Committing to a political settlement
is a fundamental and realistic pathway to easing
humanitarian situation in Syria.

China supports the role of the United Nations as
the primary mediator in pushing the Syrian parties to
abide by the Syrian-led and Syrian-owned principle and
Council resolution 2254 (2015) and to seek a solution
that accommodates the concerns of all sides. China
takes note of the positive developments relating to
consultations among the parties concerned on the setup
of the constitutional committee. We look forward to the
briefing to be delivered by Special Envoy Pedersen to
Council members next month.

At the same time, we wish the next round of Astana
talks every success.

