Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): I
wish to congratulate you, Mr. President, for refocusing
the attention of the Council on this important issue and
for your concept paper, from which we can launch a
substantive discussion. I also want to thank the
Secretary-General for being with us today, and for his
overview and his continuing efforts to integrate
peacekeeping and peace-building.

Peace-building is a multifaceted challenge. In our
View, strengthening the rule of law in democratic
institutions and promoting human rights are vital to
effective peace-building. Peace-building measures can
also include food and medical assistance, the use of
civilian police, disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants, successful
repatriation of refugees and the reconstruction and
restoration of economic institutions and processes. All
of these elements are critical in moving a post-conflict
State towards lasting stability.

These needs can be met through a variety of
bilateral and multilateral means. For instance, the
United States supports the efforts ofthe United Nations
and those of all States and regional organizations to
foster sustainable stability around the globe. We are
actively engaged in and support preventive
measures - measures that identify causes of conflict
and address them before they evolve into Violence.
Development assistance remains an important part of
United States foreign policy, and we believe that the
United States role in peacekeeping operations, as well
as in post-conflict peace-building, is critical. We do all
of this in our daily diplomatic engagement worldwide
through a variety of mechanisms and in the application
ofthe full range of our assistance resources.

In addition, while it is certainly true that conflicts
have underlying structural causes, we must not forget
that their immediate causes are often individual
ambition and greed. Some of the most intractable
conflicts of recent years have taken place not in the
poorest countries but in places that are rich in
resources. Peace-building activities must therefore also
deal with political realities and attempt to address
them.

The movement of a post-conflict State towards
sustainable peace is not a linear progression. It is
inherently complex. Peace-building measures must be
taken even as peacekeeping mechanisms are put into
place. This is not to say, however, that it is the
responsibility of the Security Council to direct the
multiple United Nations agencies that must be involved
in peace-building. It is to say that the Security Council
must be aware when it formulates mandates that
peacekeeping without peace-building is a recipe for
potential waste. Indeed, in many cases, effective peace-
building must be created to ensure a viable exit
strategy for peacekeepers.

In the past, the Council has agreed that certain
peace-building measures fall within its purview.
Examples of this include disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration activities and the rebuilding of
indigenous police forces. These efforts have proved to
facilitate the effective implementation of peacekeeping
operations. We should explore similar measures
wherever and whenever appropriate.

In this connection, I note that during the Brahimi
debates the United States strongly supported increasing
the capacity of the United Nations to field effective
civilian police forces. Regardless of mission, United
Nations civil police assist local police agencies in
resuming as rapidly as possible full responsibility for
the law-and-order tasks performed by United Nations
peacekeepers. The Brahimi-proposed judicial unit
would also greatly assist in this regard. We do not
believe, though, that a Security Council mandate
should focus on reconstruction and development. This
is not the responsibility ofthe Security Council.

But we need to ask ourselves, "What is the role of
the Security Council in peace-building?" All elements
of the United Nations system need to work together,
and regional organizations, international financial
institutions, donor Governments and non-governmental
organizations all have roles. It is absolutely clear that
better coordination is certainly needed. That is why this
debate is critical. The Security Council should be clear
and should encourage, and even insist on, clarity on
this issue. Otherwise, the full potential of even the
best-conceived Security Council action will not be
realized.

We need to ask who should direct peace-building
initiatives. Should there be one lead agency or organ,
or more than one? What kinds of bridges need to be
constructed between the various departments of the
Secretariat and agencies of the wider United Nations
community? Finally, and as recommended in the
Brahimi report, where in the Secretariat do we place a
peace-building unit? In the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, the Department of Political
Affairs or the Office of the Secretary-General? We
need to make these decisions in order to put peace-
building on the right track right away.

In conclusion, we encourage all United Nations
agencies, as well as all Member States, to support the
Secretary-General's efforts to enhance the United
Nations peace-building activities and to strengthen
coordination. We support proposals for maximum
consultation and exchange of information so that in all
instances this Council and all the other actors involved
have the best possible understanding of the situation on
the ground, of the steps all actors are taking in their
own competence and of the relationship of all those
steps to an overall strategy for creating and building
long-term peace and security.

