Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
should like to thank Nigeria for its initiative to hold
this briefing on post-conflict peacebuilding. We also
welcome the statements made by Assistant Secretary-
General Cheng-Hopkins and Ambassador Lucas.

Post-conflict peacebuilding is a major task of the
United Nations that has significant bearing not only on
ensuring lasting peace and sustainable development in
the countries concerned but also on strengthening the
existing collective security system and promoting
common development. In the past decade or so, while
the United Nations has achieved remarkable results in
post-conflict peacebuilding and has accumulated a
wealth of experience, it has also encountered numerous
challenges.

I should like to focus on four specific points.

First, post-conflict peacebuilding should be
carried out on the basis of full respect for the
sovereignty of the countries concerned. Countries in
post-conflict situations bear primary responsibility for
peacebuilding on their own territory. In helping
countries to build peace, the international community
should respect their aspirations and try to help them
strengthen national capacity-building so as to enhance

the level of governance. In doing so, integrated,
coordinated and targeted working methods should be
adopted that take into consideration the different
domestic situations of various countries. In addition,
partnerships with the countries concerned should be
strengthened.

Secondly, peacebuilding efforts should have clear
priorities. In helping the countries concerned to
formulate their integrated peacebuilding development
strategies, the United Nations and its relevant agencies
should respect the priorities identified by the countries
themselves, focusing on stabilizing the security
situation, promoting political reconciliation and
strengthening democracy. Particular attention should be
paid to tackling the root causes of threats to peace and
security, particularly in the area of economic and social
development. Peacebuilding efforts should also include
exit strategies so as to enable a smooth transition
towards lasting peace and sustainable development.

Thirdly, resources should be used as effectively
as possible in this field. The United Nations should
continue to pay attention to issues such as
peacebuilding, financing and expertise-building. We
urge the international community to continue to
provide sufficient resources to peacebuilding efforts.
We consider that efforts should be made to expand
fund-raising channels and that the Peacebuilding Fund
should further improve its working methods and
enhance performance management and its resource
utilization rate.

Fourthly, the important role of the Peacebuilding
Commission and regional organizations should be
brought into full play. China hopes that the
Peacebuilding Commission will further improve its
institution-building efforts and strengthen its synergies
with other organizations in its efforts to explore
effective means of peacebuilding. Regional
organizations such as the African Union should also be
fully utilized.

China has always supported the efforts of
countries in conflict situations to build peace, and we
will further join the international community in making
concerted efforts and contributions aimed at the
promotion of lasting peace.

