Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I would
like to extend a warm welcome to Foreign Minister
Ba'ipo-Temon. I thank Special Representative Onanga-
Anyanga for his briefing and, more important, for his
stewardship of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) over the past three and a half
challenging years. His leadership of MINUSCA during
some particularly difficult moments, especially leading
up to the historic presidential election, was enormously
valuable. The United States deeply appreciated his
consistent effort to make the most of MINUSCA's
resources, his honesty in assessing the challenging
circumstances in the Central African Republic and his
positive and deeply respected leadership in the face of
many crises. We wish him the very best as he transitions
from Bangui.

I thank Commissioner Chergui for his briefing
today and for the African Union's leadership over
the past month in Khartoum in facilitating efforts
and engagement that led to the 6 February Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the
Central African Republic. We would also like to thank
Ambassador Adorn for his leadership as Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2127 (2013) and Ambassador Hilale as
Chair of the Central African Republic configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission. as well as for their
insights into this particularly important moment in the
Central African Republic. I would also like to thank
Mr. Vervaeke.

Just over two months ago, as the Security Council
renewed MINUSCA's mandate (see S/PV.8422), the
Council was deeply concerned about the sustained
levels of violence and insecurity in the Central African
Republic and cautious about prospects for long-term
peace. Today the Central African Republic is just
more than two weeks beyond the signing of a peace
agreement between the Government and 14 armed
groups. The United States welcomes the efforts of
President Touadera and the authorities of the Central
African Republic, the commitment of the leaders of
the armed groups and the support of regional actors in
reaching the agreement. These conversations about the
future of the Central African Republic would have been
unimaginable just last year.

Nonetheless, the agreement is built on trust
and confidence - trust and confidence among the
signatories and the supporting actors in the agreement
and, most important, of the Central African people that
their leaders will finally put an end to cycles of horrific
violence that have plagued the Central African Republic
for far too long. Unfortunately, trust and confidence
have been in short supply over the past several years.
The Central African people are well aware that previous
peace agreements have failed to hold. The signatories
of the present agreement must fully implement its
content to earn the trust and confidence of the Central
African people.

The United States is deeply committed to supporting
the people of the Central African Republic as they work
to build a peaceful and prosperous future. In the past
several years, we have committed billions of dollars to
life-saving humanitarian assistance to help displaced
people and refugees build, rebuild and sustain their
lives; to capacity-building efforts, particularly in the
security and judicial sectors; and to the efforts of the
United Nations in support of the long-term peace and
stability of the Central African Republic. In particular,
we wish to highlight the important language in the
agreement pertaining to justice and accountability. For
far too long, impunity has protected the perpetrators of
the horrors of the past several years. In our view, justice
and accountability are essential to achieving lasting
peace and stability in the Central African Republic. We
strongly support victims in seeking justice.

We commend the signatories to the agreement for
acknowledging the need for justice and accountability,
including the commitment to creating a commission on
truth, justice, reparation and reconciliation. We hope
such efforts will be built on an inclusive basis, like the
Bangui Forum. We also urge all parties to fully support

and cooperate with the Special Criminal Court. We are
grateful to now have on the Council South Africa, C6te
d'Ivoire and Peru - three countries that have had their
own truth and reconciliation commissions and know
the challenges of such an effort. We expect the Council
will gain from their experience and expertise as we
address the situation in the Central African Republic
going forward.

We look forward to working with other partners
as well to support the Government in keeping its
commitments under the peace agreement. We are under
no illusion that it will be a fast process for this path to
become easier, but it is the only path.

However, it will be essential that all partners uphold
high standards so as to avoid undermining peace and
security in the Central African Republic. In that context,
we are deeply disturbed by reports of torture carried
out by Central African troops and Russian trainers in
Bambari. This is completely unacceptable. We urge
the Central African authorities to investigate these
allegations and hold accountable those responsible,
as we have similarly called on them to investigate the
murders of three Russianjournalists in August 2018.

Any international support for the Government of
the Central African Republic should be transparent,
well coordinated and consistent with the highest
standards ofmilitary conduct and the laws ofthe Central
African Republic, including respect for human rights
and a commitment to upholding them. It must also be
consistent with Member States' obligations under the
Security Council sanctions regime concerning the
Central African Republic. We look forward to joining
tomorrow's meeting with the United Nations, the
African Union, the Government of the Central African
Republic and other international partners to continue
the conversation on how to support the implementation
of the peace agreement.

