Mr. Bliss (Australia): I am pleased to provide a
brief report on the Council's visit to Belgium on 9 and
10 August, the first leg of our recent visit to Europe
and Africa. The purpose of our visit to Belgium was to
commemorate the centenary of the commencement of
the First World War, to pay tribute to the sacrifice of all
those who served their countries during that conflict
and to draw lessons from the conflict that could assist
the Security Council in discharging its mandate to
maintain international peace and security.

A visit to the town of Dinant, the site ofa massacre
early in the First World War, provided a solemn start. On
23 August 1914, 674 civilians were killed in a deliberate
attack by invading German forces. The Council viewed
the museum commemorating that incident and learned
that in 2001, 87 years after the incident, a reconciliation
ceremony had been held, with Germany formally
apologizing to the people of Dinant for the attack.

The Council's Visit to the city of Leuven underlined
the crucial importance of protecting cultural heritage in
times of armed conflict. In August 1914, the deliberate
destruction of the 600-year-old Leuven University
Library and its unique 300,000 volume collection
shocked the world. The stunning reconstruction of that
building served as the venue for a stimulating discussion
between Council members and academic experts on the
lessons from the First World War, conflict prevention
and approaches to reconciliation.

The Last Post ceremony at Menin Gate in Ypres
on the evening of 9 August was a revelation. The brief
and powerful ceremony, which consists of the playing
of the Last Post, a recitation for those who fell in the
First World War and the laying of wreaths, has taken
place every single evening since 1928 - a remarkable
act of commemoration by the people of Ypres and of
Belgium. The laying of a wreath by Australia and the
United Kingdom on behalf of the Security Council
constituted a formal act of remembrance for the losses
of that conflict.

The Council's visit to Lijssenthoek Military
Cemetery, outside Ypres, on 10 August emphasized the
horrific consequences of armed conflict. The cemetery
contains the graves of over 10,700 soldiers killed in
the First World War. A visit to the In Flanders Fields
Museum provided further evidence of the magnitude of
the destruction of that conflict and poignantly reminded
us that, although said to be "the war to end all wars",
the subsequent 100 years have been repeatedly marked
by armed conflict.

The final component of our Visit to Belgium - a
visit to the Poelkapelle military base, where chemical
weapons from the First World War continue to be
dismantled and destroyed - served to underline the
devastating impact of those weapons. Almost 100 years
after their first use, ordinance from the First World War
is still being uncovered every day. That was a timely
reminder to the Council of the need to ensure the
complete elimination of all chemical weapons and to
reinforce the absolute prohibition of their use.

The visit to Belgium starkly underlined for the
Council the inherent futility of armed conflict and
the dramatic scale of losses in the First World War.
The Council witnessed the remarkable commitment
by the people of Belgium to commemoration and the
importance of the protection of cultural heritage. We
were compelled to recall the first line of the Preamble
to the Charter of the United Nations - "determined to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war,
which twice in our lifetime has brought untold sorrow to
mankind". And, crucially, we were motivated to reflect
on what more the Council can and must do to effectively
discharge its conflict prevention responsibilities.

In conclusion, I would like to express the Security
Council's sincere thanks to the Government and the
people of Belgium, to the mayors of Dinant, Leuven
and Ypres, to the Permanent Representative of Belgium,
Ambassador Frankinet, and her Mission, and to the
Secretariat colleagues who facilitated our visit. I would
also like to thank the United Kingdom for arranging
the visit and for extending to Australia the privilege of
co-leading the Belgian component.

