Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We are
grateful for the holding of this meeting and the important
presentations by the briefers. We also welcome and
wish Mr. James Swan every success in his endeavours,
whose work we hope will mark the beginning of a new
phase of cooperation between the Federal Government
of Somalia and the United Nations.

At the outset, we reaffirm our conviction that it
is only through close cooperation and coordination
among the Federal Government of Somalia, the federal
member states, the African Union, the United Nations
and other international partners that we will be able to
achieve the priority objectives laid out for Somalia. We
therefore call on the Federal Government of Somalia and
the federal member states to resolve outstanding issues
through dialogue. The country cannot waste valuable
time and requires the consensus and cooperation of
both levels of Government to move forward on the key
issues necessary for consolidating the Federal State,
such as federal elections, security and debt relief.

We recognize the efforts of the Federal Parliament
to move forward the legislative agenda and welcome
the resumption of cooperation between the Upper and
Lower Houses of that body. We ask the Somalis to
accelerate their efforts to advance the federal election
process with the same momentum. We stress that, to a
large extent, the success of the elections will depend
on the consensus reached by the Federal Government
and the federal member states on the political
framework and key issues for the upcoming national
and regional elections.

In that regard, we encourage the state and federal
authorities of Jubaland to reach a consensus on
the upcoming elections for the state Assembly and
state President so that they are held in a transparent
and peaceful manner, while avoiding parallel and
unrecognized electoral processes. We also underscore
the importance of promoting the active participation
of women in the political life of the country. We hope
that reforms by the Government will include gender-
sensitive provisions and that the means for achieving a
30 per cent quota of women in the Federal Parliament in
2020 and 2021 will be provided.

Peru regrets, however, that, despite the increase
in security measures by the Government of Somalia,
Al-Shabaab continues to show resilience and carry out
abhorrent terrorist attacks with' improvised explosive
devices, which can be countered only through adequate
cooperation between the Federal Government and the
federal member states.

With regard to that last point, we would like to
highlight the progress made in the coordination efforts
of the Federal Government and the authorities of South-
West State. They are an encouraging collaboration
model, which, if replicated in the other states, would
make it possible for Somali forces to regain control
of security in 2021. We also welcome the fact that the
Somali Government's efficient financial management
has enabled it to qualify for debt relief from the
International Monetary Fund. We expect that the
national development plan 2020-2024 will enable
Somalia to overcome poverty and food insecurity,
which are seriously affecting 2.2 million people.

Peru notes with concern the precarious
humanitarian situation faced by internally displaced
persons and marginalized communities in Somalia,
which is exacerbated by adverse climatic conditions and
requires urgent and increased financial contributions
from the international community.

We commend Ms. Pramila Patten on her trip
to Somalia in July to work with the Government of
Somalia on the issue of eliminating conflict-related
sexual violence. We trust in the Government's strong
commitment to developing the national action plan to
end that scourge.

I would like to conclude by underscoring the work
of the African Union Mission in Somalia, the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia and the United
Nations Support Office in Somalia, in support of the
efforts of the Somali authorities and people to build
lasting peace, in spite of the remaining difficulties
and challenges. We also commend the efforts of the
African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development and the United Nations to provide
the necessary conditions for the construction of a
Somali State.

