Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): The
Ambassador of Sweden will express the position of all
of the countries of the European Union in his
statement, which France wholeheartedly supports.
However, France would like to stress several points.

France wishes first of all to express its very deep
consternation at the tragedy that has been unfolding
over the past six months in the Palestinian territories
and in Israel. More than 400 people have died, most of
them Palestinians, including dozens of children. Here
we would like to express our deepest regrets and
extend our condolences to the families of all the
victims.

The situation is serious. The parties appear to
have less and less control over the events. There is
continuing insecurity in the Palestinian territories and
in Israel, despair on the part of a people with no
prospects, and a disastrous economic situation.
Negotiations between the parties have been broken off
since the Tabah meeting, and a climate of deep-seated
suspicion and even hatred prevails. The gains of the
Oslo process are in jeopardy.

It is crucial that calm be restored. France and the
European Union have on several occasions condemned
violence in all its forms: the use of excessive force by
the Israeli army against Palestinian civilians and the
unacceptable summary executions, but also the acts of
terrorism that have caused grief among the Israeli
people.

France and the European Union have also
registered their deep concern at the measures taken by
Israeli Government, including the blockading of
territories and the refusal to hand over to the
Palestinian Authority the taxes that have been assessed
on its behalf - these are among the many collective
reprisals that can only exacerbate tensions and the
resentment of an entire people. Generally speaking,
Israel must respect human rights and international
humanitarian law, namely the Fourth Geneva
Convention, which applies to all of the occupied
Palestinian territories.

The easing of travel restrictions imposed by the
Israeli Government, if indeed it takes place, is a move
in the right direction. The strategy followed in recent
weeks could only fuel frustrations and worsen the
already catastrophic economic situation. The European
Union and its members - the largest provider of
assistance to the Palestinian people - have taken
special measures to assist the population and the
Palestinian Authority. The entire international
community must take part in this spirit of solidarity.

These violent confrontations are all the more
troublesome considering that the two parties had never
been so close to peace, both at Camp David and at
Tabah. Openness on both the Israeli and Palestinian
sides had made it possible to obtain, for the very first
time, a glimpse of an agreement, even on the most
sensitive aspects - Jerusalem, refugees and the
territories.

Hopes for peace and for harmonious coexistence,
focused on cooperation and the future, must live on.
We continue to believe that the negotiations of the last
few months have paved the way for us to follow. The
solutions that have been explored will one day form the
basis of the long-awaited final settlement. Such a
settlement must be based on Israel's right to live in
peace within recognized borders and on the right of the
Palestinian people to have a state, a territory and a
capital. It is based on resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973), on the principle of land for peace, and on the
terms of reference of the Madrid Conference.

Weapons must be silenced, and dialogue must
resume. We solemnly call upon the Israeli and
Palestinian leaders to do all within their power to halt
the spiral of violence. The current situation, in which
each is waiting for the other to make the first move,
can only lead to an impasse. Firm acts are necessary to
restore real trust. Respect for the agreements signed
since Oslo and a real freeze on settlements will greatly
contribute to this.
The Palestinian issue cannot be separated from a
just and comprehensive settlement of the conflict
between Israel and the Arab countries. We call for the
resumption of negotiations between Israel and Syria
and between Israel and Lebanon on the basis of
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

How can we help negotiations between Israel and
the Palestinian Authority? We have to think about how
to restore a minimum of trust between the parties. The
impetus provided by the United States remains
essential. The European Union, Russia, Egypt, Jordan
and the United Nations can also contribute to this, as
they showed at the Sharm el-Sheikh summit. In
particular the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, who
has close contacts with all the parties involved in the
Middle East crisis, can play a useful role. We fully
support his action.

However, the Security Council also has a part to
play. The current situation is a threat to peace in the
region and therefore comes under its jurisdiction. It has
already addressed the historical background and the
origins of the crisis by adopting resolution 1322
(2000). It is now up to the Security Council, with Israel
and the Palestinian Authority, to think about proposals
that would facilitate contacts between the parties and
would guarantee the desired results.

Sending observers to the field could be a useful
mechanism in this regard, to ease tensions and to
monitor compliance with commitments undertaken by
the parties. That is why France, along with other
countries, particularly the United Kingdom, initiated
this idea last November. This mechanism will be
helpful if it is accepted and agreed upon by the parties,
and if it enjoys their full cooperation. The work of the
observers would be an extension of the work begun by
the Mitchell commission. The mechanism will be
useful only if it is a part of a larger picture: the
reduction of violence, compliance with commitments
undertaken at the Sharm el-Sheikh summit and the
resumption of negotiations.

It is in this spirit that we are considering any
action that might be taken by the Council. But the
Council will be heard by the parties only if it is united.
We should not judge the past. Rather, we should define
a positive approach and facilitate the search for a
solution to this tragedy, working together with Israel
and the Palestinian Authority.

