Mr. Haraguchi (Japan): Thank you very much,
Sir, for convening today's meeting in an open format. I
would also like to express my appreciation to
Mr. Danilo Turk for the information he has just
provided, based on the report in front of us.

Since the Bougainville Peace Agreement was
signed in August 2001, the United Nations and its
Political Office in Bougainville (UNPOB) have been
playing a very important role in the peace process,
particularly by promoting the collection of weapons.
The Government of Japan commends UNPOB for its
valuable contributions to this effort.

Japan is especially pleased to note from the report
that

"at the end of February 2003, 80.2 per cent of
Bougainville had reached stage II, and two
districts had fully completed the process of
disarmament". (S/2003/345, para. 3)

This is indeed a clear demonstration of the commitment
of the parties concerned, as well as the efforts of
UNPOB to achieve disarmament. We hope that the
process will proceed quickly so that stage II will be
completed in all parts of Bougainville well before the
expiration of UNPOB's mandate at the end of this year.

The peace and stability of the Pacific region,
including Bougainville, are of profound interest to
Japan. In an effort to promote peace-building in
Bougainville, Japan has provided several four-wheel-
drive vehicles for the promotion of peace activities to
improve access to rural areas for those engaged in the
weapons disposal project. Japan also financed a United
Nations fact-finding mission that was dispatched last
year in connection with this project. Also, we convened
the Pacific Island Countries Regional Seminar on
Small Arms last January to share expertise in this
subject among countries in the region.

Japan is also making efforts to contribute to long-
term social stability. It has extended assistance to
expand the College of Distance Education in

Bougainville in order to provide access to education to
as many Bougainvillean youth as possible. The issue of
regional security will be discussed in the Third Japan-
Pacific Islands Forum Summit Meeting, which Japan
will host in Okinawa this May.

What is important now is that stage II efforts of
the weapons disposal plans be accelerated and that
there be a prompt transition to the political process, as
was mentioned in the report of the Secretary-General.
We must make every effort towards that end, while
keeping in mind that all operations of the Peace
Monitoring Group will cease on 30 June and that the
mandate of UNPOB will conclude at the end of this
year. Japan, for its part, reiterates its readiness to
contribute to the process as much as possible.

