Mr. Choat (South Sudan): I would very much
like to thank the members of the Security Council for
the important presidential statement adopted today
(S/PRST/2012/5). Having read the statement, I should
like to make a few points.

First, I would like to reiterate the policy of the
Republic of South Sudan: we are committed to two
viable States living side by side in peace. We also have
a policy of non-interference in the affairs of other
sovereign States. I would like to point out that we have
been unfairly accused several times of supporting the
opposition groups fighting the Government of the
Sudan. I again reiterate that we have not supported any
opposition groups fighting the Government of the
Sudan. It is not our policy to support opposition against
other States.

Secondly, I would also like to bring to the
Council's attention the fact that the Republic of South
Sudan welcomed the non-aggression pact signed in
Addis Ababa on 10 February. However, we also want
the Council to know that three days after the signing of
the pact, the Government of the Sudan violated the
agreement by bombing areas in Western Bahr
Al-Ghazal and Unity states on 13 February, and areas
in Upper Nile state a few days later. We condemned
those acts of aggression, which are in violation of the
agreement we signed with the Republic of the Sudan.
1225259

I would also like to inform members of the
Council that our team is now in Addis Ababa for the
resumption of the negotiations. We have negotiated in
good faith and given some proposals to the African
Union that are in line with international standards with
regard to oil transit fees. We are committed to the
negotiations and we are fully supporting the African
Union High-level Implementation Panel as a forum in
which all outstanding issues can be resolved.

I also want to point out that we believe in a
comprehensive resolution of all outstanding issues,
because they are all connected. When a border is not
clearly defined, that is a recipe for conflict. In that
regard, we have called upon the Republic of the Sudan
to demarcate the border. There has not been political
will to demarcate the border. It is therefore very
important that the Council call for the border to be
demarcated.

The last point I want to emphasize has to do with
the issue of citizenship. It has been our position since
the beginning of the negotiations that both the citizens
of the Republic of the Sudan and South Sudan could
chose where they want to live. That is the proposal we
made, but the Republic of the Sudan did not agree to it.
Based of what I have heard from the representative of
the Sudan, I hope that there will be a change in the
position they have taken.

In addition, there is a bad humanitarian situation
in the two areas involved. We are concerned because
the refugees fleeing Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile
states in the Sudan are coming to areas in our country.
In line with our commitment to the Charter of the
United Nations, we have extended assistance to
refugees who have crossed our border, who are
frequently targeted on our territory, in violation of
international law.

Finally, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for giving my this opportunity to participate.

