Mr. She Okitundu (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (interpretation from French): I wish to take this
opportunity to express my pleasure at seeing you, Sir,
presiding today over the Security Council. Your
presidency is for me a source of pride, because China has
excellent relations with my country, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. I feel duty-bound to thank you for
allowing my delegation to speak here in order to help find
ways and means to put an end to the armed aggression
suffered by my country.

Nor can I fail to thank your predecessor, Mr. Robert
Fowler, the Ambassador of Canada, for his skill in
guiding the Security Council's work last month and
particularly for his productive contacts with my country's
delegation with respect to today's meeting. I should like
also sincerely to thank the members of the Security
Council for having responded favourably to this request,
which is, after all, a legitimate one.

Article 52 of the Charter encourages the Security
Council to encourage the development of peaceful
settlement of local disputes through regional agreements.
My delegation is aware of the Security Council's efforts
to ensure the proper implementation of that provision, in
particular in two statements it made on the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. For this we are most
grateful. But we must not, however, lose sight of the fact
that the last paragraph of that same Article allows the

 

Security Council simultaneously to apply the provisions of
Articles 34 and 35 of the Charter.
It is for that reason that my delegation decided to
initiate the process that has led to this debate, with the
legitimate goal of drawing the Council's attention to the
danger posed by the continuation of the conflict that is
currently under way in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

Far be it from us to tax the patience of this gathering
by reiterating facts and events it is already quite familiar
with. My delegation wishes to impress upon international
opinion the finer points that have meant that despite all the
concessions made by my Government, the negotiating
process has not yet led to the signing of a cease-fire. The
efforts deployed by certain countries that are Members of
our Organization, at both the regional and international
levels, to find a peaceful settlement to the conflict would
have already succeeded had all the parties involved acted in
good faith and with honesty throughout the negotiating
process.

However, the stubbornness and intransigence of
Rwanda and their determination to remain on Congolese
territory have been the sole obstacles to a peaceful solution
to the Congolese crisis.

To be sure, negotiations are continuing at the regional
level in the Organization of African Unity, whose efforts I
should like to hail, but it should be known that the effective
involvement of the international community would in no
way thwart those regional efforts. Accordingly, my
Government, as a result of the impasse in the negotiating
process, felt it timely to appeal to the international
community to become more involved in the quest for a
lasting and peaceful solution to the conflict.

My Government wishes to draw the attention of the
United Nations to the determination of the Congolese nation
as a whole and of its tremendous need for peace and for
internal and external security. It expects the international
community to become genuinely and positively involved,
with a View to inducing the aggressors to engage in sincere
negotiations to ensure regional peace and stability. Such an
atmosphere would be conducive to the realization of the
programme of national reconstruction and development,
which all Congolese yearn for. My Government believes
that resolving the current crisis requires the convening of a
regional conference of the countries of the Great Lakes
region that would bring together leaders and their respective
opposition forces under the auspices of the Organization
of African Unity and the United Nations.

One need only look back at the negotiating process
for peace, begun in Lusaka, to see that my country has
considerably changed its position in favour of negotiations
leading to a cease-fire. Let us recall in this context that
my Government had decided to bring together, within or
outside of the country, the population of the country as a
whole with a view jointly to examining the causes of
these disputes and to take account of them in the
management of public affairs.

As members are aware, My Government has just
proposed a national debate involving all of the active
forces of the Congolese nation. The level of these
concessions is proof of our flexibility in responding to the
need for a peaceful solution to the crisis in the Great
Lakes region.

None of our concessions have elicited a similar
response on the part of the aggressors, and the Security
Council is aware of this. The international community
will recall that it had to bring great pressure to bear on
Uganda and Rwanda in order for those two countries to
acknowledge their military involvement on Congolese
territory and their participation in this war. Is the pressure
to stop there, despite the refusal by those countries to
withdraw from the territory of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo? Must we still hear of the atrocities
committed daily by those countries against the most
vulnerable sectors of our population, atrocities that have
repeatedly been condemned by non-governmental
organizations?

The Democratic Republic of the Congo shares with
nine other countries more than 9,600 kilometres of land
borders, none of which are free from threat or from the
danger of direct or indirect stabilization. Upon his
accession to office, President Laurent Desire Kabila had
focused on pacifying and stabilizing the Great Lakes
region, which was in the grip of great instability, and
made it his goal to export peace, security and
development. Let us recall the initiative of President
Kabila, who, in close cooperation with the United Nations
Development Programme, organized a regional conference
on peace and development in the subregion.

But this did not take into account the bad faith, and
especially the grand ambitions, of the current aggressors,
who endeavoured to ensure the failure of the initiative.

 

This question of insecurity as a reason for such
aggression is nothing new. The statement made by the
Ugandan Minister for Foreign Affairs in Lusaka on 27
October 1998 is most telling. He said that Uganda's
security concerns had existed before President Kabila took
power in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Unfortunately, it can be seen that, in the case of
Uganda and of its ally, Rwanda, just a few years after the
coups carried out by the current authorities of those
countries, no effort has been made to reach out to the
exiled opponents to integrate them into the structures of
their respective societies.

Since, as the saying goes, there's no place like home,
these political exiles will seek every available means to
rejoin their societies. That is an entirely legitimate right.
Since, like their Governments, they find the language of
arms more expressive than dialogue, insecurity will grow
for natives and foreigners alike. The odious murder of the
Western tourists in Bwindi Park, Uganda, is an unfortunate
illustration of this and remains fresh in our memories.

What objective attitude should responsible leaders
have adopted in such circumstances? I suppose that they
could have approached their opponents and negotiated with
them, as they insist we do towards the reconstruction of
their respective countries.

Unfortunately, that was not the case. They found it
easier to carry their war onto Congolese territory. Today,
the consequences for the native populations of that war, and
especially of the occupation of the eastern territories, is
terrible and absolutely deplorable. By way of example, I
would point to the massacre of 858 people in Kasika; of
more than 600 at Makobola; and, more recently yet, the
horrible massacre at Kamituga, all committed by the
Rwandan Patriotic Army. I wish to spare the Council a
litany of the massacres perpetrated in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. I would simply refer to Security
Council document S/l999/205 of 25 February 1999, by
which my Government transmitted the "White paper on
massive Violations of human rights and of the basic rules of
international humanitarian law by the aggressor countries
(Uganda, Rwanda and Burundi) in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo."

In view of the complexity of the question and of the
horrors being committed in the occupied Congolese territory
by the regular armed forces of neighbouring countries, the
international community, through the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) and the United Nations, has merely
issued a few timid declarations on the violations of the
territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. A strong condemnation of the violation of the
basic principles of the OAU and United Nations Charters
would prevent the negotiations from being bogged down
and war atrocities from being committed on the ground.
The number of these atrocities is now countless and they
continue to exact an extremely heavy tribute from the
innocent population.

In seven months of war, thousands of innocent
people have been murdered in the most horrendous
manner; some have even been decapitated. This is beyond
all imagination.

It is in this context that I come to the Council today
to ask it to deal objectively with this situation so as to
end the hostilities in my country by peaceful means. By
way of example, my Government might be amenable to
peacekeeping forces' being deployed to guarantee peace
and security along the borders. How long could
peacekeeping forces remain effective in the Great Lakes
region, however, if reconciliation among the warring
parties in those countries that have attacked my own did
not include all the grassroots forces of their nations in the
structures of their respective countries?

As I emphasized earlier, the borders of my country
with its neighbours to the east are more than 2,000
kilometres long. Thus, one must wonder how peace and
security, and above all the time necessary to deploy such
a force, can be truly guaranteed. Our concern is to end as
soon as possible the martyrdom of the population in the
eastern and Kivu provinces, which remain under the
occupation of the regular armed forces of Uganda and
Rwanda.

My Government is fed up with mere statements of
good intentions. It wants a definitive solution to this
question with the help of the entire international
community. That is why, after the troops of aggression
are withdrawn, it would wholeheartedly call for the
convening of a regional conference of the Great Lakes
countries, to which leaders and their respective opponents
would be invited. We have set the stage for our
participation and my Government is ready to join,
whenever possible, the entire opposition in a national
debate. Such an approach is essential for Uganda and
Rwanda, which are suffering from a lack of national
cohesiveness, the real cause of insecurity in their
countries and in the Great Lakes region.

 

The body that you, Sir, have the privilege of leading
today has received from the international community the
heavy responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security. The Great Lakes region suffers from chronic
instability and a complete breakdown of peace, causing the
focal point of tension constantly to shift in the absence of
a definitive solution. Yesterday, Rwanda; today the
Democratic Republic of the Congo; what about tomorrow?
No one knows.

Paragraph 2 of Article 24 of the United Nations
Charter calls on the Council to act in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the United Nations in such
circumstances. That is why my Government wishes the
Security Council to become more involved in the search for
a peaceful and lasting solution to the current conflict. My
Government seeks peace and wishes to live in harmony and
good understanding with all its neighbours. My Government
agrees to sign a ceasefire agreement, followed by the
deployment along the border of a buffer force, with a
precise timetable for the withdrawal of the aggressor troops.
Such a force would be tasked with monitoring and securing
the borders shared by the Democratic Republic of the
Congo with Burundi, Rwanda and Uganda.

My Government is also resolutely determined to re-
establish a state of law and fundamental freedoms
throughout its national territory and has formalized the
opening of the political landscape, notably by the
promulgation of Law 194 of 29 January 1999 on
liberalizing the activities of political parties. My
Government recently demonstrated its good faith towards
this opening by proposing the convening of a national
debate to include every region, every political tendency and
every socio-political sector of the country, including the so-
called rebels, so as to enable them to consider and work for
the future of the Congolese nation at the dawn of the third
millennium. My Government fully supports the idea
proposed by France for an international conference on
peace and security in the Great Lakes region.

My Government is convinced that the Democratic
Republic of the Congo will succeed in restoring peace and
domestic harmony. However, in order to ensure peace
throughout the Great Lakes region, it is of the highest
important that peace reign within the national boundaries of
Burundi, Rwanda and Uganda. The international community
has the duty and the obligation to help these three countries
to resolve their internal problems, which are the source of
regional destabilization. I can assure the Council that my
Government is already prepared to participate actively in
these future meetings.

Until these steps can be taken, a mere Security
Council presidential statement cannot hope to end with
any dispatch the holocaust in which Rwanda and Uganda
are engaged. It is true that the ostensible motive, as
announced by the aggressors, is the issue of insecurity
along the borders. I have already proposed an effective
solution for this. If there are hidden motives, however,
they are hidden to the Congolese delegation but may not
be to the members of the Security Council. Can these
hidden motives override consideration for the lives of the
thousands of Congolese natives who continue to be
slaughtered unjustly by the weapons of the aggressors?

In View of the Security Council's powers in the area
of international peace and security, and until the
international community takes additional steps to bring
peace to the entire Great Lakes region, the least my
Government expects from this meeting is, first, the
realization that my country is the victim of armed
aggression, as defined in resolution 3314 (XXIX), adopted
by the General Assembly with a View to defining
aggression.

Secondly, we expect condemnation of that
aggression; thirdly, we seek full respect by the aggressors
for international humanitarian law; fourthly, we expect
withdrawal of the troops of aggression from our territory.
In that regard, the Council can make use of the provisions
of Articles 39 to 42 of the Charter of the United Nations.
Fifthly, we seek from the Security Council the
deployment of an interposing force along common
borders. As the pretext used by the aggressors to justify
their aggression is precisely insecurity along borders, this
interposing force could control security along the common
borders. Finally, my Government calls for the convening
of an international conference on the restoration of lasting
peace in the Great Lakes region.

I would like to reserve the right to take the floor
later in the discussion.

