Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to welcome Mr. Inzko, High
Representative for the Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina.

It is with a great deal of attention that we have
familiarized ourselves with Mr. Inzko's report to the
Security Council (see S/2016/395, annex) and listened
to his briefing today. However, we must be candid.
The assessments that he made do not promote national
reconciliation in that long-suffering country. That is
quite unfortunate, as national reconciliation and the
promotion of a mutually respectful relationship among
the country's peoples are today gaining key importance
given the challenges faced by Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Once again, we are forced to note that the High
Representative's report is far from being objective
and balanced in nature. It merely notes that there are
problems in Bosnian society, without attempting to
understand their essence or the objective reasons for
which they have emerged. We hope that in the future the
High Representative will - to a greater extent - focus
on assessments of the implementation of his mandate
and the activity of the structure that was entrusted to
him during the reporting period, and that he will limit
himself strictly to the issues having to do with Dayton.

Moreover, we expect the High Representative
to bear in mind and be respectful of the views of all
of the peoples of that State. That is why we consider
inappropriate for him to present his Views with regard to
his support for the activities ofa number of specialized
bodies in Bosnia and Herzegovina dealing with the
fulfilment of the criteria required for the country
to launch the programme of action leading to NATO
membership. In pushing the NATO topic, Mr. Inzko
is acting counter to his basic task, which is to seek
unifying factors for the country. In fact, he is siding
with but a part of Bosnian society. As is well known,
there are other views in the country i ones that are far
from being in favour of NATO membership.

We also believe that the topic ofreallocating defence
property is one that should be considered exclusively as
one of the conditions for winding down the mechanism
ofthe High Representative. It should be considered in an
unbiased way, as it is intrinsically linked to the broader
issue of civilian versus State property. He should - not
just in words, but in fact - promote inter-Bosnian
dialogue. That, after all, is the last open point on the
5+2 agenda. He should take more seriously the political
agreements that were reached back in 2012 among the
leaders of the country's main parties.

That is also true of Euro-integration-related
aspects. It would seem that, although a decision was
made to split the two mandates in 2011, the High
Representative continues to combine his position with
that of the European Union Special Representative.
A great many here today referred to the problem of
Mostar. In that regard, it would seem that everyone
has simply forgotten that it was interference by one of
Mr. Inzko's predecessors that led to the impasse around
the prospect of forming a multi-ethnic society in the
city.

It is important that the report refer to the growing
threat of Islamic extremism facing Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We are convinced that that is one of the
most serious problems and should, in the future, be
featured as one of the key elements in the reports of the
High Representative, whose task it is to fully promote
the efforts of the competent bodies and organs in Bosnia
and Herzegovina involved in combating terrorism, and
to promote their cooperation with partner agencies in
neighbouring countries and international agencies.

The problem of terrorism presents yet another
strong argument in favour of a unifying agenda. It
is necessary to focus on strengthening inter-agency
coordination for counter-terrorism purposes. Instead
of that, the High Representative continues to focus
on imaginary challenges to the Dayton Agreement,
in an unjustified way, laying almost all responsibility
for every problem in the stabilization process on the
Bosnian Serbs. His discussion of the recent verdict of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
with regard to Karadeic' and Seselj reveals a similar
approach. We believe that in that situation it would
have been good for the High Representative to distance
himself from his personal feelings, which would
undoubtedly help the members of the Security Council
to form an objective picture of the processes in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. In that respect, we urge our colleagues
in the Council, as we have done before, to familiarize
themselves carefully with the latest report of the
leadership of Republika Srpska on their implementation
of the Dayton Agreement, which includes a great deal
of useful information and constructive considerations
for making progress on a settlement in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

We would like to especially emphasize the
undesirability of any interference by the High
Representative in discussions on the sensitive topic
of reforming the Constitutional Court in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Attempts by the High Representative
to preserve the current situation, where the last
word in that key body lies with foreign justices, are
counterproductive. It is important that the Bosnian
parties, without foreign interference and without
pressure or threats, be able to reach agreement on
new parameters for membership in the Constitutional
Court, alongside the agreements already achieved on
clarifying the modalities for the operation of the Court
and the Prosecutor's Office, which would substantially
contribute to overcoming the palpable crisis of
confidence in the common Bosnian justice system.

Let us turn now to the positive. We believe that it
is useful to acknowledge the joint steps taken by the
leadership of Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina to
forge intergovernmental cooperation, including the
first joint session of the Government of Serbia and the
Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, held
in November 2015, as well the visit by the Head of the
Government of Serbia, Mr. Vucie, to the Investment
Development Conference in Srebrenica. The parties
are quite capable of coexisting if no one interferes, and
they can promote national reconciliation.

Mindful of all those factors, we are in favour of
a further reduction in the budget and personnel of the
Office of the High Representative, based on the fact
that the path towards transferring responsibility for the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina to the Bosnians
themselves is by now well justified and must continue
to be appropriately reflected in the methods of action of
the international presence. The time for protectorates is
long gone. Under the current conditions, we consider
the use by High Representative of his extraordinary
authority under the "Bonn Powers" to be unacceptable.
There can be no alternative to inter-Bosnian dialogue,
free of external pressure. The creation of conditions
for advancing such dialogue and for the search by the
Bosnian parties of mutually acceptable options for
reforms based on the Dayton principles is the priority
task for the international community.

Consolidating Bosnia and Herzegovina and
ensuring the functionality of its central structures will
be successful only if they are the result of consensus
among the three constituent peoples. That, I believe, is
an axiom.

