Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I wish to thank the
Chinese presidency for convening this open debate. We
fully agree with the importance of a regular review of
the situation in the Middle East by the Security Council.

I also would like to express our solidarity with
Ecuador and Japan, which suffered major earthquakes
over the past two days.

Ukraine consistently supports the Middle East
peace process and the principle of a two-State solution,
with Israel and Palestine coexisting in peace and
security. In that regard, we are deeply concerned about
the latest wave of attacks and widespread violence
that has been seen since September 2015 and has
resulted in numerous casualties. The rising death toll
among civilians cannot, and should not, be tolerated;
it serves as irrefutable proof that the status quo is just
not sustainable. Another terrible reminder of that is
the recent attack against the Israeli bus in Jerusalem,
which we condemn in the strongest terms. It is obvious
that absolutely no terrorist act can be justified. Yet we
strongly believe that all sides must demonstrate genuine
restraint and to refrain from the disproportionate use
of force, which can only stir up violence and lead to
increased casualties. All of that plays into the hands
of extremists, who are trying to undermine the fragile
prospects for peace.

We are convinced that the establishment of a
stable, peaceful and democratic Palestinian State
is in Israel's long-term security interests. However,
the ongoing process of settlement expansion and the
legalization of outposts could undermine the efforts
of the international community to achieve tangible
progress in the peace process. On the other hand, we
fully understand the aspirations of the people of Israel
to live in peace within secure borders. Therefore, the
inability of the Palestinian authorities to prevent the
acts of violence regularly perpetrated against Israeli
citizens is of serious concern.

Let me stress our conviction that palpable progress
in the peace process can be achieved only through
mutual compromises and concessions reached at
the negotiation table. We firmly believe that only
a negotiated settlement leading to an Israeli and a
Palestinian State living side by side in peace and
security is realistic. For the Israelis, it would mean a
life free from violence and the daily fear of terror, and
for the Palestinians, finally, a chance to live freely in a
State of their own.

Everybody seems to share a common vision that
there is no alternative to the peace process. Ukraine,
which supports the efforts of the Quartet and regional
countries aimed at achieving a settlement of the
conflict, favours the early resumption of direct Israeli-
Palestinian negotiations. We believe that direct talks
between the parties are the best way to achieve a
peaceful solution, as no unilateral steps will solve the
key problems facing the peace process.

At the same time, it is quite obvious that it is not
enough just to demand action from the Israeli and
the Palestinian sides. Ultimate success will depend
on a genuine commitment by all interested parties.
Diplomatic efforts must be redoubled so as to contain
and de-escalate the latest wave of violence and unlock
Israeli-Palestinian negotiations.

In this light, we believe that the French initiative to
convene an international conference aimed at recreating
the momentum for the resumption of talks deserves
serious consideration. I can also assure the Council
that Ukraine remains steadfast in its support for any
effort to restore the hope that a two-State solution can
be achieved through negotiations.

Speaking of wider Middle East regional security,
we cannot but underscore the importance of the ongoing
efforts to resolve the conflicts in Syria and Yemen. The
Syrian crisis is probably the gravest regional crisis and
one of the biggest security challenges the world has
faced recently. We are convinced that the final point
of destination of the Syrian political process is the
establishment of a credible, inclusive, non-sectarian
governance transition body, followed by a new
constitution and elections.

At present, we are at a critical juncture in the
efforts to reach a long-overdue settlement in Syria. The
ongoing second round of intra-Syrian talks in Geneva
is cause for hope, but at the same time it underscores
the challenges that lay ahead.

Where are we after the two rounds of talks?
Unfortunately, there have been no profound changes
in the situation. We see the Syrian regime continuing
its obstructive approach to each of the three pillars
of the settlement of the current Syrian crisis: the
cessation of hostilities, a political transition and
humanitarian access.

On Yemen, we are cautiously optimistic and
encouraged by the fact that the United Nations-brokered
ceasefire that started on 10 April is holding, despite
minor violations. This certainly creates a conducive
environment for the talks in Kuwait, which were to
start today but were postponed, as we have just learned
with regret.

The lack of meaningful dialogue during this round
of talks could have disastrous results. The only ones
to benefit from this would be terrorist groups, which
are increasingly active in Yemen. Therefore we believe
that it is also important that this opportunity be taken
to intensify efforts to drive back Da'esh and Al-Qaida
in Yemen.

The rapidly evolving threat of violent extremism
cannot be contained within the boundaries of any
region. It benefits from existing conflicts and continues
to destabilize countries across the Middle East. We must
address the root causes that led to this challenge in the
first place. Therefore, to prevent the further spread of
violent extremism, we need to work harder to resolve
the unprecedented humanitarian crisis unfolding in this
part of the world. The recent refugee crisis in Europe is
yet another reminder of the fact that we cannot turn a
blind eye to the catastrophic humanitarian situation in
Syria, Libya, Iraq and Yemen.

I hope that the tireless efforts of the wider
international community and the Council will yield
results and that the vicious circle of violence in the
Middle East will finally be broken.

