Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): We
would like to thank the Italian presidency of the
Council for organizing today's debate. We also thank
the Executive Director of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime and the Special Rapporteur on
trafficking in persons for their valuable contributions.

I align myself with the statement delivered
earlier by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

Trafficking in persons, especially in conflict
situations, is becoming a global challenge, with growing
numbers of victims. As such, it requires a resolute
response at the national and international level. Human
trafficking is both a source and a result of conflict
and instability, and it especially affects society's most
vulnerable members. It must be addressed collectively
and comprehensively, including by taking a close look at
its root causes. This growing global challenge, linked to
acute humanitarian emergencies, is usually a symptom
rather than a cause. It is underlying factors -particularly
foreign aggression and intervention, occupation, war
and protracted conflicts, political instability, terrorism,
genocide and ethnic cleansing - that create conditions
in which millions of people become displaced within
their own countries or seek refuge overseas in a quest
for safety, stability and opportunity. These journeys can
themselves put migrants at great risk of falling victim
to human trafficking, forced labour and contemporary
forms of slavery.

Dealing with these root causes is a primary
responsibility of the Security Council, but if the
Council chooses to focus instead on symptoms, it will
undoubtedly fail to address the causes effectively.
The current situation in Libya and the concerns about
reported enslavement are examples of such issues.
Where is the accountability for the States whose
invasion created the current situation in Libya?

At the same time, I would like to underscore the
vital importance of impartial and reliable data on
trafficking in persons at different levels. Those Member
States whose destructive military options have left
millions at the risk of exploitation and trafficking are
in no position to produce politicized reports labeling
others and denying their own responsibility.

We believe that addressing root causes, working for
prevention, protecting victims, prosecuting traffickers
and establishing partnerships at the global level must be
the pillars of any comprehensive approach to combating
trafficking in persons. The Islamic Republic of Iran
is committed to preventing and fighting all forms of
human trafficking and to countering this horrible
crime. To that end, in 2004 our Parliament adopted
a law on combating human trafficking that has since
been revised to fill gaps and strengthen the domestic
legal regime.

We urgently need to scale up international
cooperation, including in capacity-building and
technical assistance, to combat trafficking in persons.
We support joint measures by Member States,
including through regional and subregional initiatives,
to step up implementation of the Global Plan of
Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons. Indeed, the
complex synergy that exists between trafficking in
persons and certain organized crimes, such as drug
trafficking and the smuggling of migrants, requires
better information-sharing, technical assistance and
enhanced capacity-building for law-enforcement
and justice departments. Meanwhile, education and
awareness-raising on the issue of human trafficking
should be an integral part of the policies of countries of
origin, transit and of destination. People who knowingly
or inadvertently use the services provided by persons
who have been trafficked are as much in need of
training as those who are at risk of being trafficked.

In conclusion, we recognize the important role of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in the
global fight against trafficking in persons, because
of the significant role it can play in promoting the
partnership pillar of the global campaign against
trafficking in persons, as well as its function in
collecting and analysing relevant information. Its
biennial Global Report on Trafficking in Persons is an
important element in efforts to implement and follow
up on the Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking
in Persons and in fostering international cooperation in
combating this heinous crime.

