Mr. Erwa (Sudan) (interpretation from Arabic): I
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of June.
Our thanks go also to the representative of Kenya for the
able way in which he presided over the work of the
Council last month.

I have the honour of addressing the Council on
behalf of the Group of Arab States at the United Nations,
as current Chairman of that group.

We sincerely thank you, Mr. President, for your
efforts and for the consultations you have led in response
to the request to convene an emergency formal meeting
of the Council to consider the recent decision by the
Government of Israel, the occupying Power, to expand the
municipal boundaries of Jerusalem. Your efforts testify to
your determination to shoulder your responsibilities as
President of the Council and do credit to the Council's

 

credibility and transparency. I also thank the other members
of the Council for their similar interest and for agreeing to
the convening of this meeting.

Once again the Security Council is meeting, this time
to consider the serious measure adopted by the Government
of Israel on 21 June 1998, aimed at expanding the
municipal boundaries of the city of Jerusalem to include
surrounding settlements and vast tracts of the territory of
the West Bank. That decision came in the context of
expanding Israeli sovereignty over occupied Palestinian
territories by distorting the character of Holy Jerusalem and
changing its status as a city that is sacred to the three major
monotheistic religions, and by tightening Israel's hegemony
over the city, eradicating its Arab character and changing
its nature and demographic composition.

The relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and
the Security Council - in particular Council resolution 252
(1968), which considers such Israeli measures regarding
Jerusalem to be null and void - reaffirm the special status
of Jerusalem and the applicability to it of provisions
relating to the rest of the occupied Arab territories. The
latest measure is part of a series of grave, flagrant
violations by the Government of Israel of Security Council
and General Assembly resolutions on the inalienable rights
of the Palestinian people.

What is new and interesting about this measure is that
it is not only a flagrant violation of international law and
international legitimacy, but also the very embodiment of
Israeli Government actions that openly and flagrantly
violate the Madrid and Oslo peace agreements with the aim
of pre-empting their final outcome. It is also a clear
violation of the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949, and the
Hague Rules of 1907, and constitutes aggression against
and a challenge to the legitimacy of the international
community. Israel has always claimed to be interested in
peace, but in fact does nothing but carry out measures that
obviously run counter to peace and that can only perpetuate
the conflict in the region.

Arab and Islamic countries, along with other
concerned international parties, have followed with grave
concern and deep anxiety this series of Israeli Government
violations aimed at imposing a fait accompli in the
occupied Palestinian territories. We reiterate our
condemnation of the latest Israeli decision not only as an
obstacle to peace, but also as a step intended to destroy the
entire peace process, and as a measure that ignores the
rights and feelings of all Muslims and Christians around the
world.

 

Having been frustrated and discouraged, our
Palestinian brethren have turned to the Security Council.
They know that Jerusalem has a very special status and a
solid international position in the United Nations, in the
General Assembly and in the Security Council. Suffice it
to say that the Council has adopted 16 resolutions whose
form and content constitute the proper legal framework
for the city of Jerusalem.

We appreciate the position taken by the Secretary-
General on the latest Israeli Government decision with
regard to Jerusalem. This position is in line with the view
expressed in a statement by the League of Arab States,
over which my Government has the honour of presiding
this month, at the emergency meeting held on 25 June
1998. That statement, which was issued at that meeting
and which has been circulated as an official document of
the Security Council, affirms that the new Israeli decision
is the latest in a series of Israeli violations of international
law and an act of aggression by Israel against
international legitimacy, an act that reeks of flagrant
racism and violates the territory and the rights of the
Palestinian people in the occupied territories. The
statement calls upon the United States of America, as a
sponsor of the peace process, to do what it must to
compel Israel to abide by its commitments under the
Madrid process. It expresses appreciation of the position
taken by the Russian Federation, calling upon it, as a
sponsor of the peace process, along with the European
Union and all other concerned parties, to take a firm
position on these Israeli practices, which ignore and
violate the feelings and rights of all Muslims and
Christians throughout the world.

The Council should understand that the Israeli
decision to expand the municipal boundaries of Jerusalem
will have grave repercussions for the peace process,
exposing it to destruction and taking the entire region to
the edge of the precipice. Therefore, the Council should
express the strongest condemnation of the decision taken
by the Israeli Government, declare that decision to expand
the municipal boundaries of Jerusalem null and void, and
demand that Israel rescind it. The Council should also call
on Israel to affirm its commitment to its legal
responsibility in accordance with the Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War, of 1949, whose provisions apply to all lands
occupied by Israel, including Jerusalem. Any action taken
by the Council which does not reaffirm these positions of
principle would cause the Council's credibility and its
shouldering of its responsibility under the Charter to be
shaken, and would impute to the Council a double

 

standard. Thus it would send the wrong message to the
Israeli Government, a message that would encourage it to
continue to endanger the peace process and to drive the
entire region to the brink of explosion.

On behalf of the Group of Arab States at the United
Nations, I request the Security Council to adopt the draft
resolution before it.

