Mr. Khiari (Tunisia): Allow me at the outset
to thank the Peruvian presidency for convening this
important open debate on youth, peace and security. In
a world where both conflict and young populations are
growing, it is easy to fall into the negative narrative
relating young people to the problem, perceiving them
as either the perpetrators or the victims of violence, and
rarely as part of the solution.

However, this narrative is changing, as young people
are now considered the missing piece in achieving and
maintaining international peace and security. Since
2011, this has been the case in Tunisia, where young
women and men decided to take matters into their own
hands and peacefully changed the course of history
in the country. The majority of young people around
the world still face challenges that keep them from
reaching their full potential. Member States, United
Nations agencies and all relevant stakeholders need to
cooperate and multiply their efforts in this regard.

First, it is our responsibility to create a conducive
environment in which young women and men will
thrive. This can be done only by listening and
understanding young people and their needs through
sustained mechanisms of interaction. Our focus should
not be only on young people in conflict situations or on
those who are already involved in peacebuilding. An
inclusive representation of young people from different
backgrounds and in different circumstances is our tool
on the path towards conflict prevention.

Secondly, the role of youth in realizing peace and
security should not be considered without recognizing
the correlation between human rights and the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. Young women
and men must be, first and foremost, perceived
and treated as rights bearers. Their participation in
peacebuilding processes cannot reach its full potential
without enabling them to be effective stakeholders
in society.

As Tunisians are only a few days away from
completing a full cycle of democratic and free
elections for the first time by electing their municipal
representatives, a focus on the role of young people in
this process has been reinforced. A system of youth
quotas was adopted in the electoral law, ensuring a
direct and equitable participation of young people all
over the country.

Thirdly, we need to realize that the role of youth
in peace and security is a cross-cutting issue that goes
beyond the political process. We need to uncover the
root causes of the challenges faced by young people,
mainly their economic and social situations. Sustaining
peace and security first requires the economic inclusion
of young people in order to ensure their well-being
and livelihood.

Finally, a focus on gender is key in order to allow
young women to play their full, effective role in
promoting and maintaining peace and security. As the
perception of identity develops mainly during youth, we
need to shape the concept ofgender among young people
by promoting respect, equality and inclusiveness. It is
also important to provide young women with training
opportunities to take an active part in peacebuilding.
With the adoption of a new law on eliminating violence
against women in July 2017, Tunisia is determined to
achieve the goal of gender equality and to combat all
forms of discrimination against women, particularly
young women and girls.

With their energy, ability to adapt and innovative
minds, youth could be mobilized as mediators,
community mobilizers, humanitarian workers and
peacebuilders. Their capacities need to be nurtured and
supported. Today's open debate helps us to send a signal
to young people around the world that their voices
are heard and that their power as agents of change is
recognized. Tunisia remains committed to continuing
to work at the national, regional and international
levels and with all relevant stakeholders - especially
youth - to advance their rights and ensure the
realization of their full capacity.

