Mr. Loizaga (Paraguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish first to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this open debate of the Security Council. Given the
developments stemming from the question of Iraq's
compliance with resolution 1441 (2002), it seems to us
to be timely and appropriate for the general
membership of the United Nations to have the
opportunity to express its views on an extremely
serious issue that is of profound concern to the entire
international community.

Our participation in this debate is inspired by a
constructive spirit, which is only fitting in the case of a
founding country of the United Nations that sincerely
believes and trusts in the multilateral system, that
respects and complies with the norms of international
law, and that believes in the peaceful settlement of
disputes.

The Government of Paraguay takes the view that
the path of inspections is the right mechanism to
guarantee the effective disarmament of Iraq. In this
respect, we pay tribute to the work that Mr. Hans Blix
and Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei have been doing, and we
are grateful for the detailed reports that they have
presented to date concerning the conduct of the United
Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC) and International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) inspections in Iraq.

However, what we have heard in the reports given
by the chief inspectors indicates to us that Iraq is
continuing to take an ambivalent attitude to the process
of inspections. Although progress has been noted that
might point to a change in attitude on the part of the
Iraq regime with respect to what the international
community is demanding, such a change must be
immediate and genuine.

The inspection process must continue and be
bolstered. The inspectors must have the time that they
require to carry out their tasks. However, the
inspections cannot continue indefinitely, especially if
they are not receiving full cooperation from the Iraqi
Government. The seriousness of the situation demands
immediate responses, without delay, from the Iraqi
regime.

Paraguay feels that the international community's
message in the face of the developments relating to this
issue is clear-cut and unequivocal. The Government of
Iraq must disarm. This is the core of resolution 1441
(2002), adopted by the Council. The Government must
comply immediately, unconditionally and fully with its
obligations under resolution 1441 (2002) and other
relevant resolutions of the Security Council. Likewise,
it must step up its cooperation with the UNMOVIC and
IAEA inspectors, without further delaying tactics, and
must provide all the information and documentation
required by the inspectors so as to achieve effective
implementation of the Council's resolutions.

The resolutions of the Security Council must be
implemented in full and without delay. This is the
obligation imposed on us by our Charter, which was
acceded to by all Member States by virtue of a free and
sovereign choice.

The Security Council, an organ to whose member
States we have entrusted the responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, should
play an essential role in this crisis. As stated by our
Charter, it is the only body that can legitimately
authorize the use of force.

For these reasons, we agree with the Secretary-
General that the unity of the Council is the foundation
for any legitimate and forceful international action. The
robustness of a system of collective security such as
that of the United Nations hinges on the unity of the
Security Council. Only a united Council will be able
credibly to take the necessary decisions to achieve the
goal of disarming the Iraqi regime.

For all of these reasons, Paraguay reaffirms its
full confidence in the ability of the United Nations and
the Security Council to resolve international disputes.
We join the great majority of the members of the
international community in affirming that all necessary
efforts should be exhausted to find a peaceful solution
to this crisis, reserving the use of force as a last resort.
The Government of Iraq will be responsible for the
consequences that may ensue. Its resolve will dictate
whether the solution is peaceful, as we all desire.

