Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): My delegation
thanks the French presidency for organizing today's
debate on cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in maintaining
international peace and security, with special attention
on the European Union, after last month's similar
exchange, which focused on the African Union (see S/PV.7694). My delegation welcomes the presence
of Ms. Federica Mogherini, High Representative of
the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, whom I thank for her important statement.

The many conflicts and crises in the world today

require close cooperation among the United Nations and
its partners, in particular regional organizations, which
play a vital role in maintaining peace and international
security. Indeed, as provided for in Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations, regional and subregional
organizations can contribute to improving collective
security in terms of maintaining international peace
and security. On that basis, these organizations may
act with a mandate from the United Nations, which in
turn benefits from the organizations' loca1 expertise
and operational methods. Senegal, which welcomes
the opportunities offered by cooperation among
organizations, would like to reaffirm its commitment
to an effective multilateralism with the United Nations
at its centre, dedicated to the pursuit of lasting solutions
to critical issues of peace and security in the world.
This perspective is one of the basic guidelines of our
foreign policy as well as one of the main reasons for
Senegalese troops' presence in the majority of United
Nations peacekeeping missions.

The European regional organization is a major
partner ofthe UnitedNations given its material, logistical
and financial capacities, which allow it to conduct
diverse activities. The European Union has developed
institutional mechanisms to finance Security Council-
authorized peacekeeping operations and is also working
to prevent crises. The European Union's significant and
recognized commitment led to its being awarded the
Nobel Peace Prize in 2012. Furthermore, as Council
members know, three important documents continue
to provide the cross-cutting strategic framework
for relations between the United Nations and the
European Union in the areas of peacekeeping and crisis
management: the Joint Statements on United Nations-
European Union cooperation in Crisis Management
of 2003 and 2007 and the Plan of Action to enhance
European Union Common Security and Defence Policy
support to United Nations peacekeeping, adopted in
2012 by the Political and Security Committee. The latter
document identifies, for the purposes of cooperation in
peacekeeping, priority measures that have been jointly
implemented in recent years by both organizations,
in particular with regard to increasing the number
of uniformed personnel from States members of the
European Union, coordination in planning stages,
cooperation in general policy and guidelines, lessons
learned and training.

In addition, as rightly set forth in the report of
Secretary-General contained in document S/2015/229,
dated 1 April 2015, coordination and consultation
activities conducted at the strategic level between the
United Nations and the European Union in peacekeeping
and crisis management take on various forms. The
collaborative bridges between the two organizations
naturally include the biannual informal meeting of the
Security Council with representatives of the European
Union Political and Security Committee, which
constitutes a framework for reviewing peacekeeping
operations and other issues of peace and security.

Furthermore, there are other high-level meetings on
the review of strategic issues, in particular the briefings
to the Security Council by representatives of the
European Union for foreign affairs and security policy
and the presentations made by high-level officials of the
United Nations to the Political and Security Committee
in Brussels. There is also the quarterly meeting of the
United Nations/European Union Steering Committee
on Crisis Management, which is co-chaired by the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations
and the Deputy Secretary-General of the External
Action Service of the European Union.

The European Union's comprehensive and
collective approach in maintaining international peace
and security should be commended. It involves the
presence of European troops and teams in almost all
peacekeeping operations across the globe. Just by way
of example, I note the European Union's contribution
to the seeking of solutions to conflicts in the Balkans;
in Haiti, with the European Union training mission;
and in Somalia; as well as the European Union's
presence in Mali and the Central African Republic; its
humanitarian assistance in Syria, and its contribution to
promoting security, good governance and development
in Afghanistan. In addition, the Security Council has
given European Union member States a mandate to
tackle the migrant phenomenon.

Sengegal supports counter-trafficking operations
and would like to call attention to the situation of
migrants who have become victims of their own
vulnerability. That is why an approach that pays more
attention to the dimension of sustainable development
must be adopted.

Beyond these contributions to international
peace and security, it is important to emphasize the
various activities of the European Union in the area of
prevention aimed at tackling the root causes of conflict.
The United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel is
a clear example and the Global Alliance for Resilience
Initiative-Sahel are part of that same logic.

The European Union provides a laudable
contribution to United Nations activities and cooperates
with all of the Organization's bodies, agencies and
programmes and is part of the broad spectrum of
United Nations actions, development policy, reinstating
peace and assistance in the fields of humanitarian
matters, the environment, human rights and culture. It
also participates in measures carried out in all regions
of the world. The 28 States members of the European
Union are the main donors to the United Nations system
with regard to the regular budget of the Organization's
peacekeeping operations, as well as to United Nations
funds and programmes.

In conclusion, I would be remiss were I not
to underscore the considerable contribution of the
European Union to peace and security on the African
continent. Along these lines, I would like to recall
the importance that our subregional organization,
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), attaches to the ongoing nature of the
activities of its force in Guinea-Bissau, the ECOWAS
Mission in Guinea-Bissau. I hope further cooperation
with ECOWAS and the European Union can contribute
significantly to the re-establishment of political
stability in this country.

In that regard, I would also like to shed light
upon the crucial role played by the European Union in
promoting human rights, protecting civilians in armed
conflict and promoting justice and the rule of law. With
regard to the whole range of European Union activities,
the Security Council could benefit were it to strengthen
its cooperation with the EU through its institutional ties
and its strategic partnership, pursuant to the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.

