Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We too would like to thank Mr. Angelo,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his briefing and for introducing the report on the
United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad (MINURCAT) (S/2009/359).
Unfortunately, the security situation remains
complex. Activities by rebel armed groups continue to
destabilize the situation in eastern Chad. The situation
in the north-eastern Central African Republic has
become more complicated with an ongoing grave
humanitarian crisis. Under those conditions, provision
of external assistance and the continued leading role of
the United Nations remain essential. We share the view
of the Secretary-General that the Government of Chad
bears the main responsibility for stabilization of the
eastern part of the country.

We welcome the progress made by the
Government of Chad in implementing the agreements
with the political opposition. Stabilization in Chad and
in the subregion as a whole will be impossible without
improved relations between those countries and the
Sudan. In that context, we are concerned about reports
incursions by Chadian aircraft into Sudanese territory
and air strikes in western Darfur on 16 July. We believe
that both sides should show the political will to
normalize their bilateral relations, which would be in
the interest of the Sudanese and Chadian peoples and
the subregion as a whole, especially since mechanisms
and a basis for negotiations exist for that. Progress
must continue towards implementing the Dakar
agreement, and diplomatic efforts must be stepped up
in order to resume the work of the Contact Group
established under that agreement.

We commend the activities of the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad, in
which Russia is actively participating. We welcome the
conclusion of preparations, with the help of
MINURCAT, and the deployment of the Detachement
integre de securite (DIS) in eastern Chad. In addition to
providing needed logistical support and ongoing
training to DIS, it is also important in our view to work
to coordinate the activities of MINURCAT, DIS and
the Chadian security forces.

We believe that the military components of the
Mission will be fully staffed by the end of 2009. We
also hope that the troop-contributing countries will
provide the necessary air units for the Mission, because
at present the Russian aviation unit bears the brunt of
that burden. The Russian unit will of course continue
to carry out those functions in accordance with the
mandate.

With respect to the question of benchmarks for
MINURCAT, they are an important element in
assessing the effectiveness of that United Nations
operation. In our view, in the process of developing
those benchmarks the Mission carried out the
necessary consultations with all interested parties, in
particular the Government of Chad.

