Ms. Kpongo (Central African Republic) (spoke in French): At the outset, I should like to take this
opportunity to express my infinite gratitude to the
Security Council for its recent visit to the Central
African Republic, and my sincere congratulations to
the hard-working presidency of Jordan.

In addressing this organ on 10 April 2014 (see S/PV.7153), the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Central African Repubic affirmed that the adoption
of resolution 2149 (2014), authorizing the deployment
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA), was a crucial step in the process of
restoring security and peace, and hence stability, in
the Central African Republic. The deployment of the
Mission began 15 September 2014 following the signing
of the headquarters agreement between the Central
African Government and the United Nations.

I wish, on behalf of the Government, to extend the
gratitude of the Central African people to all members
of the Security Council and to the Secretary-General,
and to commend the outstanding work of the European
Union-led peacekeeping force and Operation Sangaris,
alongside MINUSCA, to restore to an entire nation the
hope of finding peace.

Resolution 2149 (2014) established the mandate of
MINUSCA, which essentially consists of protecting
civilians, with particular attention to women and
children affected by armed conflict; supporting the
implementation of the transition, including the extension
of the authority of the State and the maintenance of the
territorial integrity of the Central African Republic;
facilitating the delivery of humanitarian assistance
to the Central African displaced and refugees;
working to achieve national justice and the rule of
law; and proceeding to disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation.

Eight months after the Mission's deployment,
it should be noted that progress has been made by
MINUSCA. It is now necessary to reassess the Mission
in order to better adapt its actions to realities on the
ground. To date, there has been a real improvement
in the security situation in Bangui and in certain
provincial localities, despite the periodic resurgence of
violence. There are no longer any real confrontations
between the two camps in Bangui or in the hinterland.
Nevertheless, acts of major banditry persist, including
stick-ups, kidnappings and armed robberies. The free
movement ofpeople and goods remains a major concern
throughout the territory.

Joint patrols of MINUSCA, the national police and
the gendarmerie have helped to restore security and
promote the resumption of economic and commercial
activities and the redeployment of the administration
to some areas. I thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report on the situation in the Central
African Republic (S/2015/227), and the Security Council
for renewing the MINUSCA mandate, and I welcome
the significant progress made in the implementation of
its new mandate, which will allow the Central African
Government to finalize the timing of the transition,
whose outcome will be the long-awaited restoration
of constitutional legality. To that end, MINUSCA
should not delay in undertaking timely deterrent
operations, such as those in Bangui, Sibut, Bambari,
Bria and N'De'le', which had the desired effect in the
areas occupied by armed groups. Such actions should
continue when the situation requires, pending the
implementation of the disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation programme.

The decision of the Secretary-General and the
Security Council to grant MINUSCA an effective
capacity of 750 soldiers, 288 police offciers and
20 prison officers will enable the Mission to fulfil its
mandate and to address the security gaps created by its
lack of staff.

In humanitarian terms, the improvement of the
situation is characterized by a gradual return of
internally displaced persons (IDPs) both to Bangui
and to the provinces through the multifaceted support
of humanitarian workers. The highest concentration
of IDPs is currently in Bambari, Batangafo and Kaga
Bandoro, due to persistent insecurity. Moreover, some
refugees in neighbouring countries are beginning to
return home.

At the political level, since the signing of the
Brazzaville agreements the political process has
proceeded in accordance with the measures defined
under the auspices of the international mediator. The
local consultations went smoothly in the 16 prefectures
and in some neighbouring countries, thanks to the
determination of the Government and the multifaceted
support of MINUSCA and the international forces.
The preparations for the Bangui Forum, originally
scheduled to be held from 27 April to 4 May 4, and
which will now take place from 4 to 11 May, are
proceeding apace. A steering committee for the Forum
has been established and is operational. The National
Electory Authority is pursuing its preparations for the
electoral process despite the uncertainty surrounding
its funding. In this regard, we urgently appeal to the
international community for substantial support.
Among the goals that have been set by the
TransitionalAuthorities is the fight against impunity
that was so ardently sought by the people in the local
consultations. A step was taken in that direction when
the bill establishing a special criminal court to try the
most serious crimes committed in the Central African
Republic was adopted on 22 April by the National
Transitional Council, which is the interim Parliament.

This progress is also noticeable in the field of
human rights. The support provided by MINUSCA and
our various partners has enabled the Government to
gradually reconstitute the judicial chain in Bangui and
in certain regions of the country. Several perpetrators
have been arrested and are awaiting trial. The United
Nations Human Rights Council has conducted
investigations into violations of human rights and its
report has been published.

As the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for the Central African Republic and Head
of MINUSCA stressed in his briefing to the Security
Council on 14 April (see S/PV.7427), Central
Africans continue to rely on the Mission for the
effective implementation of its mandate, with the
ongoing commitment and support of the Council. The
international community has a moral obligation to
assist the Central African Republic and its people to
keep to the path of peace and reconciliation. Special
and sustained attention must therefore be maintained,
given the complexity of the situation in my country.

The Central African delegation wishes to thank all
the members of the Security Council for having adopted
resolution 2217 (2015) today, and especially the French
delegation for having initiated the text, whose content
meets the expectations of the Head of State and other
stakeholders of the Transition.

