Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we commend Japan's presidency of the Council
this month and Italy's presidency last month. We highly
value the efforts made to convene this meeting to
discuss a very important topic that is considered to be
an issue of major concern for all Member States, under
the theme "Maintenance of international peace and
security: addressing complex contemporary challenges
to international peace and security". We thank you,
Sir, for the concept note (S/2017/ 1016, annex) that was
prepared for today's meeting. Finally, I would like to
thank the Secretary-General for his valuable briefing
earlier today.

The United Nations was formed 72 years ago
with the purpose of saving future generations from
the scourge of war, and its main role, according to the
first paragraph of the Charter of the United Nations,
is the maintenance of international peace and security,
which is ensured by preventing conflict. The Security
Council is tasked with that primary responsibility,
in accordance with Chapter V of the Charter, which
contains other relevant Articles and Chapters. Chapter
VI, in particular, includes provisions that authorize
the Security Council to perform its role. However, the
Security Council's ability to carry out its responsibilities
varies and, in some instances, those responsibilities
and powers are not fully exercised.

Kuwait's foreign policy is primarily founded on
resolving conflicts peacefully and diplomatically, as
our history shows over time. We support efforts at
mediation and the peaceful resolution of conflicts,
as well as efforts to build national and regional
capabilities, enhance peace and stability, achieve
development and uphold human rights, especially in
areas of tension that are at risk of slipping into conflict.
We reiterate Kuwait's deep conviction that development
and human rights are intrinsically linked to security,
and we support efforts to achieve the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development in order to leave no one
behind and address one of the main reasons for conflict
throughout the world.

We also underscore that the Secretary-General's
vision for enhancing and entrenching the main pillars
of the United Nations - peace, security, human
rights and development - will undoubtedly lead to
sustaining peace. That requires complete harmony
and coordination of effort among the relevant organs
in order to address any threats to international peace
and security. We must acknowledge the urgency of
enhancing the relationship between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations - in line
with today's reality where the problems we face are
extremely complex and intertwined, in a way that no
single country can resolve them without cooperation
and assistance from others.

We look forward to enhancing regional strategic
cooperation and partnerships with other organizations,
especially the League of Arab States and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation. We also agree
with the Secretary-General's description of the new
challenges facing international peace and security and
the need to prevent conflict, given the complexity of the
challenges and the need for multidisciplinary responses
to them.

We therefore reiterate the need to hold regional
dialogues and enhance the exchange of expertise in
arriving at a common regional approach to resolving
conflicts and other issues pertaining to regional and
international peace and security. That should entail
the continued involvement of regional and subregional
organizations in the peaceful settlement of conflicts,
including through prevention, confidence-building,
mediation and good offices.
Peacebuilding and peacemaking are one of the
main pillars of maintaining of international peace
and security, which underscores the importance
of upholding and strengthening that dimension in
peacekeeping operations and instituting the necessary
reforms to enable peacekeeping operations to fully
fulfil their mandates.

I agree with the Secretary-General's vision for
reforming the peace and security pillar of the United
Nations, which is considered an important step towards
enhancing the effectiveness of that pillar. I also
welcome the General Assembly's adoption this morning
of resolution 72/199, on restructuring that pillar so
that the Secretary-General can begin to implement
his vision in order that the United Nations becomes
more transparent, effective, accountable and capable of
upholding the responsibilities entrusted to it.

While we look forward to our membership of the
Security Council starting next year, we would like
to take this opportunity to express our appreciation
to Japan, Italy, Senegal, Uruguay, Ukraine and, last
but not least, sisterly Egypt. We thank them for their
outstanding role and the valuable, effective contribution
that they have made to the Security Council during
their membership.

