Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
Allow me at the outset to extend to congratulate you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month and to express our great
appreciation to Ambassador Alfredo Lopes Cabral, the
Permanent Representative of Guinea-Bissau, for the
outstanding manner in which he conducted the work of the
Council last month.

It gives me great pleasure to join other members in
welcoming the ministerial delegation from the Southern
African Development Community (SADC), which honours
the Council with its presence here today. The very presence
of the delegation signifies the international community's
interest in establishing peace in Angola and its grave
concern at the slow pace of and stalemate in the peace
process. It also indicates great interest in replacing the
doubts and suspicion now characterizing the relations
between the Angolan parties with constructive relations
based on mutual trust, coexistence and respect for the
interests of the Angolan people above every other
consideration.

The statements made by the SADC Foreign Ministers
and other speakers have emphasized the fact that the
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol has been
disappointing over the last three months because of
UNITA's failure to respect its commitments. This is a very
serious phenomenon, which cannot be accepted by the
international community, whether in Angola, Liberia, the
Middle East or any other region. Full commitment to
implementation of the spirit and the letter of agreements
signed by the parties, with clear evidence of good-will, is
the linchpin of the successful implementation of any peace
accord. This is what the international community now
expects.

The commitments of the two parties in the context of
a settlement in Angola are clear and unambiguous. On the
one hand, the Government of Angola must complete the
quartering of its forces in their camps and to finalize the
quartering of the rapid reaction police in designated camps.
It must also disarm civilians, ensure that UNITA is
involved in decision-making and can assume public office
and, finally, ensure that UNAVEM. III is able to carry out
the functions entrusted to it. It is clear to all that the
Government of Angola is honouring its commitments.

 

On the other hand, UNITA has yet to implement its
commitments in a complete and timely manner. These
include expediting the quartering of all its combatants,
handing over all light and heavy weapons, and
withdrawing its police forces from the areas it has
evacuated. It must also enable the Government of Angola
to extend State administration over all parts of the country
without exception, expedite the selection of some 27,000
of its soldiers to be incorporated into the national army
and dispatch to Luanda the 10 Generals who are
designated to join the Angola Armed Forces. Moreover,
it must transform itself into a political party and consider
the question of the assumption by one of its leaders of the
post of Vice-President offered by President Dos Santos.

In the context of respecting previous commitments,
I would like to note once again that Egypt welcomes the
many positive steps taken by the Government of Angola;
we call on that Government to continue along that path,
which will promote mutual trust and prompt the other
party to follow its example.

It was a source of concern that the report of the
Secretary-General indicated that only 27.4 per cent of the
total resources needed to demobilize soldiers, rehabilitate
them and reintegrate them into civilian life have been
made available. Since more than 100,000 soldiers will be
demobilized from both sides, donor States must honour
the pledges they made at the Round Table Conference in
Brussels last year.

The States of southern Africa have once again
proved the ability of regional groupings in Africa to adopt
unified policies on a crisis in one of their States and to
pursue such policies with persistence and great
effectiveness. This, we believe, is an example that should
be followed in Africa and throughout the world.

Today Africa is witnessing regional activities to
settle three of the most acute conflicts: in Central Africa,
the Arusha summit States are working to resolve the
Burundi crisis; in Western Africa, Economic Community
of West African States is working to resolve the Liberian
crisis; and in Southern Africa, the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) is working to promote
the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol, which was
signed almost two years ago. The phenomenon of the
various States throughout Africa tackling crises within
their regions deserves the full support and encouragement
of the Security Council. The neighbouring States are
certainly the ones that pay the price for ongoing conflicts,
and they are more capable than others of envisaging how

 

these conflicts can be resolved and of influencing the
course of events. The delegation of Egypt therefore
supports the demands made by the Ministers and calls upon
the international community's representatives in the
Security Council to support and encourage these efforts and
adopt the necessary draft resolution, as requested by the
Ministers.

The delegation of Egypt supports the position that
breaking the stalemate in the implementation of the Lusaka
Protocol depends on UNITA's political will to transform
itself into a political party and renounce all activities that
might impede the implementation of the peace process. We
are also fully convinced that this will happen only if the
international community, especially the three troika States,
bring suitable pressures to bear.

We are very pleased to welcome the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Maitre Blondin
Beye, and to affirm our full confidence in his work. He
stated the other day during a meeting with Security Council
members that in spite of the aforementioned obstacles, the
United Nations has scored significant successes in Angola,
foremost among them halting the bloodshed among the
Angolans and the assembling of UNITA forces in camps.
I would like to add to this list the success of the United
Nations in training in Angolans in mine clearance and the
United Nations efforts to rebuild the infrastructure of the
country. Such successes are worthy of commendation.

As regards the report of the Secretary-General, the
main thrust of which accords with the appraisal of the
SADC leaders, I would like to express our support for the
extension of the UNAVEM. III mandate for two months.
We look forward to the Council's adoption of a draft
resolution to this effect.

In conclusion, we would like to note that the
opportunity available to the Angolan parties, thanks to the
presence in their territory of the largest current United
Nations peacekeeping mission, should not be squandered.
Extending the mission without achieving real progress in
the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol is a complex
and difficult decision, especially since our Organization is
experiencing a financial crisis, the acuteness of which is
known to all. This places additional responsibility on the
Angolan parties to utilize as much as possible the
international presence in their territory in such a way as to
encourage the international community to continue to
provide the humanitarian, technical and economic assistance
Angola will need in the coming years. It is high time Africa

 

proved that its causes are not lost causes, as some like to
describe them.

Finally, I cannot but express our appreciation for the
efforts of the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative, Maitre Blondin Beye, and for the
continued efforts of UNAVEM. III to achieve lasting
peace for our brothers in Angola.

