Mr. Atlassi (Morocco) (spoke in French): I would
first like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
presidency of the Security Council for the month
of November, and to thank you for organizing this
very important debate. I would also like to take this
opportunity to thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing on the subject.

In a globalized world that is tested daily and
faced with challenges of many kinds, multilateralism
is not a choice but a necessity, even an obligation,
to work together for the benefit of humankind and
the well-being of humans. In the twentieth century,
multilateralism became a way to end the ravages of
war and anarchy. That is why the founding fathers of
the Organization signed the United Nations Charter
in San Francisco on 26 June 1945, to save succeeding
generations from the horrors of war and poverty, and
of disrespect for human dignity and human rights. The
aim is to maintain international peace and security,
guarantee development and promote human rights. The
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations were therefore carefully designed to ensure that
they would not date and that they would restore human
dignity and enshrine the principle of equality among
the States Members of the United Nations. Importantly,
the link between those principles has been shown over
time to confirm the notion of causality. A failure of any
one of them has a negative impact on the others.

Multilateralism's raison d'etre is now more essential
than ever, considering the emerging challenges facing
our States. In addition, the proliferation and expansion of
terrorism, the growing numbers ofconflicts and hotbeds
of tension, as well as the expansion of transnational
organized crime and its links to international terrorism,
along with other challenges, have emerged and have had
a major and acute impact on the international scene.
Those other challenges include worsening poverty and
outbreaks of famine in several regions; unemployment,
especially among young people, which has reached
alarming levels in various countries, encouraging some
of those young people to embrace the fundamentalist
tenets of terrorism, radicalism and Violent extremism
and to become easy prey for transnational crime and
trafficking networks; climate change and its impact
on the environment and people; increases in natural
disasters such as earthquakes, tsunamis, the El Nifio
phenomenon, forest fires and so forth, along with
desertification and pollution on land, air and sea. All of
those problems should challenge us to act together and
foster multilateralism.

There is no shortage of examples that reaffirm
the importance of multilateralism and the crucial
role played by the United Nations as a fitting venue
for uniting us around the principles important to the
international community. In that regard, we support
the reforms initiated by the Secretary-General aimed
at providing the United Nations with better tools for
meeting our current challenges. The principles of the
Charter must be achieved by taking a comprehensive
and multidimensional approach that focuses on the
rule of law in all aspects of international relations,
including respect for the Charter of the United Nations,
the peaceful settlement of disputes, respect for States'
sovereignty, national unity and territorial integrity, and
non-interference in their internal affairs.

In fealty to the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, the Kingdom of
Morocco became a member of the Organization on
12 November 1956. Ever since then we have been an
active member of the international community and an
ardent defender of the purposes and principles of the
Charter, which have become the pillars of our foreign
policy and international action. Morocco affirms the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations relating
to the peaceful settlement of disputes, as outlined in
Chapter VI, and firmly supports the continued role
of the United Nations as a universal Organization
responsible for resolving issues related to maintaining
international peace and security, promoting human
rights and fostering sustainable development.

It is in that spirit that the Kingdom of Morocco,
positioning its foreign policy within a framework of
preventive diplomacy, encourages the use of dialogue
and negotiation in seeking the peaceful settlement
of disputes. Constructive and responsible dialogue is
essential to that end. Morocco has willingly assisted
in efforts aimed at reconciliation and the settlement of
disputes, as His Majesty King Mohammed VI did in
the mediation efforts to resolve the crisis in the Mano
River region, and in supporting our Malian brothers
in dealing with their crisis and our Libyan brothers in
getting back on their feet. We hosted the inter-Libyan
dialogue held under the auspices of the United Nations
that culminated in the signing of the Libyan Political
Agreement in Skhirat on 17 December 2015. Beyond
that, we want to contribute to building a united Arab
Maghreb, a united Arab world and a united Africa.

In addition, in its efforts to resolve crises on our
African continent and elsewhere, since 1960 Morocco
has been involved in United Nations efforts to maintain
international peace and security through its participation
in peacekeeping operations in Somalia, the Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo, cote d'Ivoire and Mali, as well as
in NATO and European Union operations mandated by
the Security Council. In addition, during its three terms
as a non-permanent member of the Security Council,
the Kingdom of Morocco has consistently defended the
objectives and principles of the Charter and advocated
for efficient and effective multilateralism.

Climate change is an extremely important issue
for Morocco, which is why in Marrakech in November
2016 we hosted the twenty-second Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change.

Lastly, in Marrakech on 10 and 11 December, the
Kingdom of Morocco, continuing its tireless efforts
to revitalize and foster multilateralism, will host the
Intergovernmental Conference to Adopt the Global
Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration.

