The Secretary-General: It is good to see you
again in New York, Mr. President.

Chapter VI of the United Nations Charter, on the
pacific settlement of disputes, stands at the heart of the
Organization's system of collective security. Over the
past 10 years, resolutions adopted under Chapter VII
have been the better known, but the majority of the
Council's work continues to be carried out under
Chapter VI. While the framers of the Charter
understood clearly the need for an enforcement
mechanism and provided for the use of force against
threats to international peace and security, their hopes
for a better world lay in the peaceful resolution of
armed conflicts.

In recent years, the Council has used Chapter VI
in various ways. It has entered into direct dialogue with
the parties to conflict - for example, through its
discussions with the Political Committee of the Lusaka
Agreement. It has tried to work more closely with the
Economic and Social Council and with regional and
subregional organizations to prevent and resolve
conflicts in Africa.

The Council frequently calls on me to use my
good offices as Secretary-General and has encouraged
me to appoint a growing number of special
representatives and envoys. And increasingly, Council
members are venturing into the field - as they will
later this week in West Africa - for a fact-finding
mission, to review implementation of a peace
agreement, to deliver messages or even to conduct
negotiations.

I think we would all agree that these efforts have
achieved mixed results. We have seen both innovation
and inertia. We have seen genuine displays of political
will and instances where the Council has failed to
dissuade the parties to a conflict from using force.

The questions today are: what have we learned
from these experiences, and how can we do better?

My report on the prevention of armed conflict
(S/2001/574) made a number of recommendations,
including the use of regional prevention mechanisms,
more frequent resort to the International Court of
Justice and increased reporting by the United Nations
system to the Security Council about serious violations
of international law or of human rights, and about
potential conflicts arising from ethnic, religious or
territorial disputes, or from poverty or other factors.

While the primary responsibility for the pacific
settlement of disputes rests with Governments and the
parties to a dispute, the Council has many tools at its
disposal and can play a key role, while pressing those
directly involved to make peace, as the Council itself
recognized in resolution 1366 (2001), on conflict
prevention.

The Council can help identify and address root
causes early, when opportunities for constructive
dialogue and other peaceful means are greatest. It can
ensure an integrated approach that brings together all
factors and all actors, including civil society. And it
can support the other United Nations organs in their
efforts to resolve disputes or to address volatile
situations before they erupt into full-fledged threats to
international peace and security.

Let us be imaginative. Let us use what influence
we have. And let us focus on implementation and
action.

I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for your
initiative in putting this subject on the agenda of the
Council during Pakistan's presidency. Recourse to
Chapter VII may have increased in the past decade, but
that does not lessen the importance of Chapter VI. The
processes it sets out for the peaceful settlement of
disputes and situations affecting international peace
and security remain as relevant today as they have ever
been.

