Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): We thank all the
briefers for their detailed, informative and, indeed,
illuminating briefings this morning.

South Africa remains extremely concerned at the
serious humanitarian and security situation in Yemen.
The continued violence, including the attacks on Abha
International Airport, remains unacceptable and must
be condemned. South Africa firmly believes that, in
order to ensure a long-term solution to the crisis in
Yemen, it is necessary for all parties to commit to a
political process. With that in mind, we welcome the
progress made in the implementation of the Hudaydah
Agreement and the role played by the United Nations
Mission to Support the Hudaydah Agreement
(UNMHA).

We support the renewal of the UNMHA mandate
for an additional six months, which was unanimously
adopted by the Council on Monday (see S/PV.8572). We
therefore wish to encourage all parties -who, by signing
the Stockholm Agreement in the first place, have shown
their willingness to commit to its implementation - to
make every effort to fully implement all the elements of
the Agreement, namely, the ceasefire and redeployment
of forces, facilitation of the movement of humanitarian
aid and, lastly, a prisoner swap. South Africa therefore
calls on all parties to de-escalate the fighting in other
parts of the country and commit to a general ceasefire
to enable dialogue and inclusive peaceful negotiations.
We wish to reiterate that the success of the Stockholm
Agreement will require the sustained implementation
of confidence-building measures by both parties.

Mr. Lowcock's briefing this morning was a painful
reminder of the dire humanitarian situation in Yemen.
My delegation therefore calls upon all parties to ensure
that the necessary humanitarian assistance is able to

safely reach the intended destinations without being
used as a tool to further fuel the conflict. In this regard,
we are concerned by the recent partial suspension of
food aid from the World Food Programme, the dire
implications of which were clearly articulated this
morning by Executive Director Beasley. We call for the
matter to be resolved in order for this aid to be resumed
for those in need. Any hindrance to the delivery of this
vital humanitarian aid only exacerbates the already
severe crisis.

In conclusion, we wish to reiterate that the only
sustainable resolution will be a negotiated, Yemeni-
led political process that is inclusive and fair and
puts the interests and well-being of all the citizens of
Yemen first.

