Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank the delegation of the United Kingdom for
convening this meeting, and Mr. Lowcock for once
again informing us about the devastating situation
in Yemen.

We reiterate our deep regret at the continuation of
the conflict in Yemen. Far from a non-existent military
solution, the actions of the parties and their contempt for
international law and international humanitarian law
have aggravated what is already the worst humanitarian
crisis in the world today. We are facing the clear failure
of the Security Council to fulfil its responsibilities
of maintaining international peace and security and
protecting 22 million vulnerable Yemenis.

The continuous bombings and terrorist attacks are
compounded by recurring outbreaks of cholera and the
worst famine that the world has seen in the past 100
years. Girls and boys are the most vulnerable and are
the main victims of the conflict and the humanitarian
crisis. It is estimated that thousands of children under
the age of five could die as a result of malnutrition and
disease in the remainder of the year alone. We believe
that their abandonment by the international community
fosters the development of violent extremism that leads
to terrorism.

Peru condemns the Houthi rebels and their
crimes, including indiscriminate attacks against urban
centres in Saudi Arabia, for which they will be held
accountable. We also condemn the attacks carried
out by members of the coalition against civilians and
vital civilian infrastructure for dealing with cholera
outbreaks. We are still awaiting the transparent and
credible investigation requested by the Council to
identify, prosecute and punish those responsible for
the bombing of a bus that killed dozens of children last
August. Impunity is not acceptable.

We note with alarm the prospect of an escalation in
the city and port of Al-Hudaydah, which could further
restrict access to the food, medicine and fuel required
to meet humanitarian needs. Only one vessel carrying
containers has entered that port since November of last
year. We reiterate that ports, airports and land routes
must remain open and operational, as provided for in
the Council's presidential statement (S/PRST/2018/5) in
March. Likewise, humanitarian aid and the population's
access to such aid cannot and should not be conditioned
by any military objective.

In view of that, we reiterate our support for the
efforts of Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Yemen, to restore dialogue
among the parties. We also wish to convey, through
Mr. Lowcock, our support for the humanitarian work
of the United Nations and other humanitarian agencies,
whose capacities are overstretched by the scale of
the humanitarian crisis. As has been noted, the battle
against famine is being lost. In that context, it is vital
that the international community also contribute to
financing humanitarian activities, controlling inflation
and stabilizing the local currency, facilitating the
imports of basic goods and kick-starting the economy.

I conclude by noting that Council members,
in particular those with influence over the parties,
can and should do more to protect the population
without resorting to double standards or strategic
considerations. Peru emphasizes the urgent need for a
cessation of hostilities that allows free access to food
and humanitarian aid, as well as the need for the Yemeni
parties to negotiate a political solution. The time to act
is now. We cannot continue to be passive bystanders to
this tragedy.

