The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives Norway and Somalia, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the consideration of the item without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in Arabic): On behalf of
the Security Council, I extend a warm welcome to His
Excellency Mr. Abdurahman Ibrahim, First Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister of Fisheries and Marine
Resources of Somalia.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and head of the United
Nations Political Office for Somalia.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Ould Abdallah to take a seat at the
Council table.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter from His Excellency Mr. Pedro
Serrano, in which he requests to be invited, in his
capacity as acting head of the delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate in
the consideration of the item on the Council's agenda.
2

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Mr. Pedro Serrano.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Serrano to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter from the Permanent Representative of
Uganda to the United Nations, in which he requests
that the Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union Commission, His Excellency
Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item in accordance with rule 39 of
the Council's provisional rules of procedure. If I hear
no objection, I shall take it that the Council agrees to
extend an invitation under rule 39 to Mr. Lamamra.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Lamamra to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I wish to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to document S/2010/234, which contains the
report of the Secretary-General on Somalia.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Ould Abdallah. I now give the floor to
Mr. Ould Abdallah.


