I thank Mr. Mladenov for his briefing and welcome him back to the virtual home the Council has been working in over the past few weeks. Especially in these uncertain times, we appreciate the way he and his team continue to work to address this conflict fairly. That is so important. From so many of this Council's discussions already, we have seen that the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is affecting life all over the world. It does not respect persons or borders. But while our attention is rightly focused on the immediate task of stopping the spread of the virus, we cannot allow our immediate goals to entirely overshadow the long-term goal of achieving progress in the Middle East - the focus of today's briefing. In the light of that long-term goal, I want to focus my remarks today on just one point - in a time of crisis, true leadership is the willingness to make the difficult but right choices for the people you serve. Those choices are neither easy nor in keeping with business as usual, but they lift up those who most need our help. With that point in mind, I want to look at some recent choices that demonstrate true leadership. Israel is suffering from over 13,000 cases of coronavirus, and we understand that there are more than 300 cases in the West Bank and 15 in Gaza. Because of its limited medical infrastructure and fragile economy, Gaza is especially vulnerable to this virus. Fighting the pandemic must remain the focus of regional authorities. But even as authorities fight the pandemic, what has been striking is the way in which they are exhibiting true leadership - by putting aside politics and making bold decisions for the well-being of the Israeli and Palestinian peoples. We have been heartened to see signs of goodwill, humanity and unity between Israelis and Palestinians. Israel has trained four teams of Palestinian health-care workers on the COVID-19 response, and Israeli and Palestinian leaders have established a joint virtual COVID-19 control room to enhance coordination and communication. Moreover, Israel is currently testing COVID-19 treatments that have had promising early results. We commend each of those efforts. In many of the Council's meetings on this topic, there have been united calls for greater dialogue between Israelis and Palestinians, as we believe it is the only way to achieve true and lasting progress. In the midst of this crisis, we are seeing evidence that bears out our belief. The United States is committed to helping leaders make choices that save human lives and honour human dignity. As a part of our own broader contributions to fighting the pandemic around the world, we recently announced $5 million in aid to Palestinian hospitals and households to meet immediate needs in combating COVID-19. We will continue to assess how United States assistance can most effectively and efficiently use the resources of our taxpayers, but I want to be clear that we are committed to making the right choices - those that save lives and honour human dignity everywhere. In the light of recent steps taken to form a national emergency Government, please know that Israel can count on our unwavering support as we face today's challenges side by side. As Ambassador Craft has said on many occasions, Israel has no better friend than the United States. The COVID-19 crisis has been painful, but it has already provided important clarity about which of our priorities really matter. At the end of the day, the tired conversations we repeat and the political battles we continue to fight all pale in comparison to our responsibility to save lives. Once this crisis passes, the United States hopes our view does not lose that clarity. The incentives for peace and progress between Israelis and Palestinians are stronger than ever. The task now before the Council is to help the parties choose true leadership over politics as usual and to work together to ensure that the prospect of peace remains within reach.
