Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, let me thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe for his briefing.

In recent weeks, several events of great
importance have occurred in the Middle East, events
that have strengthened the positive movement that
began to emerge at the end of last year and at the
beginning of this year. I am thinking first of the
formation of a Palestinian National Unity Government
on 17 March. France, which had long wished for this,
welcomes this development, as it might end the spiral
of inter-Palestinian Violence and relaunch the peace
process. We wish to pay tribute in particular to
President Abbas' efforts, which led to this agreement
between Hamas and Fatah. That is the message that the
President of the French Republic conveyed to him
during his recent visit to France.

France would also hail here the revival of the
Arab Peace Initiative during the summit of the League
of Arab States in Riyadh on 29 March last. In our View,
it constitutes an essential basis for any solution to the
Arab-Israeli conflict.

Lastly, France welcomes the continuation of
contacts between Palestinian President Mahmoud
Abbas and Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert, who
met in Jerusalem on 15 April and who are due to meet
again soon in Jericho. It is important to make the most
of these contacts, not only to find practical answers to
the daily suffering of the Palestinian people, but also to
revive a genuine political process.

In this context, France strongly deplores the
resumption of violence that we have seen these past
few days in Israel and in the Palestinian territories. We
condemn the Israeli army operations that have left nine

people dead, including two teenagers this weekend in
the West Bank and in Gaza. Likewise, we condemn the
rocket firing that continues to target Israeli territory
almost daily, in violation of the truce. The recent
statements by the armed wing of Hamas are very
disturbing from this point of View. We call on the two
sides not to enter again into a spiral of violence, but
instead to maintain the truce reached in Gaza and to
work for its rapid extension to the West Bank. We call
on the Palestinian Government to do everything it can
to ensure that the truce with Israel is respected.

What can and must the international community
do to strengthen the political momentum and prevent a
further exacerbation of the Violence?

First, it should encourage the National Unity
Government to move quickly towards full respect for
the principles of the peace process as recalled by the
Quartet. To do so, and without conceding any aspect of
these fundamental principles, France is in favour of
resuming contacts with certain members of this
Government, as it did recently in receiving Foreign
Minister Ziad Abu Amr. France is also in favour of
resuming cooperation and direct financial aid,
specifically to the Ministry of Finance. In this regard,
we again call on Israel to transfer all taxes and
revenues due to the Palestinian Authority.

Next, the two sides must be encouraged to set out
once again on the path of negotiation, in the context of
their bilateral contacts, with a View to the creation of
an independent, sovereign, democratic and viable
Palestinian State living side by side with Israel in
peace and security. Confidence-building measures are
expected from both parties. It is the responsibility of
the international community to reaffirm its
expectations. The Palestinian Authority must be
relentless in fighting terrorism and must step up all its
efforts to obtain the immediate release of Gilad Shalit.
For its part, Israel must lift the restrictions on
movement of Palestinians, release the elected
Palestinian officials it is holding, freeze all settlement
activities and end construction of the wall of separation
within the Palestinian territory.

Lastly, France considers it indispensable to
strengthen the momentum that started at Riyadh. On
the basis of this initiative, the international community
must encourage the parties to define, in relation with
the Ad Hoc Follow-up Committee of the Arab League,
the modalities of an effective resumption of the peace
negotiations. Israel has sent positive signals in that
regard and they must be welcomed.

We also encourage the Quartet to work more
intensively with the countries in the region, especially
Egypt, Jordan, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab
Emirates, which have a leading role to play in the
promotion of peace in the Middle East. The Quartet
meeting planned for May offers an opportunity to
launch such cooperation on the basis of the Arab peace
initiative. Subsequently, a carefully organized
international conference could give the parties the
guarantees they need to overcome the obstacles
separating them: security guarantees as well as
political guarantees that would enable them to begin
negotiations on fundamental questions relating to final
status such as borders, natural resources, refugees and
Jerusalem.

