Mr. Mauries (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me first to thank and commend you, Sir, for organizing
this debate, which is of key importance to us. The
discussion seems to have evolved in a thoroughly
desirable manner, including through the statements of
ministers of countries of the region and the
participation of the President of the Economic and
Social Council and representatives of the major
agencies concerned. France supports the statement
made by the representative of Denmark on behalf of
the European Union.

I will not review all the conflicts in the region or
the endeavours under way in the United Nations. I
should simply like to offer some thoughts inspired by
the Council's follow-up of these issues and by the
statements of the ministers who spoke earlier.

First, cooperation with the States of the region
seems to be increasingly necessary. The Council has in
fact been able to establish excellent working relations
with the States of the region. The best example of this
is undoubtedly related to the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, in connection with which the
Council has been able to establish a genuine
partnership with signatories of the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement. That partnership has been gradually
enhanced by the Council's regular missions to the field
and by meetings here in this Chamber in New York at
least once a year.

The relationship of trust established between the
Council and the States of the region has enabled it to
enjoy direct contact with the reality on the ground and
a conduit whereby to send the necessary messages -
and sometimes warnings that may prove necessary.
Efforts are required on the part of all the countries of
the region in order to build on the progress recently
achieved in the peace process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, a progress that - and we
should not deceive ourselves - is still fragile.

All the States of the region need to bring the
requisite pressure to bear to ensure that armed groups
and factions over which they have some influence, in
the east of the country, lay down their weapons and to
put an end to the massacres that are occurring there.

The process of withdrawal of foreign forces must
be completed, because this is a prerequisite for peace to
return, finally, to the region. And the States concerned
should cooperate fully in implementing the programme
of demobilization, repatriation and reintegration of
members of armed groups.

Likewise, the parties must comply in full with the
Council's resolutions, beginning with the
demilitarization of the tormented town of Kisangani.
There again, neighbouring States have a role to play in
inducing the Congolese Rally for Democracy (RCD)
rebels to comply with that obligation.

The United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC), should
be deployed in the east of the country to better observe
the situation on the ground and support the withdrawal
and the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
process.

The Congolese now need to agree on the
modalities for political transition and reach a political
agreement that will include all the parties.

Finally, mobilization on the part of all will be
necessary to put an end to the plundering of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo's resources. As the
Kassem report has just reminded us, plunder is one of
the driving forces of this conflict, and it is aided and
abetted on all sides. It is not acceptable that the
resources of that great country continue to be used to
inflict greater harm on the Congolese people.

The peace process in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo cannot be divorced from the process under
way in Burundi. And there again, the Council is
encouraging the region in its efforts. The recent summit
of the regional initiative made it possible to make some
headway towards a cease-fire, and now the last
recalcitrant rebel movements must cease their
hostilities and negotiate in good faith.

The process in Angola has undergone
considerable turmoil this year. But for the first time,
the Lusaka protocol is now being applied. The people
of Angola must fully seize this historic opportunity to
restore stability and prosperity for all in that country
that has suffered such ordeals in its history.

The Central African Republic, lastly, is a good
example of cooperation between the United Nations
system and Central Africa, where the maintenance of
peace and security is concerned. An international
observer force is to be deployed there, pursuant to a
regional initiative led by President Bongo, to whom
France wishes to pay tribute. The heads of State of the
Central African Economic and Monetary Community
(CEMAC) made that decision at the Libreville Summit
on 2 October. That force will be playing a stabilizing
role in the country and throughout the region. This will
be an observer force, not an intervention force,
meaning that the primary responsibility for regional
stability will lie first and foremost with the parties
themselves. They must quickly implement the
confidence-building measures that were agreed to at
the Libreville Summit. In particular, they should
proceed to remove those individuals who represent an
obstacle to good neighbourly relations between the
Central African Republic and Chad. It is also important
for President Deby to go to Bangui in the near future,
as he has already stated.

Our Council has built up a genuine partnership
with CEMAC where the deployment of this force is
concerned. In a presidential statement adopted last
Friday, it expressed its political support for the States
of CEMAC. It encouraged countries outside of the
continent to provide logistical or financial
contributions. Our Council also laid the foundations of
a sound partnership between the force and the United
Nations presence on the ground. A liaison with the
United Nations Peace-building Office in the Central
African Republic (BONUCA) and General Cisse is
planned, and Gabon, the lead country, will be reporting
to the Security Council.

Above and beyond the monitoring of these crises,
the commitment of the Council and its partners in the
region, the experience that we have acquired in Central
Africa teaches us that security questions are not the
only ones that have to be taken into account in arriving
at a final settlement. The success of peace processes
depends, first and foremost, on the efforts of the parties
themselves. But any peace process needs to be given
the financial means required for its success.

In the course of the missions that it has conducted
in the Great Lakes region, the Council has engaged in
fruitful dialogue with the World Bank and with the
International Monetary Fund (IMF). And we are glad
to observe a growing level of involvement of
international financial institutions and development
agencies in peace-building processes in the region, as
attested by the recent decisions made on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi.

Alongside the emergency efforts of the World
Bank and the IMF, a return to long-term stability in the
region will probably require, as others have already
noted, the convening of an international conference for
peace, security, democracy and development in the
Great Lakes region. Such a conference would involve
the parties, the States of the region and members of the
international community in the identification of steps
to be taken and the mobilization of the means required
to implement them. Such a conference would make it
possible to address, in an all-encompassing fashion, the
various aspects of the conflicts in the Great Lakes
region of Africa. The time has come to think about the
modalities of and arrangements for such a conference.
Active engagement on the part of all concerned will be
needed if it is to be a success.

