Mrs. Sahussarungsi (Thailand): On behalf of the
Government and the people of Thailand, I wish to
warmly congratulate Mexico on your excellent work,
Sir, as President of the Security Council for the month
of April. I would also like to join other delegations in
expressing our solidarity with Mexico in your effort to
tackle the current public health crisis.

Thailand appreciates the leadership of Mexico in
advancing the agenda of children and armed conflict in
the Security Council. We share the commitment and
concerns of the international community on this critical
issue. In that connection, my delegation would like to
take this opportunity to share with the Council our
views on this important issue.

First, Thailand notes that the Security Council
has made significant contributions to the issue of
children and armed conflict, in accordance with its
mandate to maintain international peace and security.

We welcome the ongoing mainstreaming of child
protection in various tasks of the United Nations. In
particular, we welcome the ongoing attempt to
incorporate children's issues into peacekeeping
operations mandated by the Security Council and to
ensure that children's concerns are duly reflected and
taken into account in all phases of mission planning.
We also welcome the mainstreaming of a child-
conscious approach in various political and
peacebuilding missions.

In the meantime, we have been following with
interest the efforts to strengthen the present mechanism
established by the Security Council on the issue of
children and armed conflict. While we believe that
there is certainly room for improving and consolidating
the current mechanism, we agree with the view
expressed earlier that an incremental, step-by-step
approach, based on thorough reflection and
consideration of the Council, should be the way
forward. We cannot stress enough that such key
principles as respect, sincere dialogue and cooperation,
the building of trust and confidence, and consent
should form the basis of all undertakings of the United
Nations agencies in their relationship with the
concerned Governments.

Secondly, because challenges relating to children
are multidimensional and diverse, Thailand believes
that greater coordination and coherence among relevant
United Nations forums and agencies are needed. In
addition to the Security Council, we welcome active
interest in child-related issues in the General Assembly,
the Economic and Social Council, the Human Rights
Council, United Nations funds and programmes, as
well as relevant human rights treaty bodies. We believe
that each of those forums and agencies has its
uniqueness, strengths and constraints, in line with their
respective mandates. With better coordination and
coherence among those diverse instruments, the United
Nations system as a whole will be able to better
respond to the challenges pertaining to children around
the world.

Thirdly, Thailand strongly believes that a holistic
approach is needed to address challenges relating to
children and armed conflict in a sustainable manner.
We need to understand that each situation is unique and
that there is no one-size-fits-all prescription to every
situation around the world. The best way to address
these challenges in the long term is to tackle, with
understanding, the political, economic and social
conditions that have given rise to each situation. We
join other delegations in reiterating the primary
responsibility of the States concerned for ensuring the
effective protection and promotion of the rights of the
child in their respective jurisdictions.

At the same time, we believe that the
international community can play a complementary
role by providing constructive encouragement and
appropriate support to those States. In that regard, we
call on the international community to invest more in
areas that can make a real difference on the ground,
such as the provision of basic needs, the improvement
of people's well-being, basic health care, education,
poverty alleviation, security, the rule of law, good
governance and respect for human rights. All of those
have both empowering and protection effects on the
societies concerned as a whole.

Fourthly, Thailand's commitment to the cause of
the advancement and protection of children has been
and will always be strong, firm and consistent. That
seriousness has been well reflected in our efforts
domestically, regionally and internationally. At present,
Thailand is a State party to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child and its two Optional Protocols,
including that on the involvement of children in armed
conflict. We are committed to the effective
implementation of the obligations contained therein.

We have invested heavily in various measures to
promote, protect and develop children throughout the
country so that they can become a productive force in
society. We have been doing our utmost to ensure
universal access to quality education and a safe
learning environment for our children. Special
attention has also been given to the issue of human
resource development to ensure that all children in
Thailand, regardless of their background, are well
equipped for the challenges of the globalizing world.
At the same time, earnest efforts have been made to
promote the appreciation of diversity, tolerance,
moderation and social harmony among children in
Thailand.

At the regional level, Thailand, as the Chair of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
has been working closely with other ASEAN member
States to advance the issue of human rights in the
region, including the rights of the child. Later this year,
ASEAN is scheduled to establish a human rights body
to advance human rights in the region. ASEAN
member States have also been working together
through various initiatives to promote and protect the
rights of the child as a part of the ASEAN community-
building process.

Last but not least, Thailand cannot stress enough
that the utmost care should be exercised in the
preparation of the Secretary-General's report on the
issue of children and armed conflict. It should be clear
that the scope of the report should be restricted strictly
to situations of armed conflict in accordance with
applicable international law. In that connection, we
would like to underline that any reference in such a
report to any country where there is no situation of
armed conflict in accordance with applicable
international law - for example, a reference to
Thailand - is not only unwarranted but also
misleading, and therefore should not be repeated in the
future. A consultative and cooperative approach based
on the willingness to listen and understand the
complexity, sensitivity and nuances of each case is
needed to ensure that any well-intentioned effort does
not have unintended adverse effects on the ground, in
particular inadvertent impacts on children themselves.

