Ms. DiCarlo: I would like to express condolences
for the attacks at the synagogue in San Diego and at the
church in Silgadji, Burkina Faso, as well as previous
attacks on religious sites in New Zealand and Sri
Lanka. Our sympathy is with the families of the victims
and the Governments in question. The United Nations
condemns terrorism in all its manifestations.

I should also like to pay tribute, on behalf of the
entire United Nations family, to Major General Francis
Vib-Sanziri, the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (UNDOF) Head of Mission and Force
Commander, who passed away suddenly on 19 April. His
leadership, dedication and enthusiasm were invaluable
in commanding UNDOF under difficult circumstances.
He will be remembered for his exemplary career in the
service of United Nations peacekeeping.

We meet today as the United Nations continues to
advance efforts to address the continued humanitarian,
economic and political crisis in the occupied
Palestinian territory. Yet the continuing absence of a
political solution to the broader conflict undermines
and compounds our efforts. Under the pressure of
violence, settlement expansion, unilateral measures,
intra-Palestinian divisions and deepening mutual
mistrust, the prospects for a just and lasting peace
remains ever more elusive.

Hopes for the realization of a two-State solution
continue to be replaced by the rising fears of future
annexation. The possibility of establishing a viable
and contiguous Palestinian State continues to be
eroded by facts on the ground. The United Nations has
repeatedly warned that the conflict cannot be managed
in perpetuity. The status quo will lead only to further
deterioration of the situation, radicalization on all sides,
more suffering and conflict.

Before addressing recent developments on the
ground, I would like to congratulate Palestinian Prime
Minister Shtayyeh on the formation of a new Palestinian
Government. I wish him every success and urge all
Palestinian factions and political leaders to work
together, in good faith, to unify Gaza and the West Bank
under a single, legitimate Palestinian Government.

I also want to congratulate the Israeli people on their
democratic general election on 9 April. On 17 April,
President Rivlin asked Prime Minister Netanyahu to
form a new Government. We stand ready to continue
working with the new government when it is formed.

The prolonged absence of a political solution to
the conflict has coincided with the steady deterioration
of the situation in the occupied Palestinian territory.
During the reporting period, Israeli authorities advanced
at least 2,100 housing units in Area C settlements and
issued tenders for some 950 additional units. One of
the plans advanced would retroactively regularize,
under Israeli law, the illegal outpost of Haresha by
incorporating it into the existing Talmon settlement.
Settlements have no legal effect and constitute a
violation of international law.

Demolitions and seizures of Palestinian-owned
structures also continued across the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem. Israeli authorities demolished
or seized 37 structures, displacing 49 people, mostly
on the grounds that they lacked Israeli-issued building
permits, which are nearly impossible for Palestinians
to obtain. In addition, on 31 March, the Israeli District
Court rejected three appeals challenging demolition
orders submitted by Palestinian residents of the Silwan
neighbourhood of East Jerusalem.

The situation at Jerusalem's holy sites has remained
relatively calm in the past month. I would like to take
the opportunity of the overlapping holidays of Judaism,
Christianity and Islam to wish peace and prosperity
for the peoples of Palestine and Israel, but also to urge
sustained calm, particularly in the holy sites, which
can be achieved only by respecting the status quo and
relevant agreements.

Regrettably, elsewhere the cycle of violence
continues. On 30 March, Palestinians in Gaza marked
the first anniversary of the Great March of Return
protests, which was commemorated by 50,000
Palestinians demonstrating at the perimeter fence.
While the vast majority of the protesters remained
peaceful, a small number ignored the calls for restraint
and engaged in acts of violence against Israel and
attempted to breach the fence. During the reporting
period, seven Palestinians, including four children,
were killed in Gaza by the Israel Defense Forces (IDF)
and 1,316 were injured. I reiterate the previous calls by
the United Nations that children should never be the
target of violence, nor should they be put at risk of
violence or encouraged to participate in violence. I also
reiterate the call on Israel that lethal force should be
used only in response to an imminent threat of death or
serious injury and as a last resort.

During the reporting period. Palestinian militants
fired 30 rockets and mortars from Gaza towards Israel.
The indiscriminate launching of rockets and mortars
towards Israeli civilian populations is prohibited by
international humanitarian law and must immediately
cease. Several incendiary balloons were also launched
from Gaza into southern Israel. These must stop. Hamas
must also ensure that protests remain peaceful and
prevent provocations near the fence, including attempts
to breach it.

Meanwhile, in the West Bank, three Palestinians
were shot and killed by Israeli forces, and 63 were
injured, including 18 children. On 27 March, a 17-
year old Palestinian paramedic was shot by the Israeli
security forces near Al-Duheisha refugee camp in
Bethlehem, and later died of his wounds. The shooting
occurred during clashes following two arrest operations
undertaken by the Israeli security forces in the camp
earlier that day.

Settler-related violence also continued during
the reporting period. According to the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), one
Palestinian was killed and 19 were injured or had
their property damaged by others. On 3 April, two
Israeli civilians opened fire in Nablus, injuring two
Palestinians, including a 23-year-old man who died
later in hospital. On 24 April, following the arrest,
tying and blindfolding of a 15-year-old Palestinian boy
for allegations of stone-throwing, IDF soldiers shot him
twice in his lower body as he attempted to escape while
still blindfolded. The IDF said that it was responding to
massive stone-throwing and that one of the the rioters
was shot as he tried to flee after being arrested.

In the same period, OCHA recorded 14 Palestinian
attacks against Israeli settlers and other Israeli civilians
in the West Bank, where Palestinians threw stones at
vehicles traveling on roads near Bethlehem, Hebron
and Ramallah. One injury and damage to 13 vehicles
were reported.

The reporting period also saw a worsening
Palestinian financial crisis. Despite the austerity
measures announced and the recent pledges of support
by Arab States, the risk of a financial collapse of
the Palestinian Authority is growing. A sustainable
resolution of the Palestinian Authority's funding crisis
is urgently required. Both parties should address the
causes of the crisis through dialogue, implement
their bilateral agreements and avoid taking unilateral
actions that undermine stability and security for both
Palestinians and Israelis alike. I urge the members of
the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
International Assistance to Palestinians (AHLC) to use
its meeting tomorrow in Brussels to work with Israel and
the Palestinian Authority to resolve this crisis, which
threatens the viability of the Palestinian Authority.

I would like to turn to the ongoing humanitarian
and economic crisis in Gaza and begin by highlighting
the plight of women. Seventy per cent of all women in
Gaza today are unemployed. As a result, female-headed
households are more likely to face poverty and food
insecurity. Moreover, we know that poverty and lack of
economic opportunities are key drivers behind violence
against women in Gaza. The United Nations continues
to provide assistance to Palestinian women and girls
across a broad range of areas, but much more needs to
be done to ensure that their needs are addressed.

The United Nations is also making important
progress on the implementation of a package of urgent
humanitarian and economic interventions in order to
stabilize the situation in Gaza, prevent an escalation,
lift the closures and support Egyptian-led reconciliation
efforts. Over the past year, nearly $110 million for fuel,
health, water, sanitation and temporary employment
programmes have been raised. The United Nations
and its partners have mobilized nearly $45 million that
will allow for the creation of approximately 20,000
temporary j obs in 2019. Since September, approximately
$4.6 million in support of the humanitarian response
plan have contributed to the delivery of essential
drugs and the performance of some 9,500 emergency
surgeries. I also welcome Qatar's extension of funding
for the United Nations to procure and deliver fuel to the
Gaza power plant until June.

In a positive development, on 1 April, Israel
extended some areas of the Gaza fishing zone up to 15
nautical miles. I welcome this decision and strongly
urge that the rest of the fishing zone, which remains
limited to 6 to 12 nautical miles, also be expanded.

As we have repeatedly stated, at its core the
crisis in Gaza is political. Significant progress on the
lifting of the closures and advancing intra-Palestinian
reconciliation remains essential. I reiterate my call on
all Palestinian factions to engage in earnest with Egypt
on reconciliation efforts. I also take this opportunity
to thank Member States that have supported the
implementation of the AHLC projects to date and urge
others to contribute to this important effort, including
through critical financial support to the Programme
Management Unit, as well as for the humanitarian
response plan.

Turning to the situation in the region, Lebanon
remains stable, with the continued commitment of
political actors to dialogue leading to Parliamentary
approval of its long-awaited plan to reform the
electricity sector. Discussions continue on the 2019
budget as proposed public sector pay cuts spark protests.
Significantly, Minister of Defence Elias Bou Saab and
Lebanese Armed Forces Commander General Joseph
Aoun visited the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL) and southern Lebanon on 24 April,
with Minister Bou Saab stating that the Lebanese
Armed Forces would increase troop deployment in
southern Lebanon.

The situation in southern Lebanon and along
the Blue Line remained calm. On 2 April, UNIFIL
chaired a regular tripartite meeting attended by senior
delegations from the Lebanese Armed Forces and the
Israel Defense Forces. On 17 April, a UNIFIL team
of technical experts assessed the tunnel located south
of the Blue Line near the Israeli town of Zarit, the
discovery of which had been announced by the IDF on
13 January. UNIFIL concluded that the tunnel crossed
the Blue Line and thereby constituted a violation of
resolution 1701 (2006). The following day, the UNIFIL
Force Commander informed the Commander of the
Lebanese Armed Forces and Minister of Defence
Bou Saab of UNIFIL's findings and requested urgent
follow-up. UNIFIL has now confirmed the existence of
five tunnels, three of which it has confirmed cross the
Blue Line and constitute a violation of resolution 1701
(2006).

Turning to the Golan, on 25 March United States
President Donald Trump signed an official proclamation
recognizing Israel's sovereignty over the occupied
Syrian Golan. As previously noted by the Secretary-
General, the United Nations position on the Golan
is clear. It is reflected in the relevant United Nations
resolutions, notably, resolutions 242 (1967) and 497
(1981).

The ceasefire between Israel and Syria has
been maintained, with relative calm and low levels
of military activity in the areas of separation and
limitation on the Bravo side. The United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) continued to
observe and hear a relatively low level of small-arms
firing in the areas of separation and limitation on the
Bravo side. UNDOF assessed that the firing was due to
training activities conducted by Syrian security forces.
UNDOF also continued to observe the presence of
Syrian Arab Armed Forces in different locations in the
area of separation, including in the vicinity of United
Nations positions.

Yesterday, assisted by the International Committee
of the Red Cross, UNDOF facilitated the transfer of
two Syrian men who had been detained in Israel for a
number of years. Also, the remains of an IDF soldier
missing since 1982 were repatriated from Syria to Israel
after being located with the assistance ofRussian forces.

With regard to the conflict in Syria, the Secretary-
General's Special Envoy for Syria, Mr. Geir Pedersen,
continues his efforts to find a negotiated political
solution. He is working with all sides and making
steady progress on launching a credible, balanced and
inclusive constitutional committee as a door-opener
to a wider political process that encompasses the full
implementation of all elements of resolution 2254 (2015).
He will brief the Council on those efforts tomorrow.

As we mobilize to address the critical needs of
the Palestinian population, be it in Gaza or the West
Bank, we shall not lose sight of the core political
issue, namely, the prospect of two peaceful and secure
States living side by side in harmony. That imperative
compels us all to work with the parties, bring them
back to the negotiation table and urge them to avoid
unilateral actions that undermine the prospects for
peace. We should also work with both sides to establish
an environment conducive to a return to meaningful
discussions. However, only determined action by the
parties themselves can salvage the two-State solution.
Otherwise, Palestinians and Israelis will continue to
live their lives knowing only conflict, mistrust and
fear, rather than the infinite possibilities that would
come with ajust and lasting peace.

Finally, I would like to thank EcoPeace Middle
East forjoining us for today's debate. Its commendable
efforts to promote Israeli-Palestinian-Jordanian
collaboration around shared environmental challenges
are exemplary. I welcome the ongoing commitment
by Member States to generously support and bring
attention to such initiatives.

