Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): At the outset, allow me to thank you,
Mr. President, for having organized this Security
Council meeting on the very important topic of
counter-terrorism.

Brutal terrorist attacks on our territory and many
other States bear witness to the extent of the threat and
remind us of our common responsibility to eliminate
terrorism and the need to strengthen measures to
counter and prevent terrorism. Russia reaffirms its
principled position of unconditional condemnation of
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. We
believe that, owing to its universality, the United
Nations must continue to provide political and moral
leadership and to coordinate international counter-
terrorism efforts, in accordance with its Charter and
other norms of international law.

The Security Council's resolutions on counter-
terrorism remain topical and important. Their full
implementation by United Nations Members is an
essential elements of the wide range of counter-
terrorism measures to which States have committed
themselves under the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy.
Russia is prepared to continue to actively support
the counter-terrorism work of the Security Council and
its specialized subsidiary committees, and to seek to
bolster the effectiveness of measures taken by the
Council. We believe that the further strengthening of
dialogue between the Security Council and Member
States on implementing the relevant resolutions to be
crucial to achieving those objectives.

On a practical level, suppressing the financing of
and other support to terrorists, ensuring that borders
are monitored for terrorist activity, and severing the
links between terrorism and organized crime, including
drug trafficking, remain pressing issues. A clear
example of such dangerous links is Afghanistan, where
terrorism and drug production continue to fuel each
other. According to our assessment, Afghan drug
production has increased to such an extent that it
threatens international peace and stability. The link
between piracy and terrorism is increasingly evident.
In certain regions of the world, pirate groups share
their revenue with terrorists.

It is also very important to take effective steps to
ensure that terrorist acts are punished. Here, the
effectiveness of international preventive cooperation,
including mutual legal assistance, must be
strengthened. The principle of extradition or trial must
prevail. Legal loopholes, safe havens and other ways to
escape accountability must be eliminated. In that
context, it is appropriate to recall Russia's proposal to
develop a global convention on extradition and mutual
legal assistance, including in counter-terrorism.

The overall strengthening of the international
legal basis to fight terrorism is a pressing matter. The
issue of defining terrorism must be resolved in a
comprehensive counter-terrorism convention. The need
to further regulate cyberspace, including preventing its
use for terrorist purposes, is increasingly evident. I
reaffirm that Russia supports the establishment of a
comprehensive convention on cybercrime.

We should also recall the existing international
counter-terrorism conventions. Efforts to increase the
number of signatories should be pursued in order to
promote their full implementation. We note the
important role in that process of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, whose services are
increasingly in demand.

Time has shown that counter-terrorism law
enforcement measures must be complemented by wide-
ranging efforts to prevent terrorism, including steps to
eliminate the conditions that fuel it, to further dialogue
among civilizations and faiths, to counter the ideology
of violence and militant extremism, and to address the
radicalization of societies.

In that regard, we note the significance of
resolution 1624 (2005), which seeks to counter
incitement to terrorism and to enhance intercultural
dialogue and preventive measures. Russia does not
accept the theory of a clash of civilizations and
cultures. It categorically rejects the equation of any
religion with terrorism. In that regard, we see potential
for the Turkish-Spanish Alliance of Civilizations
initiative, which calls for projects to be implemented
under the Alliance to further counter the ideological
spread of terrorism.

Counter-terrorist efforts will be significantly
more effective if States, civil societies and business
work together in the context of an equal and reciprocal
partnership. We are pleased to note that Russia's 2006
initiative for a public-private counter-terrorism
partnership has taken shape, gained the necessary
momentum and become a concrete part of practical
measures, programmes and projects throughout the
world. We will continue to contribute to that work both
nationally and in line with the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, the United Nations
Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute and
the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force.

The adoption of today's draft presidential
statement will reaffirm the Council's resolve and unity
in countering the unrelenting threat of terrorism. It
appropriately reflects the Council's increasing efforts
to counter terrorism and to address that scourge.

In conclusion, I wish to affirm that the Russian
Federation is ready, in close cooperation with other
States, to pursue its Vigorous efforts to strengthen the
international community and to bolster the potential of
the United Nations to resolve pressing issues related to
counter-terrorism security.

