Mr. Serry: Two events with important
implications took place during the reporting period. On
27 April, Palestinian factions concluded a
reconciliation agreement under Egyptian auspices
designed to overcome years of division. Last Sunday,
there were serious clashes between Israeli security
forces and Palestinians in Syria, Lebanon and the
occupied Palestinian territory during the largest
popular demonstration of Palestinians in many years.

Both developments remind us that popular
protests and political change continue to sweep the
Arab world and shake the unsustainable status quo
found in many parts of the Middle East. The Arab-
Israeli conflict will not be immune to these dramatic
developments. One way or another, change will come
to it, too. This change must be shaped to positive ends.

Yet we are worryingly stuck regarding the search
for a two-State solution. As evidenced by Prime
Minister Netanyahu's address to the Knesset on
16 May and President Abbas's opinion piece in the
New York Times on the same date, both sides profess
their desire to negotiate a two-State solution. However,
deep differences over the stalemate in the peace
process remain. There is a genuine lack of trust, and no
credible initiative has yet been taken that could
overcome the impasse. In the absence of negotiations,
and amidst continued Israeli settlement expansion, the
Palestinians are preparing to approach the United
Nations in September to seek recognition of a
Palestinian State.
I turn first to the Palestinian reconciliation
agreement. Bearing in mind resolutions 1850 (2008)
and 1860 (2009), the Secretary-General has continually
supported efforts for Palestinian unity and the work of
Egypt in that regard. The Secretary-General wishes to
see unity in the framework of the positions of the
Quartet and the commitments of the Palestine
Liberation Organization (PLO) and the Arab Peace
Initiative.

Within this framework, the Secretary-General
asked me to represent him on 4 May at the ceremony in
Cairo that marked the conclusion of the accord. The
accord was signed by Fatah and Hamas, together with
other Palestinian factions. Faction representatives met
again earlier this week in Cairo for discussions on the
implementation of the accord, which will clearly be a
process rather than an event. The accord has been
widely welcomed by the Palestinians, who have
strongly pressed their leaders in this direction. Civil
society figures have been active in the process.

Under the accord, a Palestinian Government of
national "capables", or technocrats, is to be formed,
with the Prime Minister and ministers agreed by
consensus. The Government is to prepare for
simultaneous elections for the Palestinian Legislative
Council, the presidency and, where this is possible, the
Palestinian National Council, in one year, organized
and overseen by reformed electoral institutions. During
the transitional period until elections, the Government
is to begin reunifying Palestinian institutions and
follow up on Gaza reconstruction.

The agreement also envisages the establishment
of an interim committee to address national political
issues, in which Hamas and other non-PLO factions
would participate with PLO factions, including Fatah,
pending National Council elections. However, it is
explicitly stated that the work of this committee will
not contradict the jurisdiction of the Executive
Committee of the PLO, which is recognized
internationally as the sole legitimate representative of
the Palestinian people.

At the Cairo ceremony, President Abbas
reiterated his full commitment to the platform of the
PLO, which has long accepted resolutions 242 (1967)
and 338 (1973), recognized Israel's right to exist in
peace and security and renounced violence and
terrorism, and which remains committed to existing
11-34790
agreements. He has stated that any Government he
commissions would support this programme.

The accord envisages the reform of Palestinian
security forces on a national and professional basis,
and the establishment of a security committee of
professional officers, with the participation of Egypt.
Security reform is likely to be a gradual process. The
current realities are expected to continue for the
immediate future. In particular, we believe it is
understood that the security cooperation between the
Palestinian Authority and Israel in the West Bank must
continue, and this is to be respected by all parties.
Equally, we believe there is an intention to observe the
calm that is now in place between Israel and Gaza,
which had been secured in early April with Egyptian
and United Nations assistance.

I can report that no rockets and three mortars
were fired from Gaza during the reporting period.
Calm from Hamas has been met with Israeli restraint.
There were five Israeli incursions and no air strikes
into Gaza. Apart from incidents on 15 May, which I
will come to later, one alleged militant and five
Palestinian civilians were injured in incidents with
Israel security forces, while there were no Israeli
deaths, injuries or material damage around Gaza. The
de facto authorities in Gaza must now actively
maintain this encouraging and important calm. Israel
must show maximum restraint and ensure an
environment conducive to calm.

In the West Bank, existing security cooperation
and performance has been sustained. A seventh
battalion of Palestinian security forces returned to the
West Bank from training in Jordan with international
assistance, raising the number of newly trained security
personnel in the West Bank to over 3,500. We stress the
importance of this process continuing under any future
Government.

Some Hamas statements have suggested that the
faction is ready, within the framework of the accord, to
submit to national decisions on issues on which the
movement itself has extreme positions. However, other
statements assert those extreme positions in worrying
terms. Statements such as those calling on the PLO to
renounce its recognition of Israel, lauding Osama bin
Laden or stressing that the movement's sole
programme is resistance are a reminder of why deep
international concerns remain and why we must follow
developments vigilantly.
We also note Prime Minister Netanyahu's serious
concerns about the accord, which have been repeated
to me by many Israeli interlocutors.

Yet, we would counsel against reaching a
predetermined view about the accord's merits or
prospects. The reunification of Gaza and the West
Bank is a vital goal for all interested in peace, and the
process should not be underlined in its infancy. We
must encourage the formation of a non-factional
Government under President Abbas, with an effective
Prime Minister and ministers, who are able to preserve
the functioning security apparatus on the ground in the
West Bank, adhere to calm in Gaza, expand the State-
building agenda, oversee reconstruction in Gaza, begin
the process of reintegration and prepare for new
elections. The Government should be able to fully
support President Abbas's programme. The
international community's expectations reflected in
Quartet statements are directed to any Palestinian
Government and are clear.

I am pleased that the Israeli Government has now
decided to transfer value added tax and customs
revenues that were withheld from the Government of
Prime Minster Fayyad for a period after the
announcement of the reconciliation accord. These
funds are collected from Palestinians and are essential
for meeting normal budgetary gaps and paying salaries
to employees, including security personnel who are
maintaining cooperation with Israel. Israel's adherence
to its international obligations is the right way to
promote cooperation with a responsible Palestinian
partner.

We appeal to donors to remain fully engaged. To
date, the Palestinian Authority has received about
$30 million less per month than what is budgeted for
the first four and a half months of 2011. Inadequate
donor support for the budget would undermine
Government functions and the State-building agenda,
affecting the ability of the Palestinian Authority to
borrow to meet recurrent expenditures. Continued
engagement based on an assessment of the make-up
and real policies of any new Government under
President Abbas can empower moderation, enhance
security, restore hope, help begin Gaza's reconstruction
and contribute to reunification.

We take note of President Abbas's concerns about
Israel's continued expansion of settlements contrary to
the Road Map and international law. We call once
again for Israel to freeze settlement activity, which
continued apace during the reporting period in the East
Jerusalem and the remainder of the West Bank. We also
continue to stress the need for further measures
regarding Area C and East Jerusalem, both in enabling
Palestinian efforts and supporting vulnerable
communities.

Further measures of liberalization in Gaza are
also essential to solidify the modest progress already
made and empower those seeking continued calm. The
Secretary-General urges the Government of Israel to
take further meaningful and far-reaching steps to end
the closure of Gaza within the framework of resolution
1860 (2009). A free flow of both people and
construction materials in Gaza remains a central
objective of the United Nations.

At present, we urgently need the approval of
further projects, including two United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) housing projects in Khan Younis and
Rafah, totalling 1,100 units. Moreover, the market in
aggregate, steel bar and cement - the so-called ABC
of construction in Gaza - can and should be
liberalized by the Israeli authorities, particularly given
the quantities of construction material now entering
through unregulated tunnels.

The United Nations believes that all assistance
and legitimate goods destined for Gaza should be
channelled through official crossings and established
channels, as requested by the Quartet on 21 June 2010
and the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee on 13 April 2011.
In this regard, we continue to urge action to combat the
smuggling of weapons.

The Secretary-General is also following with
concern media reports of potential new flotillas to
Gaza that can provoke unnecessary confrontations. The
Secretary-General calls on all Governments concerned
to use their influence to discourage such flotillas,
which carry the potential for escalation. He further
calls on all to act responsibly to avoid any violent
incidents.

We must also open Gaza to enable its civil
society and children to engage with the world. I can
personally attest to the positive impact of the visit of
United Nations Messenger for Peace Daniel Barenboim
and the Orchestra for Gaza, comprising musicians from
leading European orchestras, who performed a concert
of works by Mozart on 3 May in Gaza.
I renew our calls for Hamas to release and allow
humanitarian access to Israeli Staff Sergeant Gilad
Shalit, who will have been in captivity for five years
next month. Now is clearly the time to resolve this
humanitarian issue through a prisoner exchange. In that
context, we also follow with concern the situation of
several thousand Palestinians in Israeli prisons, and we
continue to underscore the importance of the release of
prisoners to the Palestinian Authority.

Let me now turn to the serious confrontations that
took place on 15 May between Israeli security forces
and Palestinians in Syria, Lebanon and the occupied
Palestinian territory, as Palestinians demonstrated in
large numbers, marking what they call "Nakba Day".

Allow me to elaborate on some of the most
serious incidents. Regarding the occupied Syrian
Golan, at least 1,000 to 1,200 civilians, the vast
majority of them Palestinian, were allowed into the
area of separation on the Syrian side, to which access
is tightly controlled by the Syrian authorities. They
gathered opposite the village of Majdal Shams, on the
Israeli-occupied side. An estimated 200 to 300
demonstrators who had crossed the ceasefire line broke
through the Israeli technical fence, crossing a clearly
marked minefield despite attempts by the Syrian police
to block them. After firing warning shots, the IDF
opened fire in an attempt to stop protesters from
reaching the Israeli-occupied side. Early reports
indicate that four people were killed and approximately
48 injured by bullets, while approximately 87 others
suffered gas inhalation. Thirteen Israeli soldiers were
also injured in the incident. Subsequently, the majority
of the few hundred civilians who had crossed into the
Israeli-occupied Golan were escorted by local villagers
and returned to the Syrian side. Of the three infiltrators
subsequently arrested by Israeli police, two were
returned to Syria and one remains in Israeli custody.

In southern Lebanon, thousands of Palestinian
refugees gathered in the area of Maroun al-Ras. While
most demonstrators protested peacefully away from the
Blue Line, an estimated 300 to 400 demonstrators
broke away from the demonstration and approached the
Israeli technical fence. They started throwing stones
and interfering with the fence. The IDF opened fire to
repel the demonstrators at the fence. The Lebanese
Armed Forces also fired shots in order to disperse the
demonstrators. Official Lebanese figures say that 10
protestors were killed and 112 injured.
11-34790
The United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL) and the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (UNDOF) were in close contact with
the parties throughout the incidents, trying to restore
calm. UNIFIL and UNDOF are now separately
investigating both incidents, in accordance with their
respective mandates. We recall that full compliance by
all parties with resolutions 1701 (2006) and 350 (1974)
is essential.

In the occupied West Bank on 15 May, 164
people were reportedly injured, mostly in Area C and
East Jerusalem, where Israeli security forces are
present, while Palestinian security forces generally
prevented demonstrators in Area A from approaching
Israeli security positions. In Gaza, 80 people were
reportedly injured in clashes between demonstrators
and the IDF in the Beit Hanoun area near the Erez
crossing. On the same day, one Palestinian was killed
by Israeli fire in the buffer zone area in Gaza. We await
details of an incident in Tel Aviv that day involving a
truck which left one Israeli killed and 17 injured.

The Secretary-General expressed his deep
concern at the fact that a significant number of people
were killed or injured during the events of 15 May. He
called on all concerned to show restraint and refrain
from provocations, so as to prevent any escalation of
tensions and ensure that civilians involved in protests
are not killed or injured. We further note that the
protests involved violations of the Blue Line between
Israel and Lebanon and the disengagement line along
the occupied Golan Heights, and stress the importance
of the Governments in the area ensuring respect for
these lines.

Among the other serious incidents that took place
during the reporting period, two were fatal. A
Palestinian child was killed in East Jerusalem on
14 May, apparently by a settler. An Israeli civilian was
killed and four others injured by Palestinian security
forces on 24 April during an uncoordinated visit by
settlers to a Palestinian-controlled religious site in the
West Bank.

I would like now to turn briefly to the situation in
Lebanon, where, with the exception of the grave
incident of 15 May that I just reported, the overall
situation in the UNIFIL area of operations has
remained generally stable over the last month. Israeli
air violations continued on an almost daily basis.
11-34790

At the political level, almost four months after his
nomination as Prime Minister-designate by President
Sleiman, consultations by Najib Mikati with the new
parliamentary majority have not led to agreement on
the composition of Lebanon's next Government. We
continue to believe that a Government supported by all
is critical to enabling the country to face important
challenges in the political, economic, social and
security spheres.

At this difficult time in the region, we take this
opportunity to urge continued funding for UNRWA and
its support for refugees. The Agency faces an overall
deficit of nearly $65 million in 2011 in its General
Fund, a shortfall that if not bridged would have
significant consequences. UNRWA also requires an
additional $6 million in support for its 2011 Summer
Games activities for children in Gaza.

We are now three months away from September.
There is a State-building agenda that has ensured
Palestinian institutional readiness for statehood in the
West Bank, and there is now a unity process in its
infancy. We hope that real security and economic
improvements can be continued in the West Bank and
broadened to begin to include Gaza, and that elections
can take place in a year. We urge all parties to give this
process a chance, while reminding the Palestinians of
the importance of agreeing on a Government that can
live up to the expectations of the people, meet the
concerns of the international community and support
negotiations with Israel.

But with September just around the corner, a
meaningful political initiative offers the only prospect
for reaching September with the various dynamics in
play working together towards one objective: a
negotiated, two-State solution. In the absence of an
initiative, it is too early to assess whether September
will bring a new and more effective paradigm for
resolving the conflict through negotiations, or renewed
confrontation between the parties in the diplomatic
arena or on the ground.

We strongly agree with United States President
Obama that it is more than ever vital to solve this
conflict, and we will be following closely his speech
on the region today. We also await the address of Prime
Minister Netanyahu to the United States Congress next
week, and whether an initiative for breaking the logjam
will be announced. We will continue to seek enhanced
and substantive Quartet engagement to shape the
5
process between now and September, as well as
beyond. We must show purpose, rather than paralysis,
as we approach a critical period in the search for peace
in the Middle East.

In closing, let me thank retiring United States
Envoy George Mitchell for his two years of tireless and
difficult work on peace in the Middle East. The
Secretary-General and I appreciated our close working
6
relationship with him and his team. We will continue to
work closely with the United States and all our
regional and international partners in the quest for a
two-State solution.

