Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Close collaboration
between the Security Council Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities; the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning counter-terrorism; and the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) is essential to achieving the goal ofeffective
international cooperation in the field of countering
terrorism and the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction (WMD), including through ensuring
the comprehensive implementation of the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council.

We would therefore like to thank our three
colleagues for having provided extensive information
on the activities of the respective Committees and
highly commend the efforts of the Chairs and the
respective expert groups.

In particular, we take positive note of the increase
in the number of their country visits and other outreach
activities aimed at facilitating the improvement of
national counter-terrorism mechanisms, assisting in
the identification of terrorist threats on the ground
and assessing countries' needs in the area of technical
assistance. Recent examples include the visits carried
out to terrorist-vulnerable regions such as Afghanistan
and the Lake Chad basin by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) and the 1267
Committee Monitoring Team. The close cooperation
between these expert groups also contributes greatly to
the Secretary-General's periodic reports on the threat
posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
and its affiliates worldwide.

Let me briefly touch upon an issue of
particular importance to the functioning of the
respective Committees.

The recently adopted resolutions of the Security
Council, specifically 2309 (2016), on aviation security;
2322 (2016), on international judicial cooperation;
2341 (2017), on protecting critical infrastructure; and
2347 (2017), on protecting cultural property, have
significantly expanded the mandate of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee and CTED.

We are pleased that these topics are duly reflected
in the Committees' programmes of work and that
CTED is doing its utmost to deliver expert support for
the activities of the United Nations and Member States
in these areas. Yet we have to admit that the effective
implementation of the mandated tasks requires adequate
capacity and resources.

It is very encouraging that CTED has managed

to share this increased workload with its research
network, which started offby producing, on the heels of
resolution 2341 (2017), a comprehensive trends report
on the protection of critical infrastructure against
terrorist attacks. We therefore support the strengthening
of CTED's capabilities and look forward to the review
of the Directorate's mandate this December.

Ensuring the full implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) underpins my country's position in the
field of non-proliferation. Given the objective need for
continuous improvement in the process of the practical
implementation of the provisions of the resolution,
Ukraine maintains active discussions at the national
level and in inter-agency meetings, with the participation
of representatives from all relevant State bodies as well
as the respective non-governmental organizations and
community experts on the issue, so as to strengthen
the coordination of all national institutions involved in
the process.

Our national implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) will be enhanced by the development of a road
map that addresses in particular the following areas.

The first is the development of a national action
plan for the implementation of the resolution. In this
connection, we recall that according to paragraph 8 of
resolution 1977 (2011), States Members of the United
Nations are invited to develop national action plans
that define their priorities in this direction. Other
undertakings include the establishment of a national
contact centre in Ukraine and of an inter-agency working
group on the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004),
as well as interaction between Government agencies
and non-governmental organizations.

Given the growing threats and challenges in the field
of non-proliferation, the development of cooperation
between the public and private sectors, including
industrial and specialized research institutions, is of
particular relevance.

The year 2016 marked a significant stage in the
fostering of the WMD non-proliferation regime. A
possible use of weapons of mass destruction is a clear
and ever-present danger to humankind. The risk of the
world's most dangerous materials falling into the wrong
hands, either intentionally or as a result of neglect or
oversight, remains high.

Thus, strengthening cooperation in preventing the
proliferation of WMDs and their components, as well

as building synergies among all stakeholders, including
the relevant international, regional, subregional and
non-governmental organizations, is an urgent task. In
this light, the 1540 Committee should also continue
to promote outreach activities, in conformity with the
recommendations of the comprehensive review and the
provisions of resolution 2325 (2016).

We therefore join others in reconfirming
our support for the comprehensive review of the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), which
culminated in the unanimous adoption of resolution
2325 (2016) in December last year. The conclusions and
recommendations of the 2016 comprehensive review,
once properly implemented, will significantly reinforce
or even re-energize resolution 1540 (2004). The
review report clearly demonstrates the differentiated
implementation progress regarding both WMD types
and the various obligations contained in the resolution.
The document also contributes to defining specific
areas for each concerned party as to where national,
regional or international efforts should be intensified.

However, despite all the measures taken by Member
States to reduce proliferation risks, the world is
witnessing growing and ever more sophisticated threats
in this area. These risks arise not only from gaps in
national legislation, but also from the rapid development
of science and technology, as well as e-commerce and a
lack of threat awareness among academia, industry and
civil society.

Over the past decade, chemical and biological
materials have been quite often referred to as potential
weapons for terrorists, non-State actors and rogue States.
This assumption appears to be correct, as confirmed by
recent events. Ukraine's position in this regard is very
clear: any use of weapons of mass destruction, under
any circumstances, has to be met with a strong response
from the international community. The perpetrators of
such abhorrent acts must be held accountable, and the
Council cannot afford to remain silent or indifferent on
this subject.

