Mr. Apakan: I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to brief the Security
Council on the security situation in eastern Ukraine.
I am reporting to the Council today on the significant
escalation of violence that has taken place in the past
few days. The Special Monitoring Mission of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) has seen a sharp intensification in fighting
in the Avdiivka-Yasnyuvata-Donetsk airport area.
That latest upsurge comes after months of sustained
ceasefire violations, particularly in five hotspots in
eastern Ukraine, including in the Svitlodarsk and
Debaltseve areas, Horlivka, in areas east of Mariupol,
around Shyrokyne, and in Popasna, Pervomaiske and
Troitske, in the Luhansk region. Sporadic fighting has
continued, with several spikes in violence recorded
from November through January.

Today the fighting in that triangular area is in its
fifth day. The tension levels witnessed have increased
during that period and the ceasefire violations are
becoming more frequent and severe. Since 29 January,
the intensity of the fighting in and around Avdiivka
has been greater than in any similar period in recent
months. On 31 January, the Special Monitoring Mission
recorded thousands of explosions in Donetsk caused
by incoming and outgoing mortar and artillery fire,
including from multiple-launch rocket systems. On
1 February, there were almost 10,000 explosions in
the Donetsk region. Today the situation continues to
be tense and volatile. This is the highest number of
explosions that the Mission has ever recorded. Most
were in the Avdiivka and Yasnyuvata areas. The Special
Monitoring Mission has also registered a steep increase
in the use of all types of weapons regulated by the
Minsk agreements, and the use of Grad multiple-launch
rocket systems, mortars and artillery is particularly
worrying. The use of tanks has also been observed.

The sides' indiscriminate use of proscribed
weapons has resulted in civilian casualties and
considerable damage to civilian homes and essential
infrastructure. The conditions for civilians who have
remained in Avdiivka have reached emergency levels.
The town lost electricity when power lines in the area
were damaged. In the meantime, civilians, including
the most vulnerable, have been left without heat in
sub-zero winter temperatures. The Avdiivka coke
factory, which was providing the area with its main
source of heating, has lost its power and water supplies.
Repair crews have difficulty conducting repairs owing
to the security situation. Efforts to ensure access in
order to repair power lines and restore electricity to
the coke factory and the Donetsk filtration station are
ongoing. The Donetsk filtration station supplies water
to the population on both sides of the contact line, and
its protection is of the utmost importance. Further
damage to Donetsk and other water filtration stations in
the region could leave large parts of the Donetsk region
without water.

All of those factors demonstrate a blatant disregard
for the obligations undertaken by the signatories of the
Minsk agreements. Instead of the disengagement of
forces and hardware, we see the engagement of forces
and a full range of hardware in areas where they are
prohibited by the Minsk agreements. The Special
Monitoring Mission's safe access and ability to conduct
effective monitoring and verification continues
to be restricted. The Mission needs full, safe and
unhindered access.

At the moment, our teams and monitors are
facilitating local ceasefires in the area, in coordination
with the Joint Centre for Control and Coordination - the
joint military centre for Russian and Ukrainian officers.
That window of opportunity, along with the ceasefires,
as unstable as they may be, helped to allow repair crews
to access the damaged sites. Those efforts are still under
way. Local ceasefires show that, if they are willing to,
the sides can stop fighting.

Allow me to reiterate that the developments in the
Avdiivka/Yasnuvata and Donetsk airport areas are of
great concern. In that context, I welcome yesterday's joint
statement by the Trilateral Contact Group appealing for
strict adherence to a full and comprehensive cessation
of fire, withdrawal into storage sites of all weapons
regulated by the Minsk agreements, safe and secure
access for members of the Special Monitoring Mission
in accordance with the Mission's mandate, and, finally,
the facilitation of efforts aimed at restoring water,
electricity and heating supplies, including by way of
the repair of infrastructure. I would like once again to
say to the Security Council that a ceasefire is a basic
requirement. We call for the immediate cessation
of fighting.

The withdrawal of heavy weapons is another
imperative. I should also mention that work is ongoing
in the disengagement areas. In that context, I must say
that the verification of heavy weapons is an important
step that we are trying to achieve through monitoring,
verification and reporting. It is also imperative that the
Special Monitoring Mission be given immediate safe
and unhindered access to the affected areas in order to
verify that sides are complying with their obligations on
the ceasefire and the withdrawal of weapons. I would
also reiterate that the sides should try to prioritize the
protection of civilians and the repair of infrastructure,
which is also an immediate need.

We will also continue to monitor the humanitarian
situation, which remains a matter of deep concern.
Violence on such a scale, involving the loss of life,
is unacceptable, and the protection of civilians must
be paramount. Access to shelter, water, heat and
medical care is limited in many areas. In that respect,
the Special Monitoring Mission works closely with
the United Nations and its specialized agencies. The
Mission will continue to implement its mandate with
impartiality and in close cooperation with all sides, in
the context of the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Ukraine. We continue to support the implementation
of the Minsk agreements, and thereby contribute to
efforts towards peace.

