Mr. Koncke (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, let me thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this open debate of the Security Council to address
the issue of peacekeeping operations, with a focus on
new trends. I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General for his statement and his participation in this
very relevant discussion.

I would like to begin my statement by stressing
that the main objective of Uruguay's participation in
peacekeeping operations is neither international prestige
nor improvement in the quality or training of its troops
and equipment, but the ethical and moral categorical
imperative and solidarity with our Latin American
colleagues and with countries in serious situations
of conflict and instability, as well as to contribute to
the fulfilment of the primary value reflected in the
United Nations Charter, namely, the maintenance of
international peace and security.

In that regard, I note that Uruguay, a country which
has battalions deployed in some of the more complex
scenarios, attaches greater importance to dialogue,
consultation and interaction with all those that directly
or indirectly influence the work of our Blue Helmets,
For that reason, when we talk about new trends in the
maintenance of peace, we must take into account the
importance of the participation of troop-contributing
countries (TCCs) in the formulation of policy and
in the decision-making process in order to achieve
a true partnership and strengthen the link between
policy formulation and its implementation in the field,
highlighting the need for real triangular cooperation
among the TCCs, the Secretariat and the Security
Council. Consultation with the TCCs is therefore
recommended in all cases, but especially in the cases of
robust mandates because of their scope and the possible
implications that I will now discuss.

It is well known that my country, one of the main
contributors of troops to the UnitedNations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, believes that it is outside the appropriate
conceptual framework to have established, through
resolution 2098 (2013), a Force Intervention Brigade
that exceeds the traditional definition of peacekeeping
operations. Accordingly, my Government believes that
peacekeeping operations should restrict their use of
force to cases of legitimate self-defence and defence
of the mandate. We are concerned about the impact of
the Brigade's actions in relation to the protection of
civilians. It also shares the concern of other TCCs with
respect to the possible impact that the Brigade could
have on the safety of peacekeepers deployed and on the
principle of impartiality.

Beyond that issue of substance, my country would
also point out that, in that instance, there was no prior
consultation with the TCCs at the time that the new
peacekeeping capacity was being developed. Moreover,
the establishment of more robust mandates, such as
the aforementioned mandate and others, makes it all
the more relevant for troops to have more training,
more capacity and more material resources, including
financial resources, in order to guarantee effective
implementation of those mandates.

Despite recognition of the fact that one of the
greatest challenges facing Member States in the current
global financial climate is the scarcity ofresources. It is
obvious that the standard reimbursement rates require
adjustments to reflect the rising costs for TCCs in
the light of the results of the recent survey that was
conducted and where my country was selected to
be one of the samples. As a result, after many years
of stalemate, it is crucial to take advantage of this
opportunity to create a better financial incentive
structure for the troop-contributing countries. In that
regard, Uruguay reaffirms the need for a dynamic,
open and constructive dialogue in order to reach a fair
and reasonable agreement in this area and in other
closely related areas of sustainability and efficiency in
peacekeeping operations.

Along the same line of reasoning, we think
it clear that while peacekeeping operations need
financial resources, they also need to guarantee that
the temporary assignment of human resources and
necessary equipment to one peacekeeping operation
does not take place to the detriment of another
peacekeeping operation. Therefore, while we share
the View that inter-mission cooperation might serve to
overcome certain specific, contingent circumstances,
inter-mission cooperation should be designed in such
a way as to have no negative impact on the safety of
the Blue Helmets, on their effectiveness and/or on
their ability to fulfil the mandate of one mission to the
benefit of another.

The Uruguayan Government notes with interest
the development of modern technology and how it can
enhance the effectiveness and safety of peacekeeping
operations. The use of new technologies such as
unmanned aerial vehicles can, on the one hand, provide
an effective resource for peacekeeper safety and with
regard to early warning, and be a very valuable source
of inside information. On the other hand, it also raises
the question of the lack of an agreed policy on their use
and on the issue of the various aspects related to the
management, use and confidentiality of information
obtained through that tool. Nevertheless, we trust that,
in a reinvigorated dialogue, Member States will be able
to reach an agreement that sets forth transparent and
clearly defined rules on the subject.

Uruguay sees the peacekeeping agenda from a
systemic perspective and favours the inclusion of a
sound component of early peacebuilding and mission
development. It also has extensive experience as a
troop-contributing country and thus has demonstrated
commitment to the system, out of the conviction that it
is the best bet for the defence ofinternational peace and
security and for respect for the principles enshrined in
the United Nations Charter and international law. For
all of these reasons, I can assure the Council that we
will very closely follow the development of new trends
in peacekeeping and seek to contribute to the dialogue
with what we have learned from our long experience
on the ground, as well as with ongoing political
commitment from my Government to the peace and
security agenda.

