Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): We welcome the
adoption of resolution 2441 (2018), reaffirming the
Council's sanctions measures against Libya, and
we would like to thank the United Kingdom for the
transparent and inclusive negotiation process.

Sweden, together with the Netherlands and with
the strong support of partners, is particularly pleased
to have introduced the act of planning, directing or
committing sexual and gender-based violence as a
separate and distinct criterion for listing under the
sanctions. Unfortunately, this is particularly relevant
in the Libyan context. As reported by the Secretary-
General, his Special Representative on Sexual Violence
in Conflict and the Panel of Experts of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), among
others, conflict-related sexual violence and sexual
violence in detention centres are an acute problem
in Libya. It is our sincere hope that the highlighting
of this problem can make a decisive change, compel
compliance and trigger accountability on the ground
in Libya.

On the horizontal level, we hope that the Council will
continue to expand its sanctions listing criteria in other
sanctions regimes, when relevant, and counter the myth
that sexual violence is an inevitable part of conflict. We
further welcome the Council's recognition of the need
for sexual and gender-based violence expertise among
the Panel of Experts, which will give the Committee
and the Council the further understanding they need to
address this serious problem.

Together with the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya, the referral of the situation in Libya to the
International Criminal Court and the measures to
prevent migrant smuggling through Libya, the sanctions
play an integral part in the Security Council's broader
measures to support Libya in building long-term
peace and stability. The Libya Sanctions Committee
recently finished its first-ever mission to the country
and through its Swedish Chair will provide its first
impressions from the trip later this week.

