Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to start by welcoming the presence among
us of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Turkey and the
Prime Minister of Croatia. I should also like formally
to welcome the Turkish presidency of the Security
Council and to reaffirm the support and cooperation of
my delegation for its work.

I would further thank the Russian Federation for
its organization and conduct of our work last month,
which was tarnished only by the discourteous and
antidemocratic attitude of its Permanent Representative
when he abruptly ended our meeting of 28 May, before
my delegation was able to respond to his unwarranted
rebukes of a statement I had made on the need to
improve the Security Council's working methods in the
preparation of its missions. My delegation has no need
of his criteria for assessing the status of the permanent
and elected members of this Council, or for
appreciating the work of the Secretariat.

Today, I welcome the presence among us of
Presidents Patrick Robinson and Dennis Byron and of
the Prosecutors of the International Criminal Tribunals.
I thank them for their briefings and recognize the
efforts of both Tribunals to fulfil the completion
strategies, pursuant to resolutions 1503 (2003) and
1534 (2004). Costa Rica believes that the
establishment of the international Tribunals was a
fruitful decision, ratifying the Council's intention to
put an end to impunity for violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights. It offered justice
to the victims of such crimes and created an important
deterrent.

The accomplishments of the Tribunals have
shown that peace and justice are not at odds with one
another, but that justice contributes actively to the
sustainability of peace. Furthermore, the establishment
of the Tribunals helped to raise awareness of the need
for a permanent International Criminal Court, which is
now a reality.

As we move towards the end of the Tribunals'
work, it is more necessary than ever for all Member
States, in particular those in the respective regions of
the Tribunals, to cooperate with them. Costa Rica calls
upon all States to strengthen their collaboration with
the Tribunals.

The primary legacy of the Tribunals in the fight
against impunity should be the strengthening of
national judicial systems. A sustainable justice system
is the best guarantee of lasting peace. Costa Rica
values the measures to build national capacity
undertaken by both international Tribunals. Those
measures will facilitate the referral of minor cases to
the competent national jurisdictions and enable the
Tribunals to focus their work on the indictment and
prosecution of high-level leaders suspected of being
the parties primarily responsible for crimes falling
within their jurisdictions.

Along those lines, we wish to ask Prosecutor
Jallow if he is considering beginning trials against
other parties that participated in the Rwandan conflict,
who are accused of crimes that took place during the
time period the Tribunal is charged with investigating.
My delegation considers it important that the continued
impartiality of justice be guaranteed and that all
citizens allegedly responsible for crimes be prosecuted
and brought to justice before the international justice
system.

With regard to residual functions of the Tribunals,
our delegation supports the Council's presidential
statement issued as document S/PRST/2008/47, which
emphasized the reduced nature of those functions and
the need for a small, temporary and efficient
mechanism whose functions and size would diminish
over time. The residual mechanism must be authorized
to try known criminals who have yet to be brought to
justice.

For our delegation, it is important that both
Tribunals redouble their efforts to reduce the delays
vis-a-vis the original time frames. However, that
should not be to the detriment of the rights of the
accused to due process as provided in the statutes
governing the Tribunals. In that vein, my delegation
welcomes the establishment of judicial timetables and
working groups in order to speed up the trials, and we
encourage the Tribunals to continue to carry out
reforms that will permit completion of the trials and
make the best use of available resources.

