Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): At the outset, I
welcome the presence of the Foreign Ministers of
Jamaica and the Bahamas at this meeting of the
Council.

In seeking a political solution for the current
serious crisis in Haiti, Brazil is grateful for the efforts
being carried out by the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM) and the Organization of American States
(OAS). Our colleague from Chile, Ambassador
Maquieira, has already mentioned that earlier this
afternoon, the Organization of American States
adopted a new resolution on the initiative of the
Caribbean countries, Canada, Mexico and Brazil. I
would add only that the resolution stresses three points:
first, the hope and expectation that the Security
Council will take the necessary and appropriate urgent
measures; secondly that the measures taken should be
those established in the Charter of the United Nations;
and thirdly, it stresses the idea of ensuring coordination
and complementarity between the roles of the OAS and
the United Nations, taking into special account the
activities of the OAS special mission in Haiti.

We are grateful to you, Mr. President, for
convening this public meeting of the Security Council
to discuss the current state of affairs in Haiti. This
meeting is timely and appropriate. Under your
leadership, the Security Council has held regular
consultations on this issue and has been kept informed
of the events taking place in that country. This meeting
now provides an opportunity to listen also to the views
of the wider membership of the United Nations on this
very worrisome situation. We strongly appreciate the
fact that many delegations have requested to speak
today.

Brazil is very concerned by the deterioration of
the situation in Haiti in its political, economic, security
and humanitarian dimensions. We are closely following
the events taking place there through our embassies in
the region and within the frameworks of the
Organization of American States and the Rio Group.
My delegation expresses the solidarity of Brazil with
all the people of Haiti in this difficult moment. Like us,
most Haitians share the View that violence cannot be an
acceptable solution to overcoming differences or
advancing ideas and views.

Within the OAS, we have been actively
participating in the discussions and negotiations
designed to provide a solution to the political crisis. We
also took part in the negotiations on OAS resolution
CP/861 and others. And in the context of the Group of
Friends, we have been in direct contact with all the
parties involved in the process. As a country of the
region, Brazil attaches the utmost importance to
safeguarding democracy and legality in Haiti.

In the Rio Group, whose presidency Brazil has
held since January, we have been maintaining
consultations on this subject. The Group has recently
issued two communiques. The most recent, released
yesterday, expressed our endorsement of the efforts of
the OAS and CARICOM. towards a peaceful solution to
the crisis in Haiti as well as of the efforts of the United
Nations, especially its activities in the field of
humanitarian assistance. We called upon the parties to
accept the Plan presented by CARICOM, and we
strongly condemned the acts of violence that are taking
place in Haiti. On that occasion, we also voiced our
support for the democratically elected President, Jean-
Bertrand Aristide.

Thanks to the continuing efforts of the
international mediators - the OAS, CARICOM,
France, the United States and Canada - there still
seems to be room for dialogue, although the situation
in the country, mainly after the seizure of Cap-Haitien,
is steadily deteriorating. The Government of Brazil
deplores the decision of the opposition sectors to reject
both the Plan of Action presented last Saturday and the
statement of guarantors. Our delegation calls upon
those sectors to reconsider the position they voiced last
Tuesday, show a willingness to engage in an effective
and constructive dialogue and renounce all violent acts
designed to put forward their political agenda. We
believe that the elements outlined in the Plan of Action
provided a way out of the current political impasse. We
call on all the parties to render all possible assistance
to efforts towards peace in Haiti.

The Brazilian authorities are in contact with their
international counterparts and are ready to discuss all
possibilities for international engagement designed to
promote security and to address the humanitarian
situation in Haiti, so long as they are carried out within
the framework of the United Nations Charter and in
accordance with the basic principles of international
law.

My delegation is concerned about the increasing
deterioration of the humanitarian situation in Haiti.
Brazil supports all the efforts being carried out by
United Nations agencies on the ground, and we
strongly deplore the restrictions on movement that are
being imposed on those agencies. We call upon all the
parties to facilitate humanitarian assistance. Above all,
we would like to stress the importance of respecting
the safety of international humanitarian personnel and
facilities.

We also emphasize the need for all parties to
respect human rights in the country. Perpetrators of
violations should bear in mind that, sooner or later,
they will be held accountable for their irresponsible
acts.

Finally, I would like to stress the importance of a
renewed commitment by the international community,
and especially by the United Nations, to creating long-
term conditions for a stable and prosperous Haiti. The
resurgence of large-scale violence in the country, 10
years after the Council was seized of this matter, shows
that the means then adopted did not bring about the
results envisaged and that innovative approaches are
required. It is quite clear that the root causes -
poverty, political instability and institutional
weakness - have yet to be addressed, and that this
should begin to be done as soon as the present strife
and political instability are overcome.

The delegation of Brazil welcomes the Secretary-
General's decision to appoint a Special Adviser on
Haiti, and believes that he can do much to contribute
not only to resolving the present situation but also to
putting forth constructive ideas for dealing with the
long-standing problems that afflict Haiti and its
valorous people.

As we look to the future, we see the matter of the
crisis in Haiti becoming increasingly urgent. Having
listened to the Foreign Ministers of Jamaica and the
Bahamas, to the Permanent Representative of Haiti and
to fellow members of the Council, we are convinced
that the Security Council will have to urgently consider
the deployment of an international force in Haiti within
the context of the United Nations Charter. We are
willing to engage in detailed discussions on this and on
the other emerging proposals on this issue.

