Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): First of all, I would
like to thank Mr. Kalomoh for introducing the report. I
also want to begin by saying that today's meeting is, in
some ways, a historic one. This, we believe, is the first
time that Council members will be discussing openly
the annual report before submitting it to the General
Assembly for its consideration. The President of the
Security Council will also refer to the provisional
verbatim record of this meeting when he presents the
report to the General Assembly. I hope this will explain
to our colleagues here why I may have to deliver a
slightly longer statement than usual, because ifI do not
deliver it, it will not enter the provisional verbatim
records.

We believe that the new format of the annual
report has actually rectified a defect in the way the
Security Council reports were previously submitted to
the General Assembly, a defect which was,
incidentally, mentioned in "the bible" of the Security
Council, which we know to be the "Bailey and Daws"
publication. Bailey and Daws said:

"[w]hile the report in its present form provides an
occasion for United Nations Members to raise
concerns about the work of the Council over the
previous twelve months, it does very little to
facilitate the raising of such concerns". (S. Bailey and S. Daws, The Procedure of the UN Security
Council, 3rd ed., p. 290)

I hope we have taken care ofthis problem.

Together with our colleagues we are pleased to
have made a small contribution to the improvement of
the format and content of the Security Council's
Annual Report. It has been dramatically reduced in
size, from 571 pages to approximately 291 pages and,
as Mr. Kalomoh said, there was a last minute
corrigendum that managed to deduct approximately 90
pages. Each page out from the Report saves
approximately $1,000, so we have saved about
$300,000 this year in the preparation ofthis Report.

At the same time, more statistical information has
been provided on the Security Council's deliberations
and activities. Equally important there is an analytical
overview in the introduction to the Report. We will not
go into the details of the changes made; instead, in the
text of the Report we have attached an explanatory note
which sets out all the improvements made in the new
format. We thought it would be useful to have a public
record ofthese changes.

Let me also pay a tribute to my colleague,
Christine Lee, who, as you know, worked very hard on
this report, as well as many of your colleagues and
experts, to produce this revised format.

Many observers of the Council sitting outside
may be surprised that we have taken the time to
provide the details of these small changes and
improvements. We should explain why we mention
these innovations. After 21 months on the Council, we
have discovered that the Security Council, perhaps
with some justification, is one of the most conservative
institutions in the world today. In this year's General
Assembly, the Secretary-General will be trying to instil
a spirit of reform into both the General Assembly,
including its subsidiary bodies, and the Secretariat.

This spirit of reform has not yet fully infected the
Security Council. We have noticed that the Council is
particularly conservative in its working methods and
procedures. For example, despite our efforts to push for
regular meetings of the Council's Working Group on
procedures and working methods, there have only been
six meetings of this Working Group during the period
covered by the Report. We have also tried to formalize
the system of drawing of names to determine the
speakers' list for public meetings. So far, we have not
succeeded. Similarly, it is remarkable that the
Council's rules of procedure remain provisional after
57 years. Equally important, and I hope this is a major
point, despite the proliferation of various forms of
meetings of the Council, there is no agreement on their
nomenclature and modalities. Having spoken with
colleagues outside the Council, I can say there is
considerable confusion about the meanings of the
phrases: open meeting, closed meeting, private open
meeting and so on. I think it is time to standardize this
nomenclature.

The reluctance of the Council to institutionalize
the Working Group on procedures and working
methods is puzzling, because there have been
significant improvements in the Council's working
methods. For example, the Council has established new
mechanisms for consultations with the troop-
contributing countries (TCCs) and held public wrap-up
sessions so that TCCs and the wider United Nations
membership can share their views and interact in a
frank and open manner with Council members. The
TCCs have appreciated these changes.

A permanent United Nations Security Council
Presidency web site has been set up so that non-
Council Members can have quicker access to
information related to the Security Council's work. The
Council has also had more Arria-formula meetings to
listen to the views of other external actors including the
academia, media and non-governmental organizations
(NGOs). In the past year, the Council's deliberations
have become more efficient and effective and more
interactive and analytical through the use of fact sheets,
assessment-based reports, and the practice of
alternating between Council and non-Council members
in public meetings ofthe Council.

Many of these developments are outlined in a
report prepared by the Secretariat and circulated as
Security Council document S/2002/603 dated 6 June
2002. We highly commend this report to United
Nations Members as it provides a comprehensive
account of changes in the Security Council's practices
in 2001. I hope Member State will refer to this
document when they speak on the issue of the Security
Council's Annual Report in the General Assembly.

The Secretary-General has also noted these
improvements in his report on the "Strengthening of
the United Nations: an agenda for further change"
(A/57/387), a report that came out on Monday 23
September 2002 and which he presented to regional
groups. Yesterday, for example he presented it to the
Asian group. In his report he pointed out:

"The Security Council has significantly improved
its working methods over the past few years -
stimulated, in part, by the thoughtful
deliberations of the Open-ended Working Group.
The Council has become more transparent,
offering greater opportunities for the wider
membership of the United Nations to participate
in its work. There has been an increased number
of open meetings with participation by non-
members of the Security Council, briefings for
the wider membership of the Organization,
and improved arrangements for consultations
with troop-contributing countries." (A/S 7/387, para. 21)

Hence, the Secretary-General recommended, as part of
its reform package that the Security Council "might
consider codifying the recent changes in its own
practice." (Ibid.)

Moving on from procedural innovations to the
substance of the Report, we should acknowledge that
the main criticism, which has been repeated year after
year in each year's General Assembly debate of the
Security Council's Annual Report, is that the Report is
not analytical and therefore cannot be used as a basis
for evaluating the work of the Council.

In theory, the complaint of the General Assembly
Members is fair. That is why we made the analytical
component of the Report one of the key themes in our
speech at the General Assembly debate last year.
However, after having served on the Council, we have
come to realise that the Members of the General
Assembly may be making an impossible demand of the
Council. Given the heavy workload of the Council and
the highly politicized and controversial nature of many
of the issues discussed by the Council, it would take
months of negotiations for the 15 Council Members to
agree on a common analytical evaluation of the
performance ofthe Council.

Despite this, this year's Annual Report contains a
brief analytical overview that was skilfully drafted by
the United Kingdom delegation during their Presidency
of the Council in July. We congratulate Sir Jeremy
Greenstock and his team for the work they did
preparing this overview.

We also believe that the assessments and
reflections of the individual Council members at
today's debate will provide a good basis to evaluate the
Council's performance. More importantly, while the
processes of the Council's decision-making may often
take place behind closed doors, the results of the
Council's work are now much more clear and visible.
Its resolutions, Presidential Statements and press
statements are public documents. The results of
peacekeeping operations authorized by the Security
Council, now amounting to almost $3 billion annually,
are also clearly Visible. Hence, there is more than
enough public data available to evaluate the
performance of the Council when the General
Assembly meets.

We would, therefore, like to suggest that a more
constructive course for the General Assembly Members
would be to try to formulate a set of agreed criteria that
could be used to evaluate the performance of the
Council. Some of the questions included could be the
following: First, has the Council successfully managed
the issues under its purview; have lives been saved or
improved by the Council's work? Secondly, has the
Council improved its procedures and working methods
to generate greater efficiency and effectiveness in its
work? Thirdly, has the Council become more
transparent and open in its work and in its relationship
with the wider United Nations membership? And
fourthly, has the Council enhanced or diminished its
credibility and prestige in the international community?

These are only preliminary suggestions. We are
confident that our colleagues can improve on them and
probably develop better criteria.

In our considered View, any objective evaluation
of the performance of the Council for the period
covered in this year's Annual Report should result in
an overall positive assessment. It has been a good year.
There have been many success stories. It would be
impossible to cite all of them but it may be useful to
cite a few as an illustrative list.

First, with regard to terrorism, the Council's
response to the threat of terrorism after Sept 11,
especially through its substantive resolutions, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee chaired by Sir Jeremy
Greenstock and the 1267 Sanctions Committee chaired
by Ambassador Valdivieso, demonstrated the real value
of the Council. The Security Council legitimized a
global response. It also provided the necessary
leadership to galvanize international action. If the
Security Council had not existed on 12 September
2001, it would have had to be invented then. The fight
against terrorism showed once again the
indispensability of the Council.

Secondly, with regard to East Timor, the work of
the United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET) paved the way for the birth of the
Democratic Republic of East Timor on 20 May 2002,
and East Timor will be admitted as a full United
Nations Member by the General Assembly tomorrow.
The Council's enlightened decision to establish the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor as a
successor to UNTAET to continue to assist East Timor
to maintain security and stability and carry out core
areas of administration in the early years of its
independence was reflective of the Council's
commitment to institute clear and credible exit
strategies for the United Nations.
Regarding Afghanistan, Ambassador Lakhdar
Brahimi helped shepherd the Bonn process and,
through his effective leadership of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, he continues to
ensure its implementation. Incidentally, as an aside,
yesterday somebody was telling me that if there were
free and fair elections in Afghanistan, Ambassador
Brahimi would be elected President overnight. He is
the most popular person in Afghanistan today. So far,
Afghanistan has surpassed all expectations in moving
back towards the path of peace and stability, even
though many challenges remain. The problem, as we
know, is that the security situation remains fragile, but
there continues to be strong reluctance to consider the
geographical expansion of the International Security
Assistance Force. That has to be addressed by the
Council.

Finally, with regard to Sierra Leone, the return of
delicate peace and stability to Sierra Leone, following
the successful elections held on 14 May 2002 and the
ongoing efforts by the Sierra Leone Government to
implement recovery measures, has bolstered the
credibility of the Council and has reaffirmed the
important role it plays.

But, to be completely candid, the Council is a
human institution; therefore, it has its share of
successes and failures. Some of its files clearly need
more attention. Again, as an illustrative rather than a
comprehensive list, let me cite a few examples.

The Working Group on sanctions was originally
scheduled to complete its work in November 2000.
Now, almost two years later, it remains trapped in a
logjam. We hope that Council members will support
Ambassador Belinga-Eboutou, as he tries to revitalize
this Working Group.

The Middle East crisis has been aggravated in
recent months. However, the Council adopted
resolution 1397 (2002), which was a landmark
resolution that reaffirmed the vision of a region where
two States, Israel and Palestine, can live side by side
within secure and recognized borders. We hope that the
Quartet, a new diplomatic vehicle, will work to
implement it.

On the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Council has, so far, not been able to follow up
decisively on the initiative proposed by the Security
Council mission to the Great Lakes region in April
2002. That could affect the credibility ofthe Council as
well as its future missions. However, in View of the
recent agreements signed by the Democratic Republic
of the Congo with Rwanda and Uganda, the Council is
now provided with new opportunities to respond
positively to the Secretary-General's recommendations
on how the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo can play a bigger
role.

Somalia was clearly one of the strategic
orphans- and I hope that phrase will not be
misunderstood - of the Council until Norway took it
up. Still, the Council needs to develop a comprehensive
policy to deal with the security and humanitarian
dimensions ofthe Somalia issue.

Liberia was also one of the Council's strategic
orphans until Ambassador Zinser of Mexico
recommended a fresh look at it. Clearly, the Council
needs to have a comprehensive and coherent policy to
protect its major investments in West Africa.

Finally, the increasing complexities relating to the
issue of refugees and internally displaced persons from
situations in the Council's many conflict files have not
been adequately addressed by the Council today.
Indeed, the Council needs to establish a cohesive and
coordinated approach in cooperation with other
relevant United Nations bodies, such as the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, just to name a few.

Neither of those lists is exhaustive. We have not
mentioned many significant issues, including Iraq,
which is the subject of the day, Western Sahara,
Georgia, Cyprus, the Balkans, and so on. But in the
limited time we have, it would be impossible to list all
the successful and less successful files. Nevertheless,
when the General Assembly meets to review this year's
Annual Report, we hope that they will refer to the
evaluations made by the members of the Council who
have been actively involved in the management of
those difficult issues.

Finally, in conclusion, I hope, Mr. President, that
you will permit me to end my remarks by suggesting
that it may be useful practice for members of the
Council to also provide recommendations on how the
Council can improve its performance in subsequent
years. For our part, we would like to suggest at least
two areas.

First, I think the Council should respond
positively to the suggestion made by the Secretary-
General that we should "codify" improvements made
by the Council. Both the institutional structure of the
Council and the work of the Council have grown in
size and complexity. Yet, there is no single adequate
description of the full range of activities conducted by
the Council, which now include public meetings,
private meetings, informal consultations, meetings with
troop-contributing countries, working groups, formal
and informal friends groups, contact groups, and so on.
It is time for someone to draw a full picture ofthe total
architecture of the Council. Once we have clearly
drawn the big picture, it will be easier to review the
Council.

At the same time, the Security Council should
also respond positively to the Secretary-General's
efforts to imbue the United Nations family with a new
spirit of reform. One way of introducing a culture of
innovation to the Council is for the informal Working
Group on the working methods and procedures to be
more active. Each Council member should designate an
expert on organizational innovation and improvement,
and that Council Working Group should meet regularly.
Hopefully, that Working Group can make suggestions
that will improve the working methods, reduce the
workload, enable the Council to spend its time focusing
on those issues that require the most attention and on
its Charter responsibility in the maintenance of
international peace and security.

The second suggestion we would like to make is
that the Council should meet periodically to do a
strategic review of its work. While its workload has
grown by leaps and bounds - and I think that is
documented in the reports - the Council has not found
opportunities to do a strategic overview of all the work
done. There is no conscious effort to prioritize the
work of the Council. Often, the most urgent, rather
than the most important, issues are given the most
attention. Annually there is only one occasion for such
a strategic review of the work of the Council. That
takes places during the annual retreat of the Security
Council with the Secretary-General. We commend the
Secretary-General for hosting his retreats, but it may be
useful to find other occasions for a comprehensive and
strategic review of the work of the Council. All
organizations find it healthy to do this. The Council
should do no less.

It may be useful for the Council to conduct from
time to time an in-depth review and evaluation of its
own action or often non-action, as the case may be,
especially on the long-standing files so as to invigorate
them. It may be too easy to blame the protagonists
concerned. Instead of blaming others, the Council
should stop and ask itself, why have these situations
not improved? Merely responding by issuing more
press, presidential statements and resolutions may not
be enough in most instances. We should review and see
if we have become too comfortable with conservative
and safe positions, instead of looking for alternative
and creative solutions.

The credibility of the Security Council will only
be eroded over time if the Council is habitually seen to
be unable to meet its responsibilities with regard to
those long-standing files. Its press releases,
Presidential Statements and resolutions could be
ignored if there is a perceived gap between the
Council's intentions and its actual accomplishments.

Finally, I hope that, as was the case under the
Irish presidency of the Council in October 2001, after
the General Assembly debate on the Annual Report
scheduled for next month, the Council will discuss the
comments and suggestions raised during the debate to
reflect on the key points made, so as to consider further
improvements to the Council's working methods, work
and future reports. Last year, Singapore submitted a
brief summary of the key points made at the general
debate to facilitate such a discussion. We would be
happy to do so again this year. The Council's
discussion ofthe points raised at the General Assembly
will go a long way towards meeting our common
objective of building a relationship of trust and
confidence between the General Assembly and the
Security Council.

One more final point, I apologize for having read
out at great length the statement, but ifI had not read it
out, it would not appear in the provisional verbatim
record, and therefore it would not be circulated. My
apologies to all my colleagues for having done this to
them.

