The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now being its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council bears in mind the
importance of maintaining peace and stability on
the Korean peninsula and in northeast Asia as a
whole. The Security Council condemns the
5 April 2009 (local time) launch by the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK),
which is in contravention of Security Council
resolution 1718 (2006).

"The Security Council reiterates that the
DPRK must comply fully with its obligations
under Security Council resolution 1718 (2006).

"The Security Council demands that the
DPRK not conduct any further launch.

"The Security Council also calls upon all
Member States to comply fully with their
obligations under resolution 1718 (2006).
"The Security Council agrees to adjust the
measures imposed by paragraph 8 of resolution
1718 (2006) through the designation of entities
and goods, and directs the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006) to undertake
its tasks to this effect and to report to the Security
Council by 24 April 2009, and further agrees that,
if the Committee has not acted, then the Security
Council will complete action to adjust the
measures by 30 April 2009.

"The Security Council supports the Six-
Party Talks, calls for their early resumption, and
urges all the participants to intensify their efforts
on the full implementation of the 19 September
2005 Joint Statement issued by China, the DPRK,
Japan, the Republic of Korea, the Russian
Federation and the United States and their
subsequent consensus documents, with a View to
achieving the verifiable denuclearization of the
Korean peninsula in a peaceful manner and to
maintaining peace and stability on the Korean
peninsula and in northeast Asia.

"The Security Council expresses its desire
for a peaceful and diplomatic solution to the
situation and welcomes efforts by Council
members as well as other Member States to
facilitate a peaceful and comprehensive solution
through dialogue.

"The Security Council will remain actively
seized of the matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2009/7.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 3.15pm.
09-30065
