Mr. De Gucht (Belgium) (spoke in French): We
are fortunate that today's meeting is being presided
over by one of the greatest practitioners of conflict
mediation and resolution, President Blaise Compaore,
whom I wish to congratulate on his initiative. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General and
Mr. Brahimi for their statements.

Since mediation normally goes on behind closed
doors, opting to talk about it in public may seem like a
surprising thing to do. However, the time is right to
spotlight its importance. History shows that there is a
50 per cent greater likelihood of resolving a crisis if
the instrument of mediation is employed. The rapid
deployment of a compact, but well-equipped team of
mediators can help to avoid extensive and costly
missions. Above all, it could help prevent the atrocities
to which all too many innocent men, women and
children continue to fall victim.

If we all agree on the advantages of mediation,
then why do not we use that instrument so sparingly?
Without a doubt, one reason is that international
mediation calls for a broad array of talents and
instruments: the skill of analysing political processes;
knowledge of local situations; the ability to forge links
with all parties involved, including the local
population; and early warning and rapid reaction
mechanisms. Those are some of the qualities and
instruments that we need on various levels.

The United Nations clearly has a central role to
play in this field. As a non-permanent member of the
Security Council, Belgium has made consistent efforts
to ensure that the Security Council can effectively

assume its responsibility for defusing crises. The
Council must sometimes do so discreetly, for it needs
to give sufficient space and breathing room to
mediation initiatives, and sometimes in a more visible
manner, especially if it is in a position to support a
mediation effort in a united voice. If such a balance is
found, the Council can have a considerable impact,
most particularly in support of the Secretary-General's
good offices.

In that context, it is difficult to accept the fact
that the Secretary-General has such limited resources
to act. In many instances, he is reduced to having to
appeal to ad hoc arrangements. I hope that we will be
able to agree today on the urgent need to shore up his
capacity for mediation. Doing so will require the
development of a pool of experts who can rely on
receiving the resources they require. Such
peacekeeping firefighters will have to remain on
standby so that, at any time and extremely rapidly, they
can offer or even impose their services through their
vigorous efforts to address emerging conflicts before it
is too late. Belgium fully believes in that, which is why
we have made a significant contribution to the
Secretariat's Mediation Unit.

Clearly, regional and subregional organizations
also have a role to play in conflict mediation and
resolution. That is the second dimension that I would
like to highlight. I am thinking of the actions
undertaken by the French presidency of the European
Union in Georgia; the actions taken by South Africa on
behalf of the Southern African Development
Community in Zimbabwe; of Kofi Annan's initiative in
Kenya on behalf of the African Union; of the role of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations in
Myanmar, where outstanding challenges remain; and of
the efforts of your country, Mr. President, in the Sudan.

Thirdly, we must be capable of crossing
institutional borders and turning to suitable non-
governmental organizations, such as Sant'Egidio, the
Carter Center and the Ahtisaari team, which pursue
their efforts in numerous places around the world,
addressing the civil sector, representatives of the
private sector, members of the public.

I am also mindful of women's roles. History has
shown that women are often responsible for the success
of peace agreements. I would therefore express my
hope to see more women included on mediation teams.

In six months time, when we will evaluate the
outcome of this debate, I hope that the Member States
will have given the Secretary-General the means he
needs to make a difference in the field. I hope that
regional organizations will be able to contribute to and
benefit from that activity and I hope too that the
non-governmental organizations will play a core role
therein. I am well aware that this is an ambitious
programme, but one that is worthy of being enacted.

