Mr. Kydyrov (Kyrgyzstan) (Spoke in Russian):
At the outset, let me thank Staffan de Mistura, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and
Mr. Zalmai Rassoul, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
friendly nation of Afghanistan, for their informative
briefings on the situation in Afghanistan.

Kyrgyzstan has a stake in a peaceful and stable
Afghanistan. We welcome the efforts of the
Government of Afghanistan to pursue democratic
reforms and implement a national development plan for
the country. We believe that effectively advancing the
Kabul process is important. Kyrgyzstan continues to be
of the firm view that lasting solutions to the ongoing
problems in Afghanistan and effectively tackling
transnational challenges requires a systemic and
comprehensive approach. This must include political,
economic and humanitarian aspects and calls for joint
action by all stakeholders, with the United Nations
central among them.

Illegal drug-trafficking and organized crime are a
serious barrier to development, not only for
Afghanistan but also the entire Central Asian region.
Kyrgyzstan therefore views the Afghan problem in the
regional context, and we welcome the country's
participation in regional projects. In the light of new
realities, Kyrgyzstan proposes that the international
community step up its attention to Afghanistan,
particularly in strengthening border security, assisting
and countering illegal drug trafficking, training
personnel and taking a broader approach to studying
the impact of the growth of terrorist or radical groups.

We believe that any decision to withdraw troops
of the International Security Assistance Force from
Afghanistan should be taken after the situation there
has been tangibly stabilized. The key tasks of training
and genuinely strengthening the Afghan National Army
and Police must also be addressed to ensure that they
can assume the functions of ensuring the country's
security.

Kyrgyzstan favours the effective implementation
of the United Nations strategy to combat illegal drug
trafficking and transnational crime in Central Asia, and
advocates enhanced joint action in this area. The
United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy in Central Asia should be an important
component in the strengthening of regional security. A
key outcome of its activities was the crafting of the
plan of action for the implementation in the Central
Asian region of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
whose adoption is planned to take place before the end
of the year.

We are certain that restoring peace and
strengthening Government power in Afghanistan
depends not only on the use of force but to a great
extent on the pace and methods by which social and
economic challenges are addressed. We call on the
countries of the region and the international
community in the framework of the United Nations to
modify the long-term economic recovery programme
for Afghanistan so that its implementation will involve
all neighbouring and adjacent countries.

Cooperation through the New Silk Road initiative
is key to the countries of Central Asia is. Kyrgyzstan
intends to actively participate in the initiative and in
the activities of the various contact groups on
Afghanistan with respect to recovery and development.

We believe that this situation can be
fundamentally changed by implementing major
economic projects in Afghanistan. One such strategic
area is the implementation of the Central Asia South
Asia Regional Electricity Market Project, or CASA-
1000, which provides for the transmission of electricity
from Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan to Afghanistan and
Pakistan. On 19 and 20 September, Kyrgyzstan held a
meeting of the Intergovernmental Board of CASA-
1000 at which a memo of mutual understanding on the
electricity transmission project and on further
development of the regional electricity market for
Central and South Asia. Kyrgyzstan is also
participating in the implementation of an international
railway project between China, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan,
Afghanistan and Iran that will undoubtedly contribute
to the social and economic development of Afghanistan
and the region in general.

Kyrgyzstan is participating in international efforts
to improve the situation in Afghanistan at the bilateral
and multilateral levels. In particular, together with the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
on 9 July 2010 we began a project for training Afghan
customs officials at the customs training centre of the
State Customs Service of the Kyrgyz Republic. We
believe it is important to expand our partnership in this
area. Our hope is that the planned conferences on
Afghanistan in Istanbul and Bonn will define a genuine
programme for nation-building for a strong, secure and
peaceful Afghanistan.

