Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Let me start by thanking
the Foreign Minister of New Zealand for earlier
presiding over this meeting. We also thank the Special
Coordinator of the Secretary-General for the Middle
East Peace Process for his comprehensive though
sobering briefing.

Peace in the Middle East appears more distant than
ever. The inflexible and indefensible posture taken
by the hard-line Israeli Government has frozen any
prospect for the resumption of the peace process and
a political resolution based on a two-State solution.
Israeli extremism is evoking a matching turn towards
further radicalization in Gaza and the West Bank.

Earlier this month we marked the first anniversary
of the 51-day Israeli military assault on Gaza. The
devastation that it caused has left Gaza in ruins.

The report of the Independent Commission of
Inquiry established by the Human Rights Council
on the Gaza conflict is an eye-opener. It establishes
that security concerns cannot relieve Israel of its
obligations under international law. It also expresses
concern at the impunity that prevails across the board
for violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law by Israeli forces. These forces refused to
change course despite knowledge of the massive death
and destruction being caused by their actions in Gaza.
This, the Commission concludes, may even amount to
war crimes.

The persistent lack of implementation of
recommendations regarding violations made by
similar previous Commissions all but guarantee their
systematic recurrence. This impunity must end. The
full implementation of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation-sponsored and Pakistan-steered Human
Rights Council resolution of 1 July 2015 would, we
hope, be a step towards ending this cycle of impunity.

The devastation of Gaza, mind you, is but one
aspect of the daily hardships that the Palestinians
face as a result of Israeli oppression. The eight-year
blockade of Gaza, the detention regime, excessive
use of force against Palestinian civilians and illegal
settlements all continue unabated and unchecked. It is
heartbreaking that of the more than 12,500 houses that
were completely destroyed in Gaza not a single one has
so far been rebuilt.

The international community must act to alleviate
the suffering of the people of Gaza, especially because
it shares part of the blame. We collectively have not
lived up to our promises. Only 28 per cent ofthe amount
pledged at the Cairo Conference in October 2014 has so
far been disbursed.

We believe that the path to sustainable peace in the
Middle East can only lie in a two-State solution and an
end to Israeli occupation of all Arab lands. This body, as
the prime custodian of international peace and security,
must take its responsibility seriously. We call on the
Security Council to adopt a resolution setting timelines
and parameters for establishing an independent, viable
and contiguous State ofPalestine, based on the pre-1967
borders, with Jerusalem as its capital. An international
mechanism to steer the process is also imperative.

The Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS)
poses a spreading threat to security across the Middle
East, North Africa and even beyond. A purely military
approach is neither sufficient nor permanent in its
impact. A comprehensive military, political, economic
and social strategy is needed to defeat a movement
that is motivated by an ideology of hate and gruesome
violence.

In Iraq, ISIS must be confronted and rolled back.
That should be achieved by the State, not by sectarian
militias. Success will come about only if the minority
population is fully assured of its safety and its human
rights. Durable peace can be achieved through political
solutions, notjust military engagements.

Syria continues to bleed profusely. Apart from
defeating ISIS, a serious search for a political solution
in Syria is needed. We welcome the consultations on
Syria undertaken by Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura
in Geneva. We look forward to the comprehensive
peace plan that he will present and hope that it will
garner the support of parties to the conflict as well as
of the international community. Dialogue, we believe,
is the only way out of that quagmire.

In Yemen, Pakistan is concerned that the
humanitarian pause has not held. We urge parties to the
conflict to return to the negotiating table. The legitimate
Government of Yemen must be restored. That effort
should be led by diplomacy and engagement.

Finally, my country welcomes the landmark
agreement recently reached with Iran, which, if fully
and sincerely implemented, can contribute not only to
nuclear non-proliferation but also to regional stability,

cooperation and economic growth. That would also open
the way for closer consultations and even agreement on
how to address pressing regional challenges, which, at
the end of the day, require regional responses.

