Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): May I begin by
expressing our confidence in your leadership,
Mr. President, and assuring you of our fullest
cooperation. Tributes are also due to Jamaica - the
Ambassador and her team 4 for their role as President
in November. I would also like to thank Assistant
Secretary-General Hedi Annabi for his succinct yet
comprehensive briefing and for introducing the report

of the Secretary-General contained in document
S/2001/1132.

We are encouraged by the fact that the general
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina is now more
stable. We are satisfied that the United Nations Mission
in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) has made
significant progress towards the goal of fulfilling its
core mandates. Bangladesh is pleased at the notable
improvements in the security-related aspects of the
mandate of UNMIBH. At the beginning of last year,
when the State Border Service (SBS) law was imposed,
an institution was established to address the wartime
legacy of a fragmented and porous border. The
extension of the Service in the past two years to protect
75 per cent of the border and the Sarajevo airport is a
commendable achievement. We would like to know,
however, about the projected time frame for 100 per
cent coverage.

It is also noteworthy that the 1,364 police
personnel of the SBS are drawn from a multi-ethnic
catchment area. The reduction of illegal migration to
Europe and success in diminishing human trafficking,
particularly of women, owe much to the SBS. We
believe that concerted efforts by UNMIBH, the Office
of the High Representative and the local political
leadership will soon enable us to achieve further
progress in this area.

Dayton has given an important mandate to
UNMIBH to reform and restructure the local police
force. That was based on the consideration that the
establishment of a professional and non-political police
force is key to combating terrorism, corruption and
discrimination. One of the most critical challenges in
Bosnia and Herzegovina was to ensure minority
representation in the police force. Positive results have
become increasingly apparent in such representation.
That is also reflected in the recruitment of female
police. That mission has to be relentlessly pursued as
the UNMIBH mandate comes to a close in December
2002, a year from now.

The effective functioning of police institutions is
severely compromised when the judiciary does not
develop hand in hand with those institutions. In this
case, it has not kept pace with police reform. The lack
ofjudicial enforcement discourages the police from the
pursuit and apprehension of criminals. In cases of
ethnically motivated crimes, adequate response by the
judicial system is essential to gain and retain public
confidence in the institution. That would also dissuade
extremists from perpetrating ethnically motivated
violence. Immediate priorities like economic reform to
encourage investment, sustainable minority returns and
institution-building cannot be achieved without the
establishment of the rule of law based on effective
policing and an impartial judiciary. The judicial system
in Bosnia and Herzegovina clearly remains
dysfunctional. Attention is required in this area if we
are to gain tangible overall benefits from the
restructuring of the police institutions.

A most effective way to heal the scars of a tragic
past is to create economic opportunities for the people.
That will enable them to look forward to a promising
future. A long-term solution will remain elusive if the
country cannot be put on a firm footing for progress
that ultimately leads to integration with the rest of
Europe. We are heartened that, in order to identify the
needs and potentials for development, a United Nations
Development Programme mission recently conducted
an initial assessment of requirements for a multi-year
economic and social recovery plan. That must be
followed through in the coming months. However, in
itself that will not be sufficient. There must be
continued committed support from the international
community in order that stability be sustained.

Bangladesh welcomes the early planning and
preparation for an exit. Such a need was made salient
in last year's Council debate on the theme of no exit
without strategy. The decision to close UNMIBH will
be sound if its mandate is fully and satisfactorily
accomplished. The United Nations and regional actors
must generate the momentum that will imbue people
with hope for the future. Hope is what will help them
overcome their differences and set them on course for a
prosperous future.

