Mr. Michon (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank Kuwait for requesting the
holding of today's emergency meeting and the Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs for his briefing.
Given his worrisome description of the situation, I
would like to make three comments.

First, we are very concerned about today's
developments, which have exacerbated an already
tense situation in the Gaza Strip. The response of the
Israeli security forces to last-minute protests has left a
number of dead and hundreds with bullet wounds. The
threshold for violence has been crossed. As we wait for
light to be shed on the incident, I should like to remind
the Council about two very important issues: first,
respect for international humanitarian law, in particular
the importance of protecting civilians, and, secondly,
respect for the right of Palestinians to hold peaceful
demonstrations. Measures taken by Israel to protect
itself 4 a concern we all share 4 must take those
issues into account. We call on Israel to demonstrate
discretion, restraint and proportional use of force. We
urge protesters to refrain from violence.

There is a very real risk of an escalation of
violence, which we mentioned at Wednesday's open
debate (see S/PV.8218). Another conflict could erupt
in Gaza. There are calls for frequent protests to be
held until 15 May. Conditions are therefore conducive
to an upsurge in violence. There is a humanitarian
crisis in Gaza, which will only deteriorate due to the
financial difficulties of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
The intra-Palestinian reconciliation process has been
at a standstill since the assassination attempt against
the Palestinian Prime Minister on 13 February, which
we firmly condemn. At the same time, the security
situation has deteriorated with the use of improvised
explosive devices, which have targeted Israeli soldiers
along the Israel-Gaza security barrier in recent weeks,
and offensive tunnels to prepare for attacks launched
from the Gaza Strip. We condemn all such actions.

All indicators are still red, and, in the absence ofa
political perspective that offers hope to the populations,
the situation is very worrying. In that context, it is
important that we support the return of the Palestinian
Authority to Gaza so that it can fully exercise its
prerogatives in the Gaza Strip, including in the area
of security. That process must also be accompanied by
a lifting of the blockade, along with credible security
guarantees for Israel.

Finally, we must not dissociate the situation in Gaza
from the Palestinian question as a whole. Palestinian
unity is an essential element of a just and lasting
peace based on the perspective of the two States. It is
essential that we call for an early resumption of serious
negotiations with a view to implementing the two-
State solution.

In conclusion, we believe it is essential for the
Council to remain actively seized of the matter and, as
requested by Kuwait, to express its support for protecting
civilians and avoiding any disproportionate response.

