Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): At the outset, let me
thank High Representative Petritsch and Special
Representative Jacques Paul Klein for their succinct
and lucid briefings, as well as for their comprehensive
report, which provided us with a clear vision of the
current situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

My delegation is encouraged by the positive
tendencies testifying to the fact that the general
situation in that country has become more stable.
Ukraine welcomes the results-oriented efforts of the
High Representative aimed in particular at
consolidating the Bosnia and Herzegovina State
institutions and at strengthening their competencies.
We also appreciate the High Representative's activities
focused on economic reform and refugee return.

We are pleased to note further progress in
creating a multi-ethnic and multicultural united State of
Bosnia and Herzegovina based on the democratic and
humanitarian ideals of modern Europe.

Ukraine particularly welcomes the recent decision
of the House of Representatives of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to adopt the election law, which in fact
was a major step forward on the road to European
integration. It is also an important prerequisite for the
accession of Bosnia and Herzegovina to the Council of
Europe.

In this context, I wish to commend the successful
work of the Office of the High Representative and the
representatives of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, which made a remarkable
contribution to achieving this political compromise. We
support the steps of the High Representative aimed at
stabilizing political life in Bosnia and Herzegovina. My
delegation fully endorses the measures taken to
preserve the country's unity and to create conditions
necessary for the productive work of State institutions
based on non-nationalistic principles.

Ukraine welcomes the adoption by the Council of
Ministers of the Stability Pact Charter for Media
Freedom. We believe that this important step will
provide a new impetus to the further development of
free and pluralistic media in the country. Let me also
mention the adoption of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
defence policy, which has strengthened the authority of
the presidency in the field of defence and security. We
believe that such a decision will help intensify the
further development of Bosnia and Herzegovina's
security and defence identity.

In this context, my delegation supports the
intention of Bosnia and Herzegovina to join the
Partnership for Peace programme. We hope that a
positive response to this initiative can provide an
important incentive for Bosnia and Herzegovina in
taking forward the political and military reforms.

As for the economic dimension, we are confident
that the advancement of economic reforms in the
country should continue to be a key element of the
international community's strategy. At the same time,
we should be realistic about the fact that Bosnia and
Herzegovina will continue to face serious economic
difficulties until the structural reform has been fully
implemented. My delegation welcomes the decision
made by the High Representative, in pursuit of
economic reforms in the financial, labour and pension
sectors, in creating a favourable environment for the
effective functioning of industry and trade and in
promoting the privatization process.

We have noted the concern expressed by the High
Representative about the state of public finances in the
country, as indicated by the results of the audit of the
entity budgets for 2000. In this respect, let me stress
again that effective economic reforms in any country
are impossible without sound and transparent financial
administration.

While noting the recent progress on returns of
minorities, we believe that much more should be done
in ensuring the conditions necessary for their security
and the equality of their rights upon their return. In this
respect, it is of particular importance to make the
property laws effective, to promote further
comprehensive judicial reform and to strengthen
human rights institutions. My delegation applauds the
measures taken by the High Representative in this
regard.
Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to
underline the importance we attach to ensuring the
human rights not only of the three constituent peoples
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, but also of its national
minorities. As the Council knows, the Ukrainian ethnic
community constitutes the fourth-largest ethnic group
in the country. My delegation commends the efforts of
the High Representative aimed at improving conditions
for the national, political and cultural revival of the
national minorities in the country. Moreover, I would
like to express our readiness to be useful to the Office
of the High Representative in this important work. At
the same time, we would greatly appreciate the
comments of the High Representative on the current
situation in the field of the protection of the rights of
national minorities. My delegation would also welcome
his remarks on further necessary steps in this regard.

