Mr. Zinsou (spoke in French): Madam President,
I should like to beg your indulgence, as, in my capacity
as the Chairman's assistant, I will be reading out his
statement. Mr. Idohou was called on to carry out a very
important function on behalf of our head of State: he is
accepting a prize that is being awarded to my country.

"I take the floor today with a certain sense
of historical solemnity to carry out one of the
most significant acts of the final part of Benin's
mandate as a member of the Security Council -
that of reporting to the wider membership on the
manner in which Benin has discharged its
responsibilities to this organ.

"When my country began its tenure in the
Council in January 2004, it was entrusted with
the responsibility of chairing the informal
Working Group on General Issues on Sanctions, a
body that had been in a deadlock situation for
several years. My delegation spared no effort in
working to break the impasse and to revitalize the
Group. As a result, the Working Group was able
to resume its activities with a revised mandate
and has carried out a number of studies aimed at
enhancing the work of the Security Council in the
area of sanctions. I would like to take this
opportunity to congratulate Ambassador Mahiga
of the United Republic of Tanzania.

"My country has also held the Vice-
chairmanship of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) on
the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. In that framework, it chaired its
subcommittee C, charged with considering the
reports of one third of the Member States.

"Benin has also held the vice-chairmanship
of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) since its
creation in 2004.

"In 2005, Benin chaired the Ad Hoc
Working Group of the Security Council on
Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa,
which was established by the Council in March
2002 with the following mandate, which has not
changed since its inception: to monitor the
implementation of Security Council
recommendations on conflict prevention and
resolution; to issue recommendations aimed at
enhancing cooperation between the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council, as
well as between the Security Council and other
United Nations bodies dealing with Africa; to
consider, in particular, regional matters and issues
arising as a result of various conflicts that affect
the Council's work on conflict prevention and
resolution in Africa; and to make
recommendations to the Security Council
concerning security so as to enhance cooperation
between the United Nations and African regional
and subregional organizations in the area of
conflict prevention and resolution.

"In 2005, the Working Group continued its
activities in a new context. Indeed, the debate
held in 2005 on United Nations reform placed
particular emphasis on ways and means of
meeting the challenge of preventing threats to our
collective security. The question of conflict
prevention and resolution elicited great interest in
the context of the review of the implementation
of the Millennium Development Goals, as a
precondition for their realization.

"Africa continues to suffer from crisis and
conflict situations in several countries of the
continent. It is facing complex difficulties that
could cause countries emerging from conflict to
relapse into violence. That reality led to a great
number of exchanges with a variety of
organizations and stakeholders in the context of
efforts to reform the United Nations and to
enhance its effectiveness in the area of conflict
prevention and resolution in Africa.

"The Working Group felt, therefore, that it
should take an active part in the debate, within

the framework of its mandate, and contributed to
forging a consensus on the important issues of
relevance to it within the overall package of
United Nations reform. It therefore drew up a
programme of work identifying some general
issues and some more specific issues that had
been raised in the Council in order to highlight
the need to develop a comprehensive strategy for
conflict prevention and to harmonize the
approach taken to African questions by the
United Nations and by the Security Council in
particular.

"Given the overall attitude that prevailed
during the preparation of the programme of work,
several Working Group members suggested that
its implementation be spread out throughout 2005
and subsequent years, bearing in mind the
possibility of adjusting the programme in keeping
with the priorities of the incoming Chairman.

"The Working group followed closely the
discussions in the Council and supported its work
on African issues. It met whenever it was deemed
to be necessary to assess the situation and to
consider possible contributions it might make.

"In addition to the discussions held within
the Working Group and within the Council, the
Group held two major events: a policy forum on
the role of the Security Council in enhancing the
United Nations capacity for conflict prevention,
held in the Trusteeship Chamber on 13 June
2005; and a seminar on cooperation between the
United Nations and the African regional
organizations in the field of peace and security.

"It is well known that more than 60 per cent
of the Council's time is dedicated to African
issues. In that context, the Chairman of the Group
held frequent bilateral and multilateral
consultations with representatives of States on the
Council's agenda and with Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General for
Africa and exchanged views with them on the
problems facing those countries and on measures
the Council could take that would be of
assistance to them.

"Bearing in mind the sensitivity of specific
country-related issues, the Working Group agreed
not to tackle them directly but rather to address
them only within the context of the consideration

of cross-cutting and horizontal issues included in
the programme of work I mentioned earlier. Such
issues were taken into account in the Programme
of work of the Working Group.

"The Working Group decided that the
establishment of the Peacebuilding Commission
would definitively settle the controversial
question of cooperation between the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council,
bearing in mind the Council's tendency to draw a
clear distinction between the areas of competence
of the two bodies in the absence of a specific
institutional framework for cooperation. Indeed,
such cooperation and the need for it were
generally recognized by Council members as a
way of ensuring greater consistency in addressing
complex crises in Africa.

"To that end, the Working Group assessed
the institutional approach of the United Nations
in conflict resolution and the importance of
peacebuilding in Africa from the perspective of
practicality. It mainly addressed the question of
how to coordinate the action of the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council to
prevent economic crises from resulting in
political crises and outbreaks of violence. As
outgoing Chair, I would like to stress the need to
keep that issue on the agenda of the Working
Group, because the ideas considered during the
aforementioned policy forum should be studied in
greater depth.

"On 29 June 2005, the Working Group held
a meeting on the preparation and the adoption of
the Governance and Economic Management
Assistance Programme (GEMAP) in order to
provide the National Transitional Government of
Liberia with a strategy to aid its quest for
transparency and accountability in the
management of State resources, taking into
account the recommendation made in the seventh
progress report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Mission in Liberia (S/2005/391),
of 16 June 2005.

"During that meeting, the Working Group
agreed that, while cooperation on this issue
between the Security Council and the Economic
and Social Council should not be excluded, no
action could be taken until the Economic

Community of West African States and the
National Transitional Government reached an
agreement with the development partners on that
programme. It should be underlined that in its
resolution 1626 (2005) of 16 September 2005, the
Security Council welcomed the signing, by the
National Transitional Government of Liberia and
the International Contact Group of Liberia, of the
Governance and Economic Management
Assistance Programme, which is designed to
ensure prompt implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement and to expedite
the lifting of measures imposed by resolution
1521 (2003). The Council also requested the
Secretary-General to include information on
progress in implementing GEMAP in his future
reports on the United Nations Mission in Liberia.
The implementation of GEMAP merits special
attention by the Peacebuilding Commission and
can serve as a model for other countries facing
similar difficulties.

"The wrap-up discussion on the African
dimension in the work of the Security Council,
held on 30 March (see S/PV.5156), constituted an
important milestone in the work of the Ad Hoc
Working Group during 2005. The wrap-up
meeting included an exchange of views on the
situation in Africa and on the ways and means for
the Security Council to implement new measures
and increase the effectiveness of existing
measures to address that situation. The then
President of the Security Council, the
representative of Brazil, addressed a letter to the
Secretary-General (S/2005/188) on the issues to
be discussed on that occasion. Those issues are of
great relevance, and the debate's conclusions
inspired subsequent activities of the Working
Group.

"The policy forum on enhancing the United
Nations capacity for conflict prevention and the
role of the Security Council, held on 13 June
2005 and organized in cooperation with the
International Peace Academy and the Center for
International Cooperation of New York
University, focused on identifying the constraints
that prevent the United Nations from playing an
active and effective role in managing crises and
stopping them from escalating into armed
conflicts.
"The active participation of renowned
specialists such as Mr. Ibrahim Gambari, who
was invited in his capacity as Special Adviser to
the Secretary-General on Africa, and Professor
Rubin of New York University made it possible
to hold an in-depth discussion of important
questions, such as how the Security Council's
action can be triggered in situations that are not
on its agenda, how information gathered by the
early warning system can be used as indicators
for the deployment of rapid responses to
imminent conflicts and what practical crisis
monitoring instruments can be established by the
Security Council.

"The conclusions of the policy forum are set
out in resolution 1625 (2005), which was adopted
by heads of States or Government at the Security
Council summit on 14 September 2005. It is true
that that resolution, which was sponsored by the
three African countries members of the Security
Council, was not negotiated within the Working
Group, because the resolution sought to establish
a general framework for conflict prevention,
taking into account African realities.
Nonetheless, the resolution was made possible
thanks to material collected by the Working
Group.

"Thus, it is understandable that the Working
Group should seek an active role in following up
the resolution's implementation, and that the
Working Group has decided, in that context, to
hold two seminars: the first on cooperation
between the United Nations and African regional
organizations in the area of peace and security,
and the second on the formulation of
comprehensive and coherent strategies for
conflict prevention and resolution in Africa.
Holding the latter seminar remains an urgent task
that should be tackled as soon as possible under
the incoming Chair, to whom I wish every
success.

"The seminar on cooperation between the
United Nations and the African regional
organizations in the field of peace and security
was held on 15 December 2005. It was organized
with the active support and the active and very
effective intellectual participation of the
Secretariat. The seminar provided an invaluable
opportunity for deepening insight into the issue,
with contributions from various personalities
such as the Chairperson of the Commission of the
African Union Commission, the President of the
Security Council, Sir Emyr Jones Parry, and the
Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Hedi Annabi. We also had the
participation of well-known personalities of
international civil society such as Mr. Vasu
Gounden of South Africa, founder and Executive
Director of the African Centre for the
Constructive Resolution of Disputes, and
Mr. Paul van Tongeren of the Netherlands,
Executive Director of the European Centre for
Conflict Prevention.

"The report of the seminar will soon be
issued as a document of the Security Council. It
will highlight the characteristics of the peace and
security architecture of the African Union and its
subsidiary bodies; the most important initiatives
for strengthening that architecture; the principles
and priorities of cooperation with the United
Nations in the field of peacekeeping;
recommendations concerning the rules for the use
of force and the full integration of the African
peace and security architecture in the collective
peace and security system established by the
United Nations Charter; and the strengthening of
the African Union's capacity in the area of peace
and security.

"To conclude, I would like to thank all
members of the Working Group for the strong
support that they extended to me in the discharge
of my functions. In addition, I thank the
Secretariat, in particular Mr. Ibrahim Gambari. A
comprehensive report on the activities of the
Working Group in 2005 is being completed and
will be transmitted to the President of the
Security Council as soon as possible."

