We thank Special Coordinator Nikolay Mladenov for his briefing on the current situation in the region. We also thank Mr. Daniel Levy and Mr. Khalil Shikaki for their presentations. The Dominican Republic reiterates its deep concern regarding the Israeli- Palestine conflict, the current prospects of further destabilization and the enormous potential consequences for the civilian population. The continuing trends of conflict in the occupied Palestinian territory, as well as the worsening deterioration of the humanitarian and socioeconomic situation there, exacerbate the level of uncertainty about the future of the Israeli-Palestinian peace process. Dialogue is the only fundamental way to improve the lives of people affected by the conflict and to move forward with firm steps towards sustainable development - one that is based on justice, equal opportunities and a peace that can be replicated throughout the Middle East. Such dialogue needs to lead to the immediate cessation of all actions that contravene international law, including international humanitarian law and human rights law, and United Nations resolutions. But, above all, it needs to be people-centered, prioritizing the health, dignity, security, freedom and well- being of a population hit by years of violence and conflict. As an international community, we need to understand that our collective action must be aimed at contributing in an impartial and effective way to the search for real solutions to a conflict that so often endangers the lives of so many civilians. We need to move forward and reduce any empty demagogic diligence. The situation in Gaza continues to be of high concern for the Dominican Republic, as it is for others. We all know the long-standing dire situation of the health system, particularly in the Gaza Strip. And now, with the global coronavirus disease pandemic, its collapse is imminent. As stated by the Secretary-General, the challenges in Gaza ultimately require political solutions and the political will to pursue them. All acts of violence by any of the conflicting parties, including discrimination and displacement, have a particular impact on women, and notably on those in the marginalized Palestinian territories. Therefore, the Dominican Republic calls for the full, equal and meaningful participation of women in all actions leading towards peace, including the centrality of the disproportionate impact of violence on women and girls. Turning to the current situation on the ground, we are saddened by the deaths of seven Palestinians, including one child, involving the Israeli Defense Forces during demonstrations, clashes, security operations and other incidents across the occupied Palestinian territories. We also remain concerned about the number of Palestinian children killed or maimed and the disruption of children's education due to air strikes and rockets, as recently indicated in the Secretary-General's report of the on the matter. This is unacceptable. For children, the impact of such an environment is too often profound. Children are exposed to experiences that shape attitudes for a lifetime and have lasting psychological consequences. We therefore urge Israel and the State of Palestine to continue working with the Special Representative on Children and Armed Conflict and make concrete and honest commitments to prevent and end grave violations against children. In conclusion, we reaffirm that meaningful and fair dialogue around the numerous current obstacles that threaten the two-State solution must continue without delay and on the basis of international consensus. The Dominican Republic will stand with both parties in their efforts towards that end. But we believe that Palestinian national unity and Israeli political will need to precede any meaningful dialogue. Both countries' political leadership need to realize that the only way forward for Palestinians and Israelis is to negotiate their way out of this long and painful conflict and forge their own paths towards lasting peace for present and future generations.
