Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State ofBolivia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, Mr. President, allow
me to wish you and your delegation every success
during the Russian presidency of the Security Council
in June. I should also like to express my gratitude and
appreciation for the excellent work of Poland during its
presidency of the Council in May.

We regret the fact that the draft resolution submitted
today by the delegation of Kuwait (S/2018/516) was not
adopted owing to a negative vote by one of the permanent
members of the Security Council. The draft had been
subject to extensive negotiations by the members
of the Council and was the outcome of broad-based
discussions in which, I reiterate, we all participated,
and a balanced text had been achieved in which primacy
was accorded to safeguarding the lives of civilians,
whether Palestinian or Israeli. The fact that the draft
was blocked makes it clear that despite the existence of
agreement on the protection of civilians in situations
of armed conflict, that agreement is insufficient in the
face of a veto by a permanent member.

Bolivia, on the basis of its policy of pacifism,
reaffirms its strong condemnation of any kind of
attack on civilians or on civilian health or education
infrastructure in any form, as these are unjustifiable
whatever the reason and wherever, whenever and by
whomsoever committed, given that they are breaches of
the most basic tenets of international law. However, we
feel compelled to recall the underlying structural cause
ofthe dreadful situation ofthe Palestinian people, which
is the illegal Israeli occupation. The main threat to both
Palestinian and Israeli civilians is Israel's occupation
of Palestinian territory. We deplore the fact that once
again the Security Council has also become a kind of
occupied territory, as a result of the negative vote and
veto of one of its permanent members.

The situation is much more critical for the
Palestinian civilian population, whose right to
protection was denied today. For 70 years they have
been living under the yoke of the occupying Power,
Israel, and the Israel Defense Forces. Who sets up
and runs the checkpoints on Palestinian territory?
Israel. Who built an annexationist wall? Israel. Who is
responsible for the construction of illegal settlements
in Palestinian territory? Israel. Who is responsible for
preventing the return of more than 6 million Palestinian
refugees to their homes? Israel. Who is responsible for
the detention of hundreds of children? Israel. Who is
responsible for Gaza being besieged and blockaded by
air and sea and lacking the basic services of water and
electricity? Israel. And, ultimately, who is responsible
for the illegal occupation of territories that do not
belong to it? Israel.

Bolivia firmly believes that the only long-term
solution to the occupation situation facing the Palestinian
people is a two-State solution, leading at long last to
a free, sovereign and independent Palestinian State,
within the internationally recognized pre-l967 borders
and with East Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance
with the relevant resolutions of the Council and the
General Assembly.

