Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Let me first join others in
thanking the briefers, my brother Ambassador Omar
Hilale, Mr. Smai'l Chergui and Mr. Koen Vervaeke,
for their updates and in particular for their insights on
the issue that we are discussing. I would also like to
take this opportunity to express my appreciation for
the work of Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga in leading
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) since August 2015, and to welcome
Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye and offer him the full support of
my delegation. It would be remiss of me not to welcome
Minister Sylvie Valerie Baipo-Temon of the Central
African Republic to the Chamber.

Indonesia took note of the Secretary-General's
report of 15 February, and echoes him in saying that
"the only path out of crisis for the Central African
Republic must be forged through political dialogue"
(S/2019/I47, para. 75). To that end, we see the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic, signed in Bangui on 6 February,
as an important political milestone. However, I must
recall that it will remain only a piece ofpaper if it is not
duly implemented.

Indeed, the implementation of the Agreement will
not be without challenges. It is therefore important
to establish a follow-up mechanism for the effective
implementation of the Agreement, have a sustained and
constructive dialogue between the Government and the
armed groups and, in that regard, ensure the full and
solid support of the international community, including
the Security Council. I appeal to all Council members
to be united in trying to ensure that the implementation
of the Agreement becomes a reality.

Indonesia would also like to commend the Sudan
and Chad, as well as other neighbouring countries, and
the African Union (AU) in its role in brokering peace.
We have always believed that neighbours and regional
organizations play an important role in settling disputes
and in promoting dialogue. We also commend the
closer cooperation of the United Nations with the AU
in that regard.

I will focus my comments today on two pertinent
points: first, the humanitarian situation in the Central
African Republic and secondly, the role of MINUSCA
in the Central African Republic.

First, while there is progress on the political aspect,
we should not overlook the humanitarian aspect in the
Central African Republic, which is equally important.
We are still concerned about the violence in the country
and the situation remains fragile. It is alarming to
hear that the number of people in need of assistance
and protection has increased to 2.9 million, which is
16 per cent higher than last year, and that there are
more than 1,000 protection-related incidents on average
each month. There are record levels of displacement,
with more than 1 million people displaced internally
and in neighbouring countries. Furthermore, we also
hear reports that one out of three children suffers from
severe malnutrition, and one out of two people does
not have access to safe drinking water. The people of
the Central African Republic have suffered enough. I
urge countries to continue their assistance and deliver
on their commitments to the Central African Republic,
as well as supporting the work being done by the
Peacebuilding Commission.

In relation to the humanitarian situation, Indonesia
notes the relatively positive result of the disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation
(DDRR) programme. The programme works towards
reintegrating ex-combatants into society and has
succeeded in disarming 137 ex-combatants and in
separating a total of 923 children from armed groups.
Like others who spoke before me, using children as
combatants in armed conflict is a crime. We need
to work together in that regard. We urge the Central
African Republic to continue its commitment to DDRR
in order to truly silence the guns in the region, starting
in its own backyard. At the same time, the Council
should continue to support the DDRR process in the
Central African Republic, as stipulated in the recently
adopted resolution 2454 (2019) of 31 January. We also
believe that peace is illusive without investment in
development, with which the international community
should assist.

Secondly, after hearing the updates from the
briefers, it is more apparent that the role of the Mission
is more important than ever. I note in the Secretary-
General's report that MINUSCA has supported efforts
to reduce violence, promote reconciliation among
communities and increase the protection of civilians,
as well as contribute to many other noble causes.
MINUSCA's work in reinforcing the capacity of the
Central African armed forces through training and
technical and logistical support for recruitment is
crucial in the security sector reform of the country.

The Mission's role also extends to justice and the
rule oflaw by providing local authorities with technical
support for investigations - important tools for enabling
the Government to protect its people. The Mission
is currently, on average, at 94.46 per cent of its total
authorized strength; nevertheless, given its important
role there is a need to optimize its performance through
training and the use of up-to-standard equipment, and
by ensuring the continuous support of the Council. It is
important to enhance the Mission's accountability as
the face of the United Nations on the ground.

Since 2013, Indonesia has contributed 200
engineering troops, who have contributed to the
building of roads and bridges and, just recently, even
contributed to the management of waste and landfills.
This month Indonesia will increase its contribution by
sending an additional 140 formed police units to the
Mission, including 14 female police officers trained in
community-based approaches.

While on the subject of MINUSCA, Indonesia also
wishes to pay tribute to the many brave peacekeepers
who have lost their lives in recent years in the Central
African Republic, and to commend the countries that
provided them.

In conclusion, we should maintain the momentum
established by the agreement and continue to support
its implementation and monitor its progress. Let this be
the last agreement that will build a bridge to the path
of peace, end conflict and silence the guns once and
for all.

