I thank Special Envoy Griffiths and Acting Assistant Secretary-General Rajasingham for their briefings. China commends their efforts to promote a national ceasefire and improve the humanitarian situation in Yemen. These efforts are particularly significant in the face of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. China has been following the situation in Yemen closely. We support the ceasefire appeal made by the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy. We welcome the extended unilateral ceasefire made by Saudi Arabia on behalf of the coalition. All parties should make further efforts in the same vein so as, together, to reach and sustain a complete ceasefire. China shares the concern of the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy about the instability in southern Yemen. The Council already issued a press statement in this regard (see SC/14094), calling for expeditious implementation of the Riyadh agreement. We reiterate the importance of the Riyadh agreement, which serves the interests of all parties. Confrontation and escalation are the last thing the Yemeni people need, especially at this difficult moment. A political settlement is the only way forward to end the conflict in Yemen. Years of conflict have proved there will be no winners in this war. China supports the Special Envoy's efforts to secure a nationwide ceasefire, enhance confidence- building measures in humanitarian and economic areas and restart an inclusive political process. It is imperative that all parties to the conflict strengthen their political will and engage in broad dialogue and consultations. We urge all parties to remain in close contact under the coordination of Mr. Griffiths, and encourage countries of the region to continue to play a positive role. For China, our message is clear and consistent: a political settlement is necessary. Our Embassy in Yemen has been actively engaged with the Government of Yemen and other parties in the country. The humanitarian situation in Yemen is alarming, and compounded by the COVID-19 pandemic, floods, power shortages and other challenges. The fundamental interests of the Yemeni people are at stake. We urge all parties to demonstrate unity, jointly fight the pandemic and improve the livelihoods of the Yemeni people. Last week, China donated 10,000 N95 face masks to Yemen's Ministry of Health as well as other humanitarian assistance, such as rice. We call on the international community and donor countries to step up essential assistance to Yemen, especially in the forthcoming virtual high-level pledging event, to be held on 2 June. Meanwhile, the sovereignty, political independence, unity and territorial integrity of Yemen must be fully respected.
