Mr. Tachie-Menson (Ghana): I wish to express
my delegation's appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his statement and for his very comprehensive sixth
report on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2007/643). I also wish to express our appreciation to
the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
for his briefing.

In discussing this subject, which is one of the
critical issues facing the international community, it is
important that we consider the means of preventing
conflicts. It is now widely recognized that the
promotion of human security and human development
is the basis for conflict prevention. That brings to the
fore the need for the international community, working
in collaboration with the relevant Governments and
civil society, to promote acceptable standards of
governance, economic management and the rule of law
in potential areas of conflict. In this regard, my
delegation wishes to recall resolution 1674 (2006) and
to emphasize the need for a coordinated,
comprehensive approach to the promotion of economic
growth, poverty eradication and sustainable
development in vulnerable areas and regions by the
United Nations and its agencies. Regional and
subregional organizations also have a role to play in
this area. We believe that many conflicts could be
avoided if these ideas were actively pursued.

In considering the Secretary-General's report, we
note the relative decline in the number of conflicts in
the world. There is, however, no reason for
complacency in View of the brutality and atrocities of
the remaining conflicts, which have brought misery
and untold suffering to millions. The world's refugee
population stands at 9.9 million and internally
displaced persons at a record 24.5 million. That is a
stark reminder of the challenges facing the
international community.

While it is recognized that the primary
responsibility for the protection of civilians falls on
States and Governments, the present situation clearly
indicates that in most conflicts, States and
Governments are either unable or unwilling to provide
that protection. The international community, therefore,
has a moral and legal duty to extend this protection as
affirmed in paragraphs 138 and 139 of the 2005 World
Summit Outcome Document (General Assembly resolution 60/1), and as stressed in Council resolution
1674 (2006).

In this context, we are pleased to note the
progress, as indicated in the Secretary-General's report,
in creating the necessary regulatory and policymaking
framework to enhance the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, such as, inter alia, strengthening
peacekeeping mandates to cover the protection of
civilians, strengthening peace mediation mandates and
combating impunity for war crimes and crimes against
humanity.

On the subject of peacekeeping and humanitarian
assistance, which have played key roles in keeping
conflicts in check and have reduced the scale of human
suffering, the position of my delegation is that these
two tools, while distinct, are mutually supportive and
complementary. With the strengthening of
peacekeeping mandates to make them more robust, it
may be possible to ensure not only the physical
protection of civilians, but also the facilitation of
humanitarian assistance.

The role of a fully operational International
Criminal Court in the development and enforcement of
international humanitarian law and in combating
impunity is also indispensable. The recent issuance by
the Court of arrest warrants for crimes against
humanity and war crimes, in respect of atrocities
committed by The Lord's Resistance Army in Uganda,
as well as those committed in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Darfur, sends a strong positive
message that the international community will not
tolerate impunity.

In debating this matter, we cannot afford to forget
the valiant role played by journalists in reporting these
conflicts. Without the commitment and professionalism
of these journalists and media personnel, who have to
operate under great risks, the extent of some of these
conflicts and atrocities committed might have been
difficult to detect. We therefore unreservedly condemn
the deliberate targeting of journalists and media
personnel and call on all parties to conflicts to comply
with resolution 1738 (2006).

Finally, we wish to express our support for all
measures aimed at restricting and ultimately
prohibiting the use of cluster munitions, in view of
their devastating impact on civilians. The use of such
weapons is unconscionable and unacceptable. We also
strongly support the Secretary-General's
recommendation for the establishment of an expert
level working group to facilitate the systematic and
sustained consideration and analysis of the protection
of civilians.

