Mr. Antonio: Allow me, first of all, to congratulate
you, Madam President, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month.
I would also like to thank you for convening this
important meeting and for giving us an opportunity
to share with Council members the perspectives of the
African Union (AU) on the very important issues of
migration to Europe and the smuggling of migrants in
the Mediterranean Sea. I would also like to welcome
the presence among us of Ms. Federica Mogherini,
High Representative of the European Union for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, and of Mr. Peter
Sutherland, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for International Migration.

Today's meeting takes place against the backdrop
of an ever-increasing humanitarian disaster in the
Mediterranean sea, which is resulting in the the loss
of the lives of thousands of migrants, many of them
Africans trying to look for safer and better living
conditions in Europe. These horrific incidents, which
are a major issue of concern to the African Union,
should serve as a wake-up call for the international
community to reflect on the causes of this mass
movement of people, as well as the appropriate actions
that need to be taken to find a lasting solution to this
persistent problem.

The massive increase in the number of people trying
to cross the Mediterranean Sea cannot be divorced
from the conflicts and acute humanitarian crises in
some parts of Africa, in particular the situation in
Libya - which is the main point of departure for the
migrants. The conflict in that country has played an
important role, and any attempt to address the issue
would also need to address the conflict in Libya and in
the broader Sahel region.

Many migrants are also fleeing conditions of abject
poverty exacerbated by a number of factors, including
climate change, which has had devastating consequences

on traditional livelihoods. Clearly, there are other push
factors, including the lack of sufficient progress with
regard to intra-Africa mobility, demographic dynamics,
the digital revolution, widespread youth unemployment
and rising inequality. Due to those dynamics, a flurry
of highly organized transnational criminal and terrorist
groups, including those involved in trafficking in
persons and the smuggling of migrants, have also
emerged. Those present a serious threat to African and
international stability and security. For wherever one
finds human traffickers and people smugglers, one is
also sure to find drug and traffickers.

In that context, the principles of humanity,
solidarity, burden-sharing and respect for international
law, including human rights and humanitarian law,
should be placed at the centre of the international
response strategy. The need for enhanced coordination,
cooperation and partnership among all stakeholders
and actors - including the United Nations, the African
Union and the European Union (EU), as well as the
countries concerned, including those of origin, transit
and destination - cannot be overemphasized.

Equally important is the need to step up our
collective efforts to address the root causes of the
problem and to enhance our commitment to prevent and
resolve conflicts, realize the development agenda and
move towards a more just international system. It is our
conviction that ad hoc solutions that place the emphasis
solely on one specific aspect - for example, focusing
on trafficking without addressing either the reasons
pushing people to flee their home countries or even the
almost total breakdown of law and order - which have
allowed human trafficking to flourish are unlikely to
bring about the much-needed change that will prevent
people who do not have livelihoods from looking for
greener pastures elsewhere. We should therefore act
to ensure conditions of security and dignity at home,
because desperate people will definitely continue to
flee difficult situations, in particular those of armed
conflict.

It is important to note that migration by refugees
from war is protected by international law. However,
some of the migrants we are confronted by are not
refugees, and neither are they fleeing out of choice, but
as a result of hardships that are an assault and human
dignity that should offend our moral sensibility. As
global warming and water scarcity force more and
more people to flee, it is clear that the current situation
reveals gaps in our existing international instruments.
It is important, therefore, that we make use of the
opportunities provided, especially in the discussions on
the post-2015 development agenda, to begin to address
this situation.

The most vulnerable categories, including internally
displaced persons and refugees, are often subject to
exploitation and human trafficking. They deserve
our particular attention and protection. Therefore, in
addressing this problem, the international community
will need to act on the basis of a comprehensive and
balanced approach that takes into account realities
and trends as well as linkages between migration and
other key economic, social, political, humanitarian and
development issues.

For its part, the African Union is fully aware of
its responsibility and is ready to assume its share.
In addition to the development of an African policy
framework on immigration, the AU is also committed
to fighting exploitation and human trafficking in
collaboration with regional economic communities,
international partners and civil society organizations.
At the seventh African Union Commission-European
Union Commission College to College Meeting, which
took place in Brussels on 22 April, the two parties
reviewed a wide range of issues, including questions
related to legal, irregular and forced migration. In
particular, they agreed to intensify the implementation
of the EU-Africa declaration that was endorsed by Heads
of State and Government at the EU Africa Summit
in April 2014. It is worth noting that this political
declaration stressed, among other things, the parties'
shared commitment to fight irregular migration and to
address all its relevant aspects, including prevention,
strengthened immigration and border management, the
smuggling of migrants, return and readmission, as well
as addressing the root causes of irregular migration and
enhancing cooperation to address trafficking in human
beings and offering international protection.

Another issue of concern to Africa is the political
impact of migration on host communities. The increase
in xenophobia in Africa and beyond, especially in the
context of the economic crises in many countries since
2008, is a challenge we must face. As we speak about
immigration to Europe, we should not lose sight of the
extent of immigration between developing countries,
which is also called South-South migration, and the
issues around it. There are more Africans moving within
their own region than those who travel long distances
to go to other parts of the world. Therefore, this trend
must also be taken into account as we address the issues
at hand. The efforts of the African Union aimed at
advancing regional integration, including in terms of
the promotion of free movement and labour migration,
should therefore be acknowledged and supported.

