Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia wishes, first
of all, to pay tribute to the presence of Mr. Oscar
Naranjo, Vice-President of the Republic of Colombia,
and to welcome him to the Chamber. We also thank
Mr. Jean Arnault, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Mission in Colombia, for sharing with the Council
the first quarterly report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia
(S/2017/lll7). I also wish to welcome the presence of
the many Ambassadors from Latin America and the
Caribbean who are here with us at this meeting. Their
presence clearly demonstrates the commitment of Latin
America and the Caribbean to this peace process.

In the various conflicts that figure on the agenda of
the Security Council, we greatly regret the fact that there
have been political processes under way for years without
showing any tangible progress and peace agreements
that are ignored or are not really implemented. Colombia
provides us with a different reality. Of course, that does
not mean that there have not been difficulties along the
way - there have - but the goodwill and leadership
shown by the Government and the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia - Ejercito del Pueblo
(FARC-EP) in implementing the Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace is something that we would like to see in other
conflicts. That same conviction is needed to overcome
the difficulties that exist, or that will arise in future.

We are starting a new year, and it is always worth
evaluating the cycle that has been completed. The year
2017 was the year of peace in Colombia. That process
brought about positive news and demonstrated concrete
progress for the Security Council and the international
community. The agreement reached by the Government
and the FARC represents a tremendous achievement
by Colombians, which fills the entire region of Latin
America and the Caribbean with pride.

Thanks to that agreement, 53 years ofarmed conflict
came to an end. The FARC laid down their weapons,
became the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del
Comun and exchanged arms for political participation.
Those three specific facts are easy to say, but those of
us who are aware the suffering of the Colombian people
during that half-century know the value of every minute
step that was taken and the effort and cost involved in
laying the foundations for peacebuilding. Only those
three facts make that process irreversible.

Three months ago, the most complicated stage
in the implementation of the Final Agreement
began - the political, economic and social reintegration
of the ex-combatants of FARC into society, in
accordance with points 3.2 and 3.4 of the agreement.
That stage is facing difficulties, but should not stop
or diminish the significance of the progress made in
implementing the Agreement.

Colombia has adopted 107 laws and decrees on
reinstatement and security guarantees, on the victims,
and on truth, justice and reparation. It has established
dozens of institutions and specialized mechanisms and
development plans. The support of the international
community is paramount. For their part, the United
Nations and the Security Council must continue to
support this process every step of the way and work
to maintain peace. But of course it is Colombians
who should be the main defenders of the process. The
difference between now and previous attempts is that
the Government and the FARC are getting real results.

Given all of this, the Plurinational State of Bolivia
believes that we should first redouble our efforts to
ensure the reintegration of former FARC combatants
into civilian life, starting with the legal reinstatement
that is the foundation needed for achieving political,
social and economic reinstatement, as established in
the Final Agreement. Secondly, security should be
strengthened in the areas formerly occupied by the
FARC. The latest figures for murders of social leaders
and former FARC members are alarming, and we should
move faster to establish measures that will ensure a
Government presence and protection for residents of
those areas. Thirdly, concrete steps must be taken to
advance comprehensive rural reforms. In our View,
formalizing access to land is fundamental to ensuring
stable and lasting peace. With regard to the negotiations
with the Ejercito de Liberacion Nacional (ELN), we
regret the fact that the process has been suspended, and
we hope and call for the talks to be resumed as soon
as possible.

In conclusion, we would like to highlight the
efforts of Special Representative Jean Arnault and his
team. Their commitment has been proven both in the
implementation of the Final Agreement between the
Government and the FARC and in their own work in
pursuing talks with the ELN. We would also like to
express our special gratitude to three Ambassadors who
are in this Chamber today: Ambassador Rosselli Frieri,
of Uruguay - not just for his leadership in the work
of the United Nations Mission in Colombia but also for
his commitment to the issue - Ambassador Rycroft,
of the United Kingdom, for his role in the Council's
special mission in Colombia, and Ambassador Mejia
Ve'lez, who has been a pillar of the peace process. We
would also like to reiterate Bolivia's total support to the
peace process led by the Government and FARC. The
determination shown both by President Juan Manuel
Santos and the FARC's leaders in consolidating peace
will go down in history as one of the most important
decisions that the Colombian people have ever taken.
The peace they are building belongs to Colombia, but it
also belongs to, and is the responsibility of, the whole
of the human family.

