Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank you, Sir, for your initiative to
organize this meeting of the Security Council on the
fight against the illicit traffic in drugs and for the
adoption of today's important presidential statement
(S/PRST/2009/32).

Drug trafficking poses a serious and growing
threat to international peace and security. Together with
organized crime and terrorism, drug trafficking has
grown to dangerous proportions in various regions of
the world. We support the resolve of the Security
Council, the principal organ responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security, to
assist in resolving this pernicious problem.

The grave drug threat emerging from the territory
of Afghanistan is of a global nature. The Russian
Federation believes that the impetus for mobilizing
international cooperation in countering the Afghan
drug threat lies in the decisions adopted within the
framework of the Paris-Moscow process, under United
Nations auspices. The time has come to consider how
to build on and complement these decisions, taking
into account the latest trends in the evolving drug
situation in and around Afghanistan. In that regard, we
favour the convening of a third ministerial conference
within the Paris-Moscow process in late 2010.

There is a growing and urgent need to create
buffer zones around Afghanistan to ensure anti-drug,
counter-terrorist and financial security. A call to
develop broad and effective international cooperation
consonant with that initiative is contained in the
outcome document of the special conference on
Afghanistan held in Moscow in March under the
auspices of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization.
We believe that one example of effective
cooperation among States in curbing the illegal flow of
drugs is Operation Channel, carried out under the
auspices of the Collective Security Treaty
Organization. The list of participants in the Operation
grows ever year, and its purposes reflect the global
nature of drug trafficking and its nexus with other
types of criminal activity. In 2009, the Operation
sought to close off the conduits for smuggled Afghan

09-6381]
opiates into the territories of States of the Eurasian
region, synthetic drugs from Europe and cocaine from
Latin America; to curb the illegal flow of precursors
into Central Asian States and Afghanistan; to seize
illicitly trafficked weapons, munitions and explosives;
and to counter the laundering of drug revenues.

The problem of drug trafficking has also
deteriorated in West Africa. Exploiting the weakness of
existing West African counter-narcotics mechanisms,
porous borders and feeble national security sectors,
international criminality has turned that subregion into
a major new transit hub for cocaine. The Economic
Community of West African States and the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime must step up their
efforts in that regard through the development of
operational counter-narcotics programmes. The United
Nations Office for West Africa should pursue its
practical contributions to the work in this area.

We consider the problem of drug smuggling and
associated transnational organized crime to be one of
the most serious threats to the security of African
countries, in particular those in transition towards
recovery following destructive armed conflict.

It may be concluded that the problem of the
spread of drugs has become global, and that more
robust measures to eradicate it are called for.

