Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): 1 would like first of all to
join other speakers in welcoming the Presidents and
Prosecutors of both Tribunals to the Council and in
thanking them for their respective reports and
insightful briefings.

Indonesia supports the effective contributions of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) in bringing those who
were responsible for crimes against humanity in the
former Yugoslavia and in Rwanda, respectively, to
justice.

Justice, as a foundation of peace, will generate
sustainable peace only when it is sought in tandem
with reconciliation efforts. Hence Indonesia believes
that the Tribunals could also contribute to the process
of national reconciliation in the countries concerned
and to the struggle of those countries to come to terms
with the past and move on to embrace the future.

We are encouraged by the fact that the two
Tribunals are steadily working to meet their completion
strategies. The completion strategies are instrumental
in the streamlining of the final phase of the functioning
of both Tribunals.

We commend the cooperation of the countries of
the former Yugoslavia and of Rwanda in the work of
the respective Tribunals and their completion
strategies.

One important step in the context of the
completion strategies is the transfer of cases from the
Tribunals to national courts. My delegation recognizes
the merits of, and challenges posed by, such a step.
Transferring the cases would reduce the backlog of the
two Tribunals and allow them to complete their
respective mandates on time. It would also reduce the
Tribunals' overall financial burden.

However, transfer to national courts will be
ineffective if those courts are not well equipped and
sufficiently capable. Under such circumstances, justice
will hardly be served and the foundations of peace will
become less secure.

In that regard, my delegation attaches particular
significance to the capacity-building programmes of
national courts. The support and assistance of the
international community in that effort is essential.
National courts must have an unequivocally strong
commitment to justice in order to function effectively.
They must receive political support from the
Government and from the people they serve in order to
work authoritatively. In our view, a lack of
commitment or support would bring into question the
courts' efficacy and credibility.

Legal standards and respect for national justice
systems must be equally respected. Thus, when
national courts eventually take over the cases from the
Tribunals, they should observe proper standards.
National justice systems must also have an
undisputable willingness and the capacity to bring to
justice their nationals responsible for crimes against
humanity, whoever they may be. When a system is
averse to, and incompetent in, bringing such
perpetrators to justice, the need for international
tribunals will remain pressing.

Justice cannot be fully served so long as the
perpetrators remain at large. The system must be able
to bring them to justice, no matter when or where they
are apprehended. My delegation therefore stresses the
paramount importance of enhancing cooperation
among States in the service of justice.

There can be no sustainable peace in the former
Yugoslavia or Rwanda without justice and
reconciliation. Through their judgments and decisions,
the Tribunals could play a major role not only in
serving justice, addressing impunity and promoting
reconciliation in those countries but also in the
development of international humanitarian and
criminal law.
As a final point, my delegation underlines the
significance of continued close cooperation between
the Tribunals and the countries concerned and other
relevant stakeholders at various levels in the pursuit of
justice.

