Mr. Lowcock: Last Friday, 26 July, I spoke via
a video link to Dr. Mohammed Abrash, a surgeon at
Idlib Central Hospital. Trained in Aleppo, he has been
a physician for 28 years, and since 2011 he has been in
Idlib. Dr. Abrash told me he is afraid. He has a room
at the top of the building. He says the lower floors
and basement are the safest places, so that is where
the patients are. A few days before I spoke to him, a
bomb landing 50 metres away blew out all the glass and
windows of his room. A day or so before that, another
bomb had hit a gynaecological facility 200 metres
away. Dr. Abrash's hospital is deconflicted under the
United Nations system. Everyone knows where it is.

I spoke to Dr. Abrash because two days prior, on
24 July, three young sisters were taken to his hospital
by emergency ambulance. Their house had been hit by
a bomb dropped by a war plane. Dalia, the 9-year-old,
lay on the bed behind Dr. Abrash, as we spoke While he
tended to her.

Everyone has seen the pictures of her two younger
sisters, because they were printed on the front pages of
newspapers all across the world - Rawan, a 3-year-old,
buried by rubble, covered in dust and clinging on to the
T-shirt of her baby sister, Tuka, in a desperate effort to
stop her from falling to her death off the precipice that
the bomb had made of the upper storeys of their home.
Their mother, just 25-years old, and 5-year-old sister
Reham were killed in the attack. Rawan, that brave
little three-year-old, died of her injuries the day after

the attack. She had saved her baby sister, who has now
been discharged from Dr. Abrash's hospital.

For more than 90 days now, bombing and shelling
by the Government of Syria, backed by the Russian
Federation, has produced carnage in the so-called
de-escalation zone of Idlib. On 26 July, the Office of
the High Commissioner for Human Rights identified
at least 450 civilians who had been killed since late
April, including more than 100 in the past two weeks
alone. We have seen continued reports of attacks killing
civilians, including further attacks in the town of those
little girls. Many hundreds more have been injured.
More than 440,000 have been displaced. Dozens of
civilians have also been killed or injured as a result
of shelling by Security Council listed terrorist group
Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham and the non-State armed groups
associated with it.

My office and I have now briefed Council members
on the situation seven times since 29 April when the
current onslaught started. Members will all have seen
the statement of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights issued on 26 July. Let me quote from it.

"Despite repeated calls by the United Nations
to respect the principle ofprecaution and distinction
in their conduct of hostilities, this latest relentless
campaign of air strikes by the Government and
its allies has continued to hit medical facilities,
schools and other civilian infrastructure, such as
markets and bakeries. These are civilian objects,
and it seems highly unlikely, given the persistent
pattern of such attacks, that they are all being hit
by accident."

She emphasized,

"Intentional attacks against civilians are war
crimes, and those who have ordered them or
carried them out are criminally responsible for
their actions".

I last briefed the Council at its closed meeting
on 18 July. I said then that I would respond today to
a number of questions that Council members asked
me, first, about the information sources we use to
determine what is going on; secondly, an update on the
de-confliction system; thirdly, about the letter sent to
you, Mr. President, and the Secretary General on 16 July
by the Permanent Representative of Syria (S/2019/572)
and, fourthly, whether we would pass on to the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian
Arab Republic since March 2011 and the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian
Arab Republic the information we hold about attacks
on civilians and civilian objects.

First, with regard to information sources, many
Council members provide us With information, which
we study carefully. Information that I provide to the
Council is information that is from direct or verified
sources, triangulated, reviewed and confirmed. Our
teams on the ground tell us what they see. Our partners,
with Whom we have worked sometimes for many years
and with whom many of the countries represented
here in the Council also work, provide information.
Testimony comes from those closest to the source who
are assessed by the United Nations as credible. We use
imagery, including satellite imagery, or geotagged and
time stamped pictures of medical facilities that have
been analysed and assessed by the United Nations. We
see videos of explosions, destroyed buildings, scorched
bodies and screaming children. We triangulate all
our information.

There are many other sources of information. Media
organizations report extensively on what is happening.
Members have all seen their reports and footage. There
is a great deal ofsatellite imagery illustrating the impact
of the fighting on towns and villages in southern Idlib
over the past three months. If, for example, we compare
satellite photos of Kafr Nabutha, a town in southern
Idlib, taken at the end of April and then again at the
end of June, which is what analysts at the Operational
Satellite Applications Programme of the United Nations
Institute for Training and Research - the United
Nations body with capacity in that area - have done,
what we see is a level of destruction consistent with a
bombing campaign aimed at a scorched-earth policy.
Almost every building was destroyed in a three-month
period. Such satellite imagery has shown 17 entire
villages almost completely destroyed and emptied.

Then there is information from organizations
delivering humanitarian assistance, including United
Nations agencies, such as UNICEF, the World Health
Organization, the United Nations Population Fund
and others, and the many humanitarian partners they
finance. Those organizations are all financed by the
Member States on a voluntary basis. Members require
them to provide information on how they are spending
Members' money as a basis for financing them. Some
Members hire other independent bodies to double
check that what the delivery organizations tell them is
true. Those organizations have staff totalling thousands
of people, most of them Syrians, and many of them like
Dr. Abrash. Members can talk to them, too, just as I
have done.

Then, of course, there is the testimony ofthe people
of Idlib themselves. I spoke yesterday by video link to
two groups of displaced people in different parts of
Idlib. I asked them what was happening where they
were. They said, "We are being bombed every day by
the Russians and the regime". I asked them what they
needed. They said, "We just want the bombing to stop".

"Do you feel safe?"

"No. We are afraid."

"What is your hope for the future?"
"We just want to live in peace."

We know there are people from the Security Council
listed terrorist group Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham in Idlib
who make daily life there difficult for ordinary people,
but we also know that estimates suggest there are about
100 civilians for every fighter. Do the answers from
the people I spoke to yesterday sound like the words
of terrorists? I do not think so, especially because the
people to whom I spoke ranged in age from 8 years old
to 12 years old. They are children - little boys and
girls. There are a million children just like them in that
part of Syria, many forced to flee with their families
from elsewhere in the country. I asked if any of them
go to school. "No. It is not safe. They hit our schools."

There is no shortage of information about Idlib. We
all know exactly what has been happening over the past
three months.

Secondly, I was again asked for information
on the de-confliction system. Through that system,
humanitarian agencies, mainly non-governmental
organizations provide information to the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to identify static
civilian locations or humanitarian movements. The
United Nations then shares the coordinates with the
international coalition forces, the Republic of Turkey
and the Russian Federation.

When there is an incident on a de-conflicted site,
we notify the parties and request that an investigation be
undertaken. As I said to the Council last week, whether

the information provided through the de-confliction
system is being used by the parties to protect civilian
facilities from attack or to target them for attack is an
extremely important question. As members know, I
have asked the Russian Federation for clarification of
what it does with the information we give it. I continue
to hope to receive further clarification.
We have also sent notes verbales to parties to the
conflict in respect of six different attacks in north-west
Syria in 2019 in relation to de-conflicted locations or
movements. While we have received a formal response
from Turkey, we have not received one from the
Russian Federation.

In spite of our efforts to work with parties to the
conflict to prevent attacks on civilian objects and
humanitarian workers, I have come to the conclusion
that, in the current environment, de-confliction is not
proving to be effective in helping to protect those who
utilize the system. I have asked my team to meet again
with the humanitarian organizations that would like
their activities to be de-conflicted to update them on
the current situation and again determine whether or
not we should continue to provide information to the
parties on new sites or humanitarian movements.

Thirdly, I have now seen the letter of 16 July
from the Syrian authorities (see S/2019/572), which I
was asked about when I last briefed the Council (see S/PV.8561). As members know, the letter says that 119
hospitals in Idlib governorate have been taken over by
terrorist groups, no longer serve their original purpose
and cannot be considered hospitals, health-care centres
or even civilian objects.

Few of the facilities referred to in the letter are
named, but Maarat Al-Numan Hospital is among those
that are. According to the United Nations-led health
cluster, it has been functioning as a hospital since
December 2014. The current operating partner, helped
by the United Nations, has been supporting the hospital
since April 2015, and it is still supporting it today.
Another facility that is named is Ibn Sina Hospital,
where the basement floors were rehabilitated with
funds from the United Nations and other donors and
which has been in operation since April.

The letter also says that there is no ambulance
network left in existence in Idlib. Members of the
Council have all in recent days seen footage and photos
of ambulances in Idlib, including one used to take those
three little girls I talked about earlier, Rawan, Tuka
and Dalia, to be treated by Dr. Abrash. The United
Nations continues to support organizations operating
ambulance systems in Idlib. As members are aware,
medical facilities and transports are entitled to special
protection under international humanitarian law,
requiring steps to spare them even if they are being
used for military purposes.

Fourthly, on the question of whether we will pass on
relevant information that we hold to the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Those Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011 and the Independent International Commission
of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic, in order to
support investigations into the potential violations we
are seeing, the answer is yes, we will do that, subject
only to the proviso that those giving us sensitive
information consent to it being shared.

Between January and May this year, more
than 6 million people in Syria were provided with
humanitarian assistance with financing provided by
donors to allow us to implement the United Nations
humanitarian response plan. An average of 2.9 million
people were given some form of help every month. The
humanitarian response plan is needs-based. Eighty-
five per cent of all assistance provided reached areas
of high-severity need - areas where multiple, urgent
needs have converged and require a systematic and
sustained response. There is also a response in areas of
lower severity, including for life-saving activities, such
as vaccination campaigns and nutrition screening.

Some recent reports have claimed that United
Nations humanitarian assistance reaches only those in
areas not controlled by the Government. That is untrue.
In fact, most of those reached with United Nations
assistance are in areas controlled by the Government of
Syria. Access to the estimated 1.1 million people in need
living in areas that changed control in 2018 continues to
improve. In southern Syria, for example, half a million
people in need have been reached at least once with
some form of humanitarian assistance over the past five
months, despite increased insecurity in recent months.
Significant gaps in access still remain across many
of those areas. Eastern Ghouta, for example, remains
heavily dependent upon water trucking more than a
year after changes in control. I also remain concerned
for those 24,000 people remaining in Rukban, and I call
again for access to reach them.

In the north-east, 734,000 people also receive
assistance on a monthly basis, including 70,000 civilians
currently in Al-Hol camp. Humanitarian agencies have
significantly scaled up their response to meet needs
in Al-Hol, opening three field hospitals in the past
month. I nevertheless remain extremely concerned
about people there. I call again on all Member States
to repatriate their civilians and take all the necessary
steps to avoid statelessness. I also call on all Member
States to de-escalate growing tensions along the borders
in the north-east and avoid any actions that might cause
further displacement, casualties and suffering.

In addition, humanitarian agencies have
significantly scaled up cross-border operations
authorized under resolution 2165 (2014), particularly
for those who have fled to the northern part of Idlib
during the current fighting. This month, cross-border
aid aims to reach some 1.2 million people with food
assistance. In the current circumstances, there is no
other way to provide adequate support to the 3 million
civilians who are in the area.

I am not sure that I have told the Council anything
today that is different from what all those present
already know. Many people have told the Council what
is happening in Idlib for many months now. I asked Dr.
Abrash and the children that I spoke to yesterday if they
had a message for the Council. They do, and it is "[w]e
are afraid. Please help us. Make it stop."

The Security Council has ignored all the previous
pleas it has heard. The Council knows what is
happening, and it has done nothing for 90 days, as the
carnage continues in front of its eyes. Are members of
the Council again going to shrug their shoulders, as
Michelle Bachelet said? Or are they going to listen to
the children of Idlib, and do something about it?

