The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Cote d'Ivoire and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The representatives of the aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter dated
16 July 2007 from the representative of Ghana in
which he requests that Ms. Lila Ratsifandrihamanana,
Permanent Observer of the African Union to the United
Nations, be invited to participate in the consideration
of this item under rule 39 of the Council's provisional
rules of procedure. If I hear no objection, I shall take it
that the Security Council agrees to extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Ms. Lila Ratsifandrihamanana, Permanent Observer of
the African Union to the United Nations.

It is so decided.

I invite Ms. Ratsifandrihamanana to take the seat
reserved for her at the side of the Council Chamber.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
documents S/2007/42l and Corr.l, containing the
report of the Security Council mission to Africa.

At this meeting, the Council will hear briefings
by the following four Ambassadors on the Security
Council mission to Africa: Mr. Dumisani Kumalo,
Permanent Representative of South Africa, who
together with Mr. Emyr Jones Parry, Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom, led the mission
to Addis Ababa, Khartoum and Accra; Ms. Karen
Pierce, Charge d'affaires of the Permanent Mission of
the United Kingdom, who will brief on behalf of
Ambassador Jones Parry; Mr. Jorge Voto-Bernales,
Permanent Representative of Peru, who led the mission
to Abidjan; and Mr. Jean-Marc de La Sabliere,
Permanent Representative of France, who led the
mission to Kinshasa.

I shall now give the floor to Mr. Kumalo.


