I thank you, Mr. President, for your invitation. The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) greatly welcomes the Security Council's engagement on this subject and its continued recognition of the relationship between conflict and hunger. While addressing the Council today, it is of course impossible to ignore the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and its impact on food security. Let me assure the Council that FAO is working at all levels to reduce the risk of the pandemic disrupting food systems and causing a global food crisis among our members. Today I will focus on three central elements, namely, the 2020 Global Report on Food Crises and how it clearly shows the link between conflict and rising levels of acute food insecurity; the connection between livelihood interventions and peace processes; and the importance of early warning and quick action to pre-empt food insecurity caused by conflicts. Earlier today, we - FAO, the United Nations World Food Programme (WFP), the European Union and 13 other partners - launched the 2020 edition of the Global Report on Food Crises. According to the Report, 135 million people in 55 countries experienced acute food insecurity in 2019. That is a substantial rise over the past four years. Almost 60 per cent of all those people did so in contexts of conflict or instability. In South Sudan, for instance, where over 6 million people - more than half its population - are expected to face crisis levels of food insecurity or worse. That will likely deteriorate further between May and July, to almost 6.5 million people. In Yemen, which remains the world's worst food and malnutrition crisis in 2020, the number of acutely food-insecure people is expected to exceed 17 million. The risk of famine persists, particularly if port operations are disrupted by the conflict. Coherent actions are needed among humanitarian, development and peace actors to address the root causes of acute food insecurity. FAO's experience shows that interventions supporting livelihoods and food security contribute to local peace and broader peace processes because they address not only the symptoms but also the root causes of conflict. That goes to the essence of the Sustainable Development Goals, which we are working to achieve by 2030. For example, in the Sahel, more than 12 million people experienced acute food insecurity last year. Unfortunately, we expect that number to rise to over 17 million during the coming lean season. Despite large-scale, internationally backed efforts, peace remains fragile, particularly for pastoral and agropastoral communities, whose livelihoods have been increasingly eroded in the Sahel and elsewhere. Pastoralism represents one of the most viable livelihood options in the drylands, making enormous contributions to social, environmental and economic well-being. In West Africa and the Sahel, livestock production contributes up to 44 per cent of agricultural gross domestic product. But the marginalization and neglect of pastoral communities, as well as the depletion of the natural resources on which they rely, has left them exposed. In many areas, the relationship between farmers and pastoral herders, which was once cooperative, has become confrontational as they compete over the same scarce resources. FAO and other agencies are strengthening the resilience of those communities, with a focus on cross-border areas, such as in the Liptako-Gourma region of Mali, Burkina Faso and the Niger, where insecurity and fragility are particularly acute. Conflict prevention and acting early to reduce the impact of conflict are highly effective steps that can be taken to avert and reduce acute food insecurity. We need prevention, as the forecasts for food security in 2020 look bleak: conflicts, extreme weather, desert locusts, economic shocks and now COVID-19 are likely to push more people into acute food insecurity. However, by closely monitoring the evolution of those shocks, we can rapidly intervene to mitigate their impact. We are committed to rising to that challenge and have mobilized our organizations in ways not seen since the founding of the United Nations. Because the evidence is clear: widespread conflict and instability lead to food insecurity; therefore, limiting or preventing conflict reduces and prevents hunger. FAO will continue supporting the Security Council by providing professional consultation with up-to-date information and analysis on food security in conflict contexts. That will facilitate the Council's timely action to avert food crises. Non-traditional security will be an unavoidable problem closely related to food system. My appreciation goes to all Council members for their continued attention to the direct link between conflict and food security, along with rural development.
