Mr. Listre (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation commends you, Sir, for convening this
meeting on the situation in Kosovo, which is of such
consequence to the Security Council.

I thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kouchner, for his briefing and
the members of the Joint Interim Administrative
Structure for their presence here.

The very detailed report submitted by the
Secretary-General on the work accomplished by the
United Nations Interim Administration in Kosovo
(UNMIK) from 6 June to 18 September plainly attests
to the magnitude and complexity of the Security
Council mandate to that mission. We wish clearly to
reaffirm our support for and acknowledgement of the
work of Mr. Kouchner, UNMIK and the Kosovo Force
(KFOR) and to thank them for their valiant efforts to
ensure the transition of Kosovo towards authentic
autonomy based on democratic institutions.

We wish to focus on a few of the issues that we
deem to be essential. First, we wish clearly to offer our
support for the electoral process and the elections to
take place on 28 October. With regard to the civilian
registry connected to the elections, it is certainly
important that UNMIK meet the deadline. Material
errors that have occurred in the registration process
should not be overemphasized, since they can all be
solved. We feel, however, that it is a matter for concern
that, out of either fear or intimidation, most Kosovo
Serbs have not registered. We support the electoral
process despite those restrictions. We hope that, in the
future, elections held in the context of that process will
allow the Serb minority to feel sufficiently secure to
participate and that it will do so in great numbers. That
will mark the beginning of the legitimization of the
authorities that we hope will become an inherent part
of a general process leading towards pacification and a
negotiated solution for the final status of Kosovo.
One concept that we support is the pact for civil
society in Kosovo that paragraph 9 and the following in
the Secretary-General's report (8/2000/878) mention.
In accordance with the report, that pact would include
the establishment of institutions which would make it
possible for there to be a real autonomous government.
This would take place during the transitional period of
UNMIK. The Airlie Declaration is very auspicious.
Now we have to implement the commitments entered
into by the communities of Serbs and Albanians to
respect the outcome of the elections and to respect
ethnic realities. We also must flag the concern that we
have regarding political violence.

In this regard we would like not only to address
ourselves to the Serb minority but also to the Albanian
majority. The people and leaders of Kosovo must not
ignore the warning laid down by the Secretary-General
in paragraph 115 of his report, that if violence occurs,
the danger is run that they will lose international
support and that there will be paralysis in the economic
and social development of Kosovo.

One could not support the extreme positions of
either side. Argentina gives its full support to UNMIK
and KFOR in its work to ensure that all will act within
the context of law and in conformity with democratic
principles. We think that the status of Kosovo could not
be decided in an isolated way. Dialogue with legitimate
authorities from the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
and the regional context are factors that we believe
cannot be left to one side.

This is why we attach great importance to the
elections that were held on 24 September in the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, because we think that a
democratic Government that enjoys full popular
support is a valid interlocutor for addressing the final
status of Kosovo. In this context, it should be obvious
that we wish to recall that the basis of a democratic
system is the respect for the will of the people
expressed at the ballot box. We want that the results of
the elections be fully respected.

