Mr. Ri Tong 11 (Democratic People's Republic of Korea): We apologize for taking the floor again. We
have just heard remarks that do not make any sense.
Previously, the Japanese representative also made
totally senseless remarks. Concerning those remarks,
let me emphasize three points.

First, the Japanese representative talked about a
peace-loving Japan. I do not know any country in this
Chamber that thinks of Japan as a peace-loving nation.
When one looks at Japanese politicians and the diplomats
who come here, representing the politicians, they say
totally different things and present totally different
pictures of Japan. Domestically, the politicians say that
their policies on the invasion, military occupation and
colonial period of the Second World War were about a
war of liberation for Asian people. Prime Minister Abe
himself raised the question of rewriting the definition
of the aggression that their ancestors conducted. How
can one say that Japan is peace-loving?

Secondly, the Japanese delegation talked about
comfort women. I do not think that the delegation of
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea even needs
to talk about that, because it has already been clarified.
One thing to emphasize, however, is the fact that Japan
can never - ever - erase history. As the delegation of
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea mentioned
in its previous remarks, that was a most extraordinary
and spectacular crime against humanity. No nation in
the world, in the history of humankind or the history of
Statehood, has mobilized, under the name of comfort
women, sex slaves for the soldiers of their invasion
army. The Japanese are the only ones to have committed
that crime.

Concerning the Yasukuni shrine, it contains the
remains of 14 convicted Class A war criminals who
were punished under international law. That is not
something that can be disputed here.

The issue of revised textbooks is a very sensitive
one that concerns educating future generations about
history. Japan is trying its best to educate its youth about
militarism, something at which their ancestors did not
succeed. It is one thing to tell them and to warn them,
but they should learn the lessons of what happened to
their ancestors after militarism - a defeat they will
repeat if they continue to go in that direction.

