Mr. Mitchell (Bahamas): The Caribbean
Community (CARICOM) appreciates the opportunity
to participate in this debate, which is taking place
during a critical phase in Haiti's transition to
constitutional rule.

On 7 February 2006, after two years of
calamitous trials, the people of Haiti in large numbers
demonstrated their yearning to be governed by persons
of their choice. The tremendous courage,
determination, discipline and patience they displayed
in exercising their franchise is commendable and
underscores the importance of democracy for the
Haitian people. The member States of CARICOM
congratulate Mr. Rene Preval on his election to the post
of President of the Republic.

There is no room, however, to be complacent
about the process that led to this result; the electoral
season in Haiti has not yet ended. Every effort must be
made by all involved to rectify the organizational
shortcomings which bedevilled the presidential and
legislative elections of 7 February and which have led
to the delay of the second round, as well as to the
postponement of the inauguration of the President-
elect. The attachment of the people of Haiti to the
democratic process demands no less.

Similarly, the preservation of the integrity of the
electoral process is of paramount importance for the
legitimacy of the new Government, the future stability
of the country and the development of Haitian society.
The importance of the local and municipal elections -
essential building blocks in Haiti's constitutional
system of democratic governance - should not be
allowed to fade from our awareness.

In the past, the Caribbean Community has offered
its own electoral expertise, and it takes this opportunity
to reiterate its offer. It is ready, and intends, to field
once again an electoral observation mission for the
second round of the legislative elections and for the
local government elections, in company with other
international support groups.

The principled position adopted by CARICOM
two years ago is well known. We were of the view that
the fundamental tenets of democratic practice and
behaviour had been compromised in the process of
seeking a resolution to the Haitian political impasse.
As the Caribbean Community emphasized in this very
Chamber during the debate of 12 January 2005 on the
situation in Haiti, "We cannot vacillate on principles
since they are essential to our security as small States."
(S/PV.5110, p.]6)

From the outset, the Caribbean Community
indicated its willingness to welcome the return of Haiti
to its Councils once constitutional rule had been
restored. In his recent letter of congratulations to the
President-elect, Mr. Rene Preval, the CARICOM
Chairman intimated that that process was well on the
way to being achieved, since President-elect Preval's
victory

"opens the path to the re-engagement of Haiti at
the highest levels of the Councils of the
Community, given the all-embracing endorsement
of [his] election as a reflection of the will of the
people".

The Chairman also emphasized that the
Caribbean Community stands ready to accompany the
Government and the people of Haiti as they confront
the many challenges facing them in their quest for the
sustained political, economic and social development
of their country.

In that regard, the Community proposes to meet
soon with the President-elect to better determine how
best it can contribute, and continue to make good, on
its commitment to the people of Haiti.

Reconciliation, bridge-building, compromise and
respect for one another must become key elements of a
new Haitian ethos and polity, if the people of Haiti are
to overcome the deep social and political divides which
have historically impeded progress; if Haiti is to rise to
the multiple, complex and deep-seated challenges that
await; if the country is to find consensus on the
direction it must take in order to grasp the opportunity
of transformation. Towards that end, the Interim
Administration has a primary rule of law obligation to
fulfil before relinquishing office, as well as an
opportunity full of symbolic resonance to contribute to
the new dawn by bringing to urgent completion the
judicial processes that will ensure the release of the
numerous persons arrested arbitrarily and kept in
detention without legal justification or adjudication
over the past two years.

Helping Haiti to overcome the difficulties it
previously experienced in seeking to become an
integral part of the Caribbean Community will
constitute a priority for CARICOM. in its assistance to
Haiti. An important aspect of that effort will involve
facilitating the smooth integration of Haiti into the
various programmes and institutions that coordinate
and underpin the functioning of the Community. With
the green light of the new constitutional authorities, the
Community will also seek to build on the activities it
set in train during the transition period in the areas of
institutional development for the establishment of a
permanent electoral council; completion of a study,
with recommendations, of Haiti's energy and fuel
needs; an academic conference on the transition to
democracy bringing together the region's universities;
and the provision of French translations of key
CARICOM. documents of a technical nature.
CARICOM's contribution will be constrained only by
lack of resources and not by a shortage of political
will.

The road ahead for Haiti will be long and
difficult. Building democracy and creating the
conditions for stability and for social, political and
economic development will require the dedicated
engagement of the Haitian Government and people. A
long-term horizon of commitment from the
international community will also be required. In that
connection, the support in the field provided to Haiti
by the United Nations peacekeeping Mission and its
key contributing nations, the Organization of American
States and the donor community must be commended,
as must the work of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General.

Haiti is a small but complex society. The nature
of the problems to be overcome is such that
expectations on all sides, Haitian and international,
should be tempered and should remain realistic.
Success may have to be measured in small increments.
However, the opportunity for Haiti to move from
instability and deprivation to peace and development is
once again present, and it should not be lost.

