Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me at the outset to echo your words of
recognition and gratitude, Sir, to Ambassador Hardeep
Singh Puri and his entire delegation for the efficient
and dedicated manner in which they led our work
during their presidency of the Council in August. I am
also very pleased to be the first member of the Security
Council to warmly welcome you, Mr. President, and to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
for this month, which is going to be a very busy one.
We wish you every success.

In my capacity as Chairman of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006), I shall now give my briefing, which I
shall deliver in English.
2
(spoke in English)

Today, I am very pleased to present to the
Security Council the nineteenth 90-day report in
accordance with paragraph 18 (h) of resolution 1737
(2006). The report covers the period from 24 June to
1 September 2011, during which time the Committee
held no meetings but conducted its work using the
no-objection procedure.

I would like to begin by congratulating the Panel
of Experts, which was formally reappointed by the
Secretary-General on 30 June following the adoption
of resolution 1984 (2011) on 9 June, by which the
Security Council decided to extend until 9 June 2012
the mandate of the Panel.

During the reporting period, the Committee
revised the guidelines for the conduct of its work,
which were approved on 19 August by the members of
the Committee and will be posted on the Committee's
web page in due course. The Committee also updated
its programme of work, which is currently under
consideration by the members of the Committee. The
Committee continues to consider a series of draft
implementation assistance notices prepared by the
Panel.

The Panel submitted its own programme of work
to the Committee, as required by paragraph 3 of
resolution 1984 (2011). The Panel also provided to the
Committee its second quarterly assessment of Member
States' implementation reports under paragraph 31 of
resolution 1929 (2010). From 29 to 30 August, the
Panel visited Brazil to hold consultations with relevant
Government agencies on the implementation of
Security Council resolutions.

During the current reporting period, the
Committee received additional information from a
Member State on a previously reported incident of an
alleged violation of paragraph 5 of resolution 1747
(2007). The Committee encouraged the Member State
to invite the Panel to visit the concerned State in
support of its inquiry into this matter.

The Committee also received a joint
communication from four Member States reporting "a
violation of paragraph 9 of resolution 1929 (2010)".
The Committee sought the full cooperation from the
four Member States and is currently examining this
alleged violation with the assistance of the Panel.
11-48797

The Committee received three notifications: one
from a Member State confirming, in response to the
Committee's earlier request for information, that none
of the individuals and entities designated by the
Committee's consolidated list had been found to own
companies or shares under its jurisdiction; one from a
Member State informing the Committee of its
successful disposal, with the assistance of another
competent Member State, of the confiscated cargo
aboard the vessel M/V Hansa India; and one from a
Member State pursuant to paragraph 15 of resolution
1737 (2006) and paragraph 4 of resolution 1747
(2007), indicating its intention to authorize the release
of funds in order to make a payment due under a
contract entered into prior to the listing of an entity.

The Committee answered a written query from a
Member State seeking clarifications about its presumed
involvement in an incident of illegal arms
trans-shipment previously reported by another Member
State. The Committee was able to confirm, with the
support of the Panel, that the inquiring Member State
was not involved in this incident.

In following up on two other written queries from
two separate Member States - one concerning energy
cooperation with an Iranian company and the other
related to specific information about financial
transactions - the Committee is still awaiting
additional information in order to provide appropriate
responses to the two Member States.

This concludes my briefing to the Security
Council today.

