Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Allow me to begin by
thanking Mr. Michael Steiner, the Secretary-General's
Special Representative for Kosovo, for his briefing.

Pakistan attaches great importance to the work of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). We support UNMIK's five pillars,
as well as the eight standards that serve as the yardstick
for measuring Kosovo's progress in self-governance.
We believe that those standards will help in the
implementation of the provisions of Security Council
resolution l244 (1999). They will also enable all the
people of Kosovo to realize their fundamental rights in
an environment of freedom, peace and the prospect of
prosperity.

Given Kosovo's unique situation, we support
Mr. Steiner's "standards before status" approach. This
is, of course, a unique approach. We urge the people of
Kosovo to work, with the assistance of the United
Nations, to make those standards a reality on the
ground. They should take ownership of all aspects of
their own administration. Once that is done, we
should - and I hope we will - move to the next phase
of the implementation of resolution l244 (l999),
which, under paragraph 11 (e) of the resolution, is the
process designed to determine Kosovo's final status.
We hope that this process, when it takes place, will be
based on consultations with all concerned, particularly
the people of Kosovo, and that it will ensure their
fundamental rights, consistent with the Charter of the
United Nations.

Pakistan would like to add its voice in support of
the direct dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade on
administrative and practical issues, which has helped,
in some measure, to improve cooperation and reduce
tension in the region. We hope that similar progress can
be made within Kosovo as well.

We share the concern expressed by the Secretary-
General in an earlier report, that "Security remains a
paramount concern" (5/2002/62, para. 43). We support
calls, including by the Secretary-General, for the
communities in Kosovo to reject violence and
extremism and to move to genuine dialogue and
reconciliation. The rule of law is central to progress
being made towards reconciliation and, indeed, towards
the path of self-governance. As Lord Ashdown recently
said about post-conflict situations, "Only if you
establish the rule of law can you have decent
democratic practices" (S/PV463], p. 27).

Pakistan supports inter-ethnic conciliation and
cooperation and the creation and maintenance of
institutions consistent with resolution 1244 (1999). We
call for the return, in dignity and safety, of all refugees
and internally displaced persons, and for the protection
of all minorities and their rights in each region of
Kosovo.

In spite of the obstacles, we appreciate the
progress that has been made by the United Nations,
especially the efforts being made by Mr. Steiner and
UNMIK to improve conditions in Kosovo. We
acknowledge their efforts to promote peace in Kosovo
based on multi-ethnic accommodation and the rule of
law. We hope to see a Kosovo at peace with itself and
all adjacent nations. We hope that Kosovo can emerge
as a beacon of hope for peace in the entire region, a
region that has seen so much despair during the last
decade.

