I thank Germany for convening today's open debate. We believe that human rights are directly linked to the maintenance of peace and security and the work of the Security Council, including with respect to peace operations. We thank all the briefers for their presence and their briefings. Peace operations would not be able to fulfil their mandates effectively if they overlooked the issue of protecting and promoting of human rights. While, on the one hand, human rights violations can presage and drive conflicts and are regrettably a constant feature of conflicts, peace operations, on the other hand, are one of the Council's most powerful tools for managing conflict. Human rights are also a part of the protection-of-civilians mandates given to most missions by the Council to help the most vulnerable in conflict. Peace missions can be helpful interlocutors in dialogues with Governments and with civil society. We underline the key role of the human rights components in United Nations missions and the strong support lent by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. I take this opportunity to thank High Commissioner Bachelet and her team for their work in this regard. Dedicated women protection advisers and child protection advisers play an important and complementary role in protecting and promoting human rights. We note the importance of the cooperation between the human rights officers and protection advisers and believe that all of these components should be sufficiently funded. However, we also believe that a whole-of-mission approach - the cooperation between the human rights officers and the military and police staff - is key to making a real difference. We welcome the good examples that have been shared in this regard. Similarly, good mission leadership is crucial. Indeed, human rights should be part of mission management at the highest level. We do not need human rights protection to be a token add-on with no real impact; rather, it must be an integral part of force generation, mission planning, management and oversight and evaluation. We note the steps that have been taken towards greater coherence to this end. Sufficient and practice-oriented predeployment training is one of the key elements in this regard. In the context of the coronavirus disease, training and knowledge of the protection and promotion of human rights in practice helps missions better support countries dealing with the pandemic. We also stress the importance of applying a gender perspective to the human rights-related activities of peace missions and to the activities of missions in general. In parallel, we underline the need for the observance of human rights by the United Nations peace operations themselves, including by addressing all instances of sexual exploitation and abuse. We value the exchange we have had today and look forward to following up on this topic in future discussions.
