Mr. Terzi di Sant'Agata (Italy): I wish to extend
a warm welcome to His Excellency Mr. Ismail Omar
Guelleh, President of the Republic of Djibouti, and to
his delegation and to thank him for providing the
Council with updated information and views on the
situation around the border with Eritrea. What His
Excellency Ismail Omar Guelleh has just said about
Somalia is fully and vigorously shared by my country.
The tragedy affecting the Somali people and the wider
regional impact the Somali crisis is having requires an
adequate and urgent response by the international
community and by this Council.

I would also like to reiterate my Government's
appreciation for the efforts made by the President of
the Republic of Djibouti in the reconciliation process
in Somalia. I also wish to thank the Permanent
Representative of Eritrea, Ambassador Desta, for
taking part in today's debate and conveying his
Government's perspective.

Italy shares the concerns expressed by President
Guelleh on the ongoing militarization of the area of
Ras Doumeira, which could become another source of
instability in a region already strained by heavy
security and by humanitarian and development
challenges.

Italy commends the Government of Djibouti for
the restraint exercised since the outbreak of this
situation, as well as for having withdrawn its troops, as
requested of both parties by the Security Council
presidential statement of 12 June (S/PRST/2008/20). In
the face of its repeated offers to engage, Djibouti's
sense of frustration is understandable and deserves our
full solidarity.

Conversely, my country regrets the lack of
engagement of Eritrea with regional and United
Nations efforts to facilitate a bilateral settlement, in
particular the fact that the Eritrean forces have not
responded to international calls for withdrawal and the
lack of cooperation with the United Nations fact-
finding mission. I hope that the presence of
Ambassador Desta among us today and his
contribution to the debate may be a sign of renewed
will to take part constructively in a solution to the
present situation.

The United Nations fact-finding mission has
produced a balanced and informative report
(8/2008/602) that provides a number of useful
proposals. Reactivating dialogue and returning to the
status quo ante are immediate priorities that need to be
accompanied by long-term sustainable solutions. My
Government shares the view contained in the report
that the final settlement of the border between Djibouti
and Eritrea would be a real contribution to resolving
the current crisis. We encourage both parties to agree
on a framework to address this issue from a legal
perspective. Like France, Italy is ready to place at the
disposal of the parties its historical and technical
knowledge of the process leading to the current border
situation.

We see the need for a consistent approach to all
border disputes in the subregion. The dispute between
Yemen and Eritrea was resolved by a decision of the
International Court of Justice. The border dispute
between Ethiopia and Eritrea was entrusted by the
parties to the Eritrea-Ethiopia Boundary Commission,
whose decisions need to be applied on the ground. We
do not see why a similar model cannot be found by
Djibouti and Eritrea to settle the border issue in Ras
Doumeira.

Finally, I would like to like to stress the
importance of the facilitating role of regional
organizations, namely the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, the African Union and the League of
Arab States, whose efforts must be fully sustained by
the Security Council. A close collaboration between
those efforts and initiatives of the Security Council is
the key to a successful conflict prevention strategy. At
the same time, we should make sure that the present
crisis does not disappear from the radar screen of the
Council and that progress is closely monitored in order
that we can adjust our action accordingly.

