Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
I would first to thank the briefers for their informative
and detailed briefings. Today I would like to emphasize
three issues 4 the Political Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic, national
ownership and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA).

We welcome the political agreement and support
the political process, which is the only acceptable
solution to the crisis in the country. Central Africans
have had enough of the violence, and that message must
be heard by the leaders of the armed groups, which are
signatories to the agreement and must respect their
commitments. That means ending the violence and the
cycle of retaliation that led to the recent massacre in
Paoua, which we firmly condemn. Those responsible
must be brought to justice. The armed groups must
also cease their predatory activities and human rights
violations, such as the recruitment of children, and
the movements of unauthorized troops, and they must
realize that serious violations of the agreement will not
be without consequences.

We welcome the establishment of the prefectural
implementation committees and the technical security
committees, which are encouraging signs of the
commitment of the parties. The operationalization
of the Unites speciales mixtes de securite is a major
challenge. Given the magnitude of that endeavour, it is
fortunate that the European Union can provide financial
support without any delay.

With regard to national ownership, the Central
African authorities naturally have a role to play in the
implementation of the agreement. Belgium welcomed
the launch on 15 June of the national implementation
committee. The national disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programme is crucial in assisting
with the dissolution of armed groups. The lack
of access to health services, education, economic
development opportunities and justice, and above all
security, jeopardize ownership of the peace agreement
by the Central Africans, especially those living outside
the capital. Fortunately, the Central African Republic
does not have to face those challenges alone. It can
count on the support of the international community,
including the European Union. It should also rely on
the guarantors of the political agreement, such as the
countries of the region, the Economic Community
of Central African States and the African Union. We
encourage President Touadera to use his contacts to
forge strong partnerships with neighbouring countries,
including by re-activating the mixed commissions.

With respect to justice, we believe that the fight
against impunity is not at odds with the implementation
of the political agreement. The fact is that the quest for
justice is part and parcel of the reconciliation process.

Lastly, it must be recognized that MINUSCA is also
facing major challenges. The very serious incidents that
have occurred in the past few months have shown that
its mandate for the protection of civilians is painfully
relevant. Apart from overseeing the deployment of the
Central African Armed Forces, MINUSCA must now
also supervise the deployment of the Unites speciales
mixtes de securite. We believe that it will be important
to consider enhancing logistical deployment support for
MINUSCA. MINUSCA also has a crucial role to play
in exercising its good offices and providing support
for the peace process, the expansion of State authority
and security-sector reform. Good cooperation among
all partners of the Central African Republic is key to
success, and we believe that MINUSCA can contribute
to that unity. The approaching elections are another
factor that must be taken into account in the peace
process. We call on the political leaders of the Central
African Republic to refrain from reviving tensions
among communities for electoral purposes. We believe
that MINUSCA will have a major support role to play
in the organization of the elections.

In conclusion, I would like to commend Special
Representative Ndiaye for his energetic approach to his
work. I can assure him of Belgium's full support.

