Mr. Mlynar (Slovakia): We are very grateful to
Judge Fausto Pocar, President of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY),
and to Judge Dennis Byron, President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), as
well as to the respective Prosecutors of both Tribunals,
Ms. Del Ponte and Mr. Jallow, for their detailed
assessment reports concerning the progress made in
their work, including towards implementation of the
Completion Strategies set out in Security Council
resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004).

Slovakia welcomes progress made within the
period since the most recent assessment reports were
submitted to the Security Council in late 2006, as well
as the continuing endeavours of the Tribunals. We wish
to reiterate our full support for them as they exercise
their tasks under the mandate given by the Council.

Considering the Completion Strategies as crucial
documents that streamline the final phase of the
functioning of the Tribunals, we highly appreciate all
measures, including amendments of the rules of
procedure and organizational adjustments, made by the
Tribunals in order to meet the timeframes and
deadlines for completion of their work, taking into
account the shift from investigation activities and the
focus on the trials and appeals phase of the
proceedings. Since the deadline for completion of first-
instance trials by the end of 2008 is approaching, we
are following current developments and cases very
closely. In that regard, we acknowledge that the
Tribunals continue to put serious emphasis on the
protection of the rights of the accused while trying to
expedite proceedings at the same time.

Slovakia commends the strengthening of
cooperation of the Tribunals with respective national
authorities, in particular with domestic courts of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Serbia and Rwanda.
We highly appreciate the increasing number of
referrals of cases involving intermediate and lower-
ranking accused to competent national jurisdictions. In
particular, we welcome the decision of the ICTR to
transfer the case of Michel Bagaragaza to the domestic
authorities of the Netherlands. Those measures should
enable both Tribunals to focus on prosecution and trials
of the most senior leaders suspected of being most
responsible for crimes under international law.
Slovakia insists on the strict compliance of trials at the
national level with international standards of fair trial
and due process.

Regrettably, some of the most important indictees
explicitly referred to in Security Council resolution
1503 (2003) remain at large, having so far escaped
international justice. In that context, we reaffirm our
strong appeal to States concerned to cooperate fully
with the Tribunals, in particular in tracking, arresting
and transferring remaining fugitives to the Tribunals.
Without bringing those suspects to justice, the work of
the Tribunals cannot be fully completed and the
message to the international community would be
flawed. No perpetrators of the worst crimes under
international law should go unpunished.

We also praise the effective assistance of States in
witness and victim protection and in the enforcement
of sentences imposed by Tribunals. We find the
conclusion of respective legal instruments for that
purpose to be essential to the full implementation of
Completion Strategies.

Extending current outreach activities, especially
among members of communities affected by crimes
prosecuted by the Tribunals, and leaving a clear legacy
of international jurisprudence are among the key
components of the wider system of international
criminal justice. The residuary issues of Tribunals
seem to be the most crucial issues for the coming
months. We call upon all respective States to pay due
attention to that problem. We are very encouraged, of
course, by the most recent arrests of Zdravko Tolimir
and Vlastimir Djordjevic, and commend the
cooperation of the respective national authorities with
the ICTY. We hope that the same type of cooperation
will soon lead to the early arrest of the remaining
fugitives, in particular the two top fugitives Radovan
Karadzic and Ratko Mladic.

Conscious of the serious problems and obstacles
both Tribunals have to tackle, Slovakia welcomes and
strongly supports the continued commitment of the
Tribunals to making every effort within their powers,
including through exploring new measures, to fully
discharge their mandates and to meet the target dates of
the Completion Strategies.

Moreover, in the case of Felicien Kabuga, as we
have just heard from Mr. Jallow, we encourage all
States to cooperate closely with the ICTR, as we have
heard that he is active and moving around in the
region, which cannot be tolerated. All current efforts
should be redoubled in order to ensure that he is
arrested without delay.

The Security Council should maintain its strong
support for and attention to the work of both Tribunals,
including the implementation of their Completion
Strategies. If necessary, we believe that we should be
ready to adopt the additional measures necessary for
the successful completion of the work of both
Tribunals in serving international law and justice.

In conclusion, I would like to take this
opportunity to express our special thanks to Judge Erik
Mose for his work as former President of the ICTR and
to Ms. Carla Del Ponte, who today delivered her last
briefing to the Security Council in her current capacity.
Slovakia highly appreciates the energy and efforts that
Ms. Del Ponte has invested in the cause of the ICTY
and the fight against impunity. We appreciate her
leadership over the past eight years and wish her every
success in her future professional and personal life.

