Mr. Garcia Sz'tenz (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Guatemala thanks the delegation of Equatorial Guinea,
in its capacity as President of the Security Council, for
convening this open debate, which provides us with an
opportunity to exchange views on an issue as important
as cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations to silence the guns in
Africa.

We are also grateful for the concept note (S/2019/169, annex) provided for this debate, with which we fully
agree, as it states, in paragraph 1, that this initiative is
intended to

"achieve the goal of a conflict-free Africa, to
make peace a reality for all our people and to rid
the continent of wars, civil conflicts, human rights
violations, humanitarian disasters and violent
conflicts, and to prevent genocide".

We recognize that, over the past two decades,
the African Union and its regional mechanisms have
ramped up their capacities to address crisis situations
and conflicts on the continent, while contributing to the
creation of conditions that are conducive to the growth
and development of their populations, with the ultimate
goal of achieving peace in the region. Despite progress
pertaining to conflict prevention and their management
and settlement, however, Africa continues to face
various crises that jeopardize human, national and
regional security. At the same time, it is appropriate to
mention that the region to which my country belongs
also faces the same challenges.

Moreover, the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons sets the stage for the commission of mass
atrocity crimes. The consequences of the devastating
impact of the illicit transfer of small arms and light
weapons is a problem that is severely affecting the
African continent and is a global phenomenon.
Consequently, it requires international and multilateral
responses and commitments - that is to say, a strong
and determined resolve.

Every day throughout the world, small arms and light
weapons and their proliferation and illicit trafficking
result in the deaths of hundreds of people, fuel conflict
and exacerbate violence. Such trade is unscrupulous
and unethical, which is why the Organization should
devote efforts to its strict regulation. The manufacture
of such weapons and their ammunition shows no signs of
decreasing. It is linked to illicit markets and contributes
to drug trafficking, organized crime and armed
conflicts, thereby undermining security and standing
in the way of creating an appropriate environment in
which human, economic and sustainable development
is fostered.

Guatemala supports initiatives that seek
comprehensive and sustainable solutions to the problems
afflicting our peoples, in particular with regard to
effectively addressing current and emerging threats to
international peace and security. Although that is the
primary obligation of our Governments, we must also
recognize that we are stronger when we work together
and multilaterally, so that solutions are sought based on
experiences and good practices in the implementation
of the various relevant international instruments.

We therefore urge States that have not yet done so to
accede to the Arms Trade Treaty, while recalling that it is
a legally binding instrument that establishes a common
regime for the international trade in conventional arms,
as well as seeks to reduce the illicit proliferation of
small arms and light weapons. It is therefore necessary
to reduce the human suffering caused by illegal and
irresponsible transfer of such weapons.

The Arms Trade Treaty contributes to improving
regional security and stability, as well as promoting
accountability by establishing better controls on
the transfer of conventional arms. In addition to that
Treaty, the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat
and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects is also a suitable platform for
the exchange of capabilities, assistance and cooperation
for the improvement of national laws on small arms and
their import and export controls, as well as the proper
management of stockpiles.

Guatemala firmly believes that peace and
development go hand in hand. We therefore emphasize
the need to generate synergies linking instruments
related to peace and security with the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, which represents the
broadest consensus at the international level for
achieving peaceful and inclusive societies.

In conclusion, I would like to recall that armed
violence is an evil that affects our entire society, and
vulnerable groups are the most affected - especially
women, young people and children who are seeking a
better future. That is why it is in our hands and our
responsibility to take measures to ease the suffering of
our peoples, thereby demonstrating our firm willingness
to safeguard multilateralism and maintain peace.

