Mr. Zehnder (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
I would like to thank the Egyptian presidency of the
Council for organizing today's important debate.
Our conceptual approach to preventing conflict and
sustaining peace has evolved considerably over the past
few years. In order to achieve conditions conducive to
lasting peace, we should take a fresh look at how to get
the best results from our peace operations. I will focus
on two institutional issues that we believe are crucial to
the Council's efforts to maintain lasting peace.

First, a single strategy bringing the various peace
operations together is best suited to addressing the
multidimensional complexity of current conflicts, which
require a whole range of tools. The sequential approach
to the conflict cycle, which is based on divisions
between special political missions, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding missions, followed by development,
has too often resulted in failure. From the outset, and
without any interruption, peace-operation mandates
should include a full spectrum of appropriate responses,
which will make for smoother transitions between the
various phases of missions. Such an approach would
also align better with the Secretary-General's vision
for prevention, integrating all the United Nations
pillars - peace and security, sustainable development
and human rights - on the same plane. In that regard,
Switzerland welcomes the Peacebuilding Commission's
important role as an intergovernmental advisory body
to the Council. Through its reporting and engagement,
the Commission gives effective support to the
Council's efforts to prevent conflicts from breaking out
or recurring.

With regard to the issue of financing, if the
Security Council is to fully take on its central role
in preventing and peacefully resolving conflicts, it
must be able to make full use of the various tools at
its disposal. However, they cannot be really effective if
they are underfunded or lack the necessary political and
administrative support. Starting off with an inadequate
budget frequently results in higher costs down the
road. Switzerland therefore urges all Member States
to support funding for the entire cycle of measures for
dealing with conflict, especially conflict prevention
and peacebuilding.

I should like to conclude by presenting a concrete
example of the positive impact that peacekeeping
mandates can have on security in a specific context.
The safe and secure management of ammunition
is a crucial element in the context of various United
Nations missions. The proliferation of ammunition
from unsecured stockpiles can fuel other armed
conflicts. Unsecured ammunition can be looted
or misused. There are components in improvised
explosive devices that threaten the lives of civilians
and United Nations peacekeepers. There is a clear link
between safely managing the life cycle of conventional
ammunition and maintaining international security and
sustaining peace.

Switzerland is actively supporting the efforts
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali in assisting the Malian
authorities with the management of their ammunition
stockpiles. It encourages the Security Council to
include, when appropriate, the principle of safe and
secure ammunition management in future mandates.

