The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Nepal for the kind words he
addressed to me.

The next speaker on my list is Mr. Papa Louis
Fall, Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People. I invite
him to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.

Mr. Fall (Senegal), Chairman of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People (spoke in French): You are aware
how deeply gratified I am, Sir, to see you presiding
over the work of the Security Council.

Allow me at the outset to express to you our
sincere hopes for success in your term as President of
the Council in this particularly busy month of
September. To your predecessor, Ambassador John
Negroponte, Permanent Representative of the United
States, I should like to convey our deep and heartfelt
gratitude for the outstanding manner in which he
guided the work of the Council last month.

The Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People is particularly
concerned by the rapid deterioration of the situation in
the occupied Palestinian territory. The responsibility
for this turn of events devolves first and foremost on
the Israeli Government, whose judgement is clouded by
the policy of security at all costs, which, as the facts
have shown with utter clarity, can only lead to
deadlock and to the slippery slope that we all are
witnessing today as powerless bystanders.

As the whole world knows, the President of the
Palestinian Authority is under siege, cornered in the
last ruined building of Ramallah and fully at the mercy
of Israeli fire and bulldozers, in living conditions that
are disgraceful, to say the least. Together with the
European Union and others who have expressed their
indignation, including Americans, the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People condemns the policy of the occupying Power,
just as it condemns the random and targeted attacks and
massacres of civilian populations.

We make this energetic condemnation because the
subhuman plight imposed on the Palestinian leadership
is, paradoxically, a deliberate act by those who suffered
so greatly under Nazi barbarism and who still today
denounce the altogether intolerable remnants of anti-
Semitism. The survivors of the Holocaust must clearly
understand that the Israeli Government's choice of
brutal force and boundless retaliation in unacceptable
conditions of terror, which some would associate with
a form of terrorism, cannot advance the cause of peace
in the subregion, and even less the security that is the
dream of both the Israeli and Palestinian peoples.

With the consent of the President, I would like to
endorse the recent exhortation by Monsignor Desmond
Tutu, hero of the anti-apartheid struggle and patron of
the Holocaust Centre of South Africa:

(spoke in English)

"Israel will never get true security and safety
through oppressing another people. True peace
can ultimately be built only on justice. Therefore,
Israel has three options: revert to the previous
stalemated situation, or exterminate all
Palestinians, or - I hope - strive for peace
based on justice, based on the withdrawal from
all the occupied territories and based on the
establishment of a viable State on those
territories, side by side with Israel, both with
secure borders."

(spoke in French)

Just as no one can make the sun disappear,
Israel's spokesmen and other representatives will never
be able to make us forget that the heart of the conflict
lies in Israel's perpetuation of its illegal occupation of
Palestinian territories and the plethora of illegal acts
associated with it. While there is still time, Tel Aviv
must recognize that Israel will never live in peace and
security within internationally recognized borders as
long as Palestine is not free from occupation and
colonization. Nothing will succeed in bringing about
that peace and security: neither walls, which will fall
like the Berlin Wall, nor encirclement and closure, nor
wanton arrests of Palestinian activists, nor summary
and extrajudicial executions nor, even less, the mass
destruction of property, nor economic blockades nor
the systematic dismantling of the administration of the
Palestinian Authority. Such a policy has no future.
Rather, the future lies in a courageous and determined
resumption of the peace process on the basis of the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council, in
particular resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1397
(2002).

The Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People once again launches an
urgent and heartfelt appeal to the Security Council, the
guarantor of peace and international security, to
shoulder its historic responsibilities. Posterity will not
forgive it for having left unresolved for over 50 years
the burning and grievous issue of Palestine. Tomorrow
may perhaps be too late to act, when the entire
flashpoint of the Middle East - cradle of the three
great revealed religions - will have been consigned to
the flames. It will be a thousand times more difficult
for the Council to act tomorrow than today.

The Committee urgently demands that the
occupying Power withdraw immediately and
unconditionally from Palestinian territory and that it
end its unacceptable siege of the offices of President
Arafat. In that regard, our Committee shares the
farsighted remarks made here this morning by the
Secretary-General, when he said that the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict cannot be resolved solely by the
use of force and that a policy exclusively based on the
use of force is doomed to failure. The Committee
therefore supports the Saudi initiative endorsed by the
Arab Summit held in Beirut, as well as the Quartet's
peace plan, which must be implemented without delay.

Through me, the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People states
and restates its full support for sending an international
interposition force to halt the escalation of violence
and to protect the lives of Palestinian and Israeli
civilians.

According to the report of the Personal Envoy of
the Secretary-General, Ms. Catherine Bertini, 50 per
cent of the Palestinian population depend on
international assistance distributed by the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East and the World Food
Programme. In addition, over 70 per cent of the
population of Gaza, and 55 per cent of the population
of the West Bank, are living in poverty. In the light of
this, and given the rapid deterioration in the
humanitarian situation in the field, the Committee
urges international bodies to reinforce their assistance
to the Palestinian people. The Committee also urges
Israel to abide strictly by the relevant provisions of the
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949.

Before concluding, I would like to reiterate with
force and conviction our unequivocal condemnation of
terrorism and terrorist acts against innocent civilians,
be they Israeli or Palestinian and regardless of
circumstances or motives. The suicide acts committed
by Palestinian extremists on Israeli territory, which
have been resolutely condemned by the Palestinian
Authority, can therefore not serve as a pretext or
excuse for stubbornly refusing to resume the peace
process.

It should therefore be understood that the
Committee holds out the sincere hope that the Council
will be able to properly assess the seriousness of the
situation in the Middle East and to honour the
international obligations incumbent upon it under the
Charter. Solutions to the crisis exist, and we are aware
of them. Let us therefore implement them in the
interest of the Israeli and Palestinian peoples, in the
interest of peace and security throughout the Middle
East and in the interest of cooperation and prosperity of
the peoples and nations of this sensitive region that
history, geography, culture and religion must serve to
unite.

I shall end my statement with the prescient
remark of Mr. Binyamin Bin Eliezer, the Israeli
Minister for Defence, cited in The New York Times of
21 September 2002:

(spoke in English)

"Today there are two schools of thought in the
Government One is to squash the Palestinians
and to conquer them completely, and the other
realizes that this is the time to hold out a hand
and to walk side by side."

(spoke in French)

The Committee has no doubt whatever that the
allies and other friends of Tel Aviv will be able to
convince - I do not say coerce - the Israeli
Government to make the right choice, namely, to take
the side of those who favour peace.

The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People for his
kind words addressed to me.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Iraq. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.


