Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (interpretation from Arabic):
My delegation should like to extend to you, Sir, and to the
delegation of Portugal its sincere thanks for convening this
open debate, which we hope will be repeated on other
issues of interest to the Council, thus allowing all United
Nations Members to participate and contribute, in
implementation of the principle of transparency in the
Council's work.

I should like at the outset to express my delegation's
appreciation to all those who participated in preparing the
presidential statement on children in armed conflict that
we will adopt today. My delegation has joined the
consensus on the draft, in its belief in this cause as just
and important to the entire international community and
out of its conviction of the need for all parties to conflicts
to abide by all their obligations, in accordance with the
principles of international law - particularly the Geneva
Conventions of 1949, their Additional Protocols of 1977,
and the 1989 United Nations Convention on the Rights of
the Child - and the commitments incumbent upon all
States to punish the perpetrators of serious violations of
international humanitarian laws applicable in this regard.

My delegation strongly condemns the targeting of
children in armed conflicts, and their humiliation and
subjection to atrocities, exploitation, abduction and
displacement, not to mention their recruitment by force
for military activities. We expect children to be treated
kindly and with care because they are young and
vulnerable, physically and psychologically. However, we
see that some take advantage of them because of their
vulnerability - a fact that makes the abuse of children
one of the most inhumane and atrocious practices ever
perpetrated.

It would be beneficial for the international
community to study in depth the social dislocations that
result in the exposure of children to this form of
exploitation. Conflicts, and their major causes, cannot be
isolated from other social factors, particularly when such
factors are directly linked to such conflicts. The
continuing efforts of the United Nations programmes,
funds and agencies that are concerned with providing
protection to children who are victims of armed conflicts
provide an ideal means of mitigating the effects of these
conflicts on innocent children, who, in fact, constitute the
majority of victims.

The phenomenon of using children in armed
conflicts has become so acute that it has gone beyond all
of the moral value systems acknowledged by the
international community. In the light of the statement
made by the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, I pose this question: how can the contemporary

 

international community allow a situation to develop in
which children are so badly treated, given that previous
civilizations had values and rules governing the conduct of
war that shielded children and women from the kind of
harm we witness today?

Bahrain, which is keen to provide the necessary
protection for children against the destructive effects of
armed conflicts, would like to express its appreciation to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Olara Otunnu, and to state here and now that the
recommendations that he made today are worthy of
examination and analysis.

