Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): First ofall,
let me congratulate you, Mr. President, on a successful
presidency of the Security Council, which culminates
in today's debate at a time marked by key processes
relating to the maintenance of peace, in particular the
review of the peace and security pillar. I would also
like to warmly congratulate the Secretary-General for
his briefing, which confirms his firm commitment to
the maintenance of peace. Morocco also thanks the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission for his
briefing, which confirms the strategic nature of the
partnership between the United Nations and the African
Union. Finally, I would like to commend Ms. Toure', for
her moving and passionate intervention, which enables
us to better grasp the magnitude of the challenges that
still must be overcome in Mali.

Morocco, which has been a troop-contributing
country on an ongoing basis for 60 years, has first-
hand experience of this issue. Peacekeeping has
evolved, while the risks for United Nations personnel
are becoming ever greater. It is high time for the
Organization to take the necessary measures to adapt
to this fact.

The need for recasting peacekeeping is nothing
new. The report (S/2000/809) of the Panel on United
Nations Peace Operations - known as the Brahimi
report - in its day made recommendations along
those lines, and they are as relevant as ever. The same
is true of the United Nations Peacekeeping Operations
Principles and Guidelines - also known as the Capstone
Doctrine - as well as the report of the United Nations
High-Level Independent Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446), the current process capped by the Cruz
report, and the new vision of the Secretary-General,
which he presented this morning to the Council. Hence,
the importance of institutional memory.

One must also never lose sight of the fact that the
goal of peacekeeping operations is that of resolving
crises. The primacy of politics must never be sacrificed
to other elements of the mandate. We hope that the
current strategic reviews will allow us to strengthen
this critical aspect of peacekeeping operations.
On the issue of partnerships, we had an opportunity
to hear from Mr. Faki Mahamat this morning, who
presented, in a comprehensive way, the challenges and
opportunities inherent in the partnership. Morocco,
which rejoined the continent-wide African Union
organization in January 2017 and was recently elected
a member of the Peace and Security Council, is
committed to sharing its experience for the benefit of
both organizations.

More than 10 years have elapsed since the financing
of African Union operations mandated by the Security
Council has been discussed without significant
progress. We all agree when it comes to affirming
the importance of partnerships that the time has now
come for the United Nations to provide the necessary
support to the African Union in order to provide that
partnership with the resources needed to achieve the
scale and effectiveness awaited.

We would also like to emphasize Morocco's belief
that a greater number of women in peacekeeping
missions is needed, if not mandatory. Morocco will
continue to take the necessary measures to increase
the percentage of women in its deployments in
peacekeeping operations.

Today's debate raises many pertinent questions. We
take this opportunity to reiterate our full support for the
zero-tolerance policy aimed at ending sexual abuse and
exploitation and the recent initiatives of the Secretary-
General in that regard, which we fully support.

I shall restrict my remarks to the notion of collective
responsibility and that of performance. To quote an
expression dear to the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierred Lacroix,
"Peacekeeping is a family within the United Nations."
We must support that approach and avoid, to the extent
possible, shirking responsibility and finger-pointing.
This notion of collective responsibility can be made
tangible on the basis of the following elements.

First, mandates must be realistic and adapted to
the situation on the ground. It is in that spirit that we
emphasize the importance of triangular cooperation, as
troop-contributing countries have gained experience
and expertise that needs to be shared. We hope that the
group that we set up last year with Pakistan, bringing
together the major troop- and police-contributing
countries, will play a positive part in strengthening
triangular cooperation by providing a platform
for exchanges, both with the Secretariat and the
Security Council.
Secondly, the documents that define a mission's
needs in terms of equipment are vitally important for
mandate delivery. They must be regularly updated each
time that the operational concepts or the mandates
change. The equipment must be able to be looked after,
and the troop-contributing countries have an obligation
to provide material that meets United Nations standards.

Thirdly, training is the responsibility of troop-
contributing countries, which undertake to provide
only military and career police officers. We are also
responsible for predeployment training, which we
provide on the basis of Secretariat documents. Hence
the importance of updating the documents made
available to us, according to the realities in the theatres
of deployment. On the basis of its experience, Morocco
has for several decades now been engaged in providing
military capacity-building and training to our many
African partners. We stand ready to offer our first-
rate facilities and expertise to all in the framework of
a triangular partnership in order to expand the number
of beneficiaries.

Fourthly, managing expectations, whether of the
civilian population, the authorities or the Security
Council, is essential. Let us take the example of the
protection of civilians, which is one ofthe key mandated
tasks, but also the most difficult to fulfil. It is difficult
to expect that a contingent of 750 soldiers can guarantee
the protection of a civilian population on a surface area
as big as an entire country. It is vital that our soldiers
are backed by clear rules of engagement and supported
by appropriate equipment.

I would like to briefly address the second point.
We often hear talk of troop performance, but we
should rather focus on the performance of missions
in a holistic manner. All the elements that I referred
to earlier impact the performance - at Headquarters
level, at the level of the mission's leadership and
among deployed contingents. That was rightly pointed
out in the latest report of the Special Committee on
Peaekeeping Operations.

I would like to conclude by paying tribute to
the men and women deployed in extremely difficult
conditions, and more particularly to the Blue Helmets
who sacrificed their lives in the cause of peace.

