The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Gounden for his briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea.

I would like to begin by saying that it is indeed a
great honour to be here presiding over today's important
and historic open debate on a theme of such significance
for Africa - silencing the guns in Africa by 2020. I
convey greetings from His Excellency Mr. Obiang
Nguema Mbasogo, Head of State of the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea, who congratulates all countries that
helped to adopt resolution 2457 (2019) and thanks them
for their support during Equatorial Guinea's presidency
of the Security Council.

I commend Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs and
Peacebuilding, for attending today's meeting. I also
commend Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, African Union High
Representative for Silencing the Guns in Africa and
Mr. Vasu Gounden, Executive Director of the African
Centre for the Constructive Resolution of Disputes, for
agreeing to participate in today's meeting and offer
insightful briefings at today's solemn and momentous
meeting on an issue affecting the African continent. I
would like to acknowledge His Excellency Mr. Walter
Lindner, State Secretary of the Federal Foreign Office
of the Federal Republic of Germany, who is here with
us today. I also extend congratulations to all dignitaries
and delegations present.

The unanimous adoption of resolution 2457
(2019) attests to the commitment and support of the
international community, expressed through this organ,
for Africa's efforts to achieve sustainable peace and
stability. Resolution 2457 (2019) will undoubtedly help
safeguard peace and security on the African continent.
We hope that it will also mark a turning point in
Africa's future.

Small arms and light weapons, including
anti-personnel mines, pose a great danger to human
survival, yet thousands of such weapons continue to
exist with the potential for use or proliferation. There
is an urgent need for Africa to accelerate the process of
combating, preventing and eradicating the illicit trade
in small arms and light weapons in all its aspects. It is
well known that most of the world's armed conflicts are
in Africa.

Agenda 2063, which is the African Union's legal
framework for inclusive growth and sustainable
development, is in line with the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, the sustaining peace agenda
and the fiftieth anniversary solemn declaration of the
African Union Heads of State and Government. They
all include a commitment to achieve the goal of a
conflict-free Africa, that is, making peace possible for
all African peoples, while ridding the continent of wars
and violent conflicts and not bequeathing the burden of
conflict to future African generations.

The goal of silencing the guns by 2020, entailing
their complete, effective, controlled, verifiable and
transparent elimination through international and
regional legal instruments, is of vital importance to
Africa and must have the support of the international
community, especially the Security Council. It cannot
be achieved without involving those most directly
affected by the scourge of conflicts, which are our
peoples. That fact becomes a collective responsibility
of all African countries, which must prioritize the
participation of citizens in political and economic
processes, promote equity and prevent violence at all
levels of our people's lives.

The current reality of, and the threat posed by, the
illicit manufacture, circulation and trade in small arms
and light weapons, including anti-personnel mines, is
a fact that challenges us all. We must be aware of that
reality and assess the damage and horror those weapons
cause to the whole of humankind, especially in Africa,
knowing that those weapons and explosive devices do
not come from another planet. Silencing weapons in
Africa by 2020 is not just a desire; our lives depend
upon it. Conflicts are the main cause of our problems,
as they touch on all aspects of our lives.

Africa must therefore address both the symptoms
and the root causes of conflict. In paying attention to
the current problems of peace and security, we must
also work to eliminate the source of those problems by
improving efforts to accelerate development and reduce
poverty, thereby eliminating the breeding grounds for
conflict and violent extremism. The flashpoints involve
complex national, ethnic, religious and social tensions.
Fundamentalists, criminals and terrorist and mercenary
organizations advantage of those problems to spread
terror throughout our lands and increase piracy and
transnational organized crime at sea, as already seen in
the Gulf of Guinea.

Equatorial Guinea therefore appeals to the
international community, particularly Africans
themselves, to pool their efforts to help Africa implement
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, together
with the African Union's Agenda 2063, as avenues for
sustainable economic development, that is, to begin
working on the establishment of solid structures in the
areas of health, education, the economy, trade, peaceful
inter-ethnic coexistence and good governance, among
others, and focus on addressing with determination the
problems that affect youth, children, women, refugees,
immigrants, including employment among others.
Leaving those issues pending would lead us to the risk
of endless conflicts.

Ifwe do not find definitive solutions to the causes of
the current conflicts that plague our continent, or if we
do not succeed in strengthening the mechanisms for the
effective prevention of such conflicts, we will continue
to address African problems in a rhetorical manner
without conclusive steps towards concrete objectives.
That is why peacekeeping operations on African soil
must be at the forefront of those efforts, and in that
endeavour cooperation with the United Nations and
partners is key. We must continue to strengthen United
Nations peacekeeping efforts in Africa. The draft
resolution on the financing of peacekeeping operations
in Africa, pending adoption by the Security Council, is
momentous. The hope for silencing the guns in Africa
will be a utopian one if it is not accompanied by that
important step.

I would therefore like to take this opportunity to
appeal to the Council to achieve unity, as was possible
on the occasion of adopting resolution 2457 (2019)
today, so that we can sooner rather than later adopt and
celebrate that other important part in order to complete
the equation that will be resolved only through the
adoption of both resolutions. That would represent
the solid ground necessary to genuinely and solidly
begin building Africa's tomorrow, free of conflicts and
weapons, in which its citizens would be concerned only
with how to face the daily challenges in an atmosphere
of peace and stability.

The African Union itself must be able to optimize
the preventive diplomacy mechanisms and tools it
already possesses, including the Panel of the Wise and
the Continental Early Warning System, and ensure an
immediate response to any threat that may arise. That
is a step in the right direction, but work still needs to be
done to operationalize the African Peace and Security
Architecture, particularly the African Standby Force
and its rapid deployment capability. African countries
have worked closely in recent years to address African
problems in an African way, thereby contributing
significantly to the maintenance of peace and security
on the continent.

The recently concluded thirty-second Summit
of the African Union reaffirmed its determination to
redouble efforts towards better and more effective
conflict prevention action in order to preserve the
African Union's commitment to address critical points
in Africa, continue to strengthen African capacities
for peace and security, strengthen Africa's collective
security mechanism and enhance African peace
and security.

It is true that progress has been made in conflict
prevention, management and resolution in Africa. Many
of the long-term conflicts that devastated the continent
have been resolved. The African Union and its regional
mechanisms have also improved their capacity to deal
with conflict and crisis situations on the continent.
Let me share my optimism. Let me say to those
present that somehow we have already begun silencing
the weapons on our continent. Equatorial Guinea greatly
celebrates the latest achievements in both the Central
African Republic and South Sudan, where long-lasting
conflicts have seen the signing of agreements that solely
benefit those two brother countries, with which they
will be able to begin theirjourney towards progress.

We also commend the achievements made in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Madagascar,
where elections were held under very complex
conditions and allowed for a peaceful transition of
power in those countries. Let us also not forget the
progress made in the Horn of Africa, or the success
of programmes on disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration and security sector reform, both crucial
elements of stabilization and recovery, which are an
integral part of the African Union Master Road Map
of Practical Steps for Silencing the Guns in Africa
by 2020.

The only entities that should have a monopoly over
armed forces are legitimate Governments, and they
must use that only in accordance with the law and with
respect for the rights of their citizens, with the ultimate
goal being to defend them.

I wish to conclude my statement by calling for
the spirit of unanimity that we have witnessed in the
Council today, which has resulted in the adoption of
the historic resolution 2457 (2019), to be preserved in
order to support the praiseworthy initiatives in Africa,
as silencing the guns on the African continent does not
only require the involvement of Africa, but rather the
necessary international cooperation of us all, given that
peace and stability in Africa means peace and stability
throughout the world.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I shall now give the floor to the others members of
the Council.

