Mr. Kamara (Sierra Leone): At the outset, allow
me to congratulate the Republic of Korea on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of February, and to wish you, Sir, full success during
your tenure. Please accept also our appreciation for
convening today's debate on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. We commend the Secretary-General,
the High Commissioner for Human Rights, the Assistant
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and the
Director for International Law and Cooperation of the
International Committee of the Red Cross for their
constructive remarks.

Undoubtedly, we all share a fundamental
responsibility to once again take stock of progress on
key protection issues that affect civilians caught up in
conflict situations. We recognize the significant steps
taken by the Security Council to address the challenges
confronting the protection of civilians, in particular
the adoption of resolution 1894 (2009), which laid the
foundation for ensuring compliance with international
provisions aimed at safeguarding civilians caught up in
perilous situations.

Furthermore, the central challenge identified
in the Secretary-General's report, contained in
document S/2012/376, remains a critical concern and
underscores the need for a concerted approach to
protecting the safety, dignity, integrity and sanctity
of civilians affected in contemporary armed conflict
through adherence to obligations under international
humanitarian law, refugee law and human rights law.
Those instruments set out the minimum protection
standards applicable, especially where civilians are
most vulnerable, and seek to prevent situations that
might exacerbate vulnerabilities, such as displacement
and the destruction of civilian property.

Despite the systematic engagement of the United
Nations in seeking ways to streamline and improve
peacekeeping protection standards, there are a number
of inherent challenges due to the ambiguity on how the
United Nations should intervene when Member States
lack either the military force or the political will to
halt all forms of carnage against innocent civilians.
Ultimately, the end-state objective of a peacekeeping
mission should include a protection mandate as part of
the international response so as to create an enabling
environment in which to take the appropriate steps to
ensure accountability. In that regard, we owe special
gratitude to the peacekeepers who take on the challenge
of implementing protection functions in the field, and
it is our responsibility to collectively ease the burden
of peacekeepers by matching resources to tasks in
fulfilment of the protection mandate. Peacekeeping
missions should be sufficiently resourced with adequate
mobility to provide the desired operational latitude in
challenging environments.

The development of strategies for a well-structured
protection approach shows an unswerving determination
to assume a more robust protection posture and the
adoption ofthe aide-memoire in 2010 (S/PRST/2010/25, annex), together with a comprehensive protection
mandate, is a clear testament to the measures aimed
at enhancing the implementation of the protection of
civilians by peacekeeping and other relevant missions.

Addressing impunity should not be considered
an afterthought; rather, the Security Council should
proactively seek to ensure an appropriate international
response, especially in cases where national authorities
fail to take responsibility under the protection laws.
On that score, Sierra Leone unreservedly calls on
all parties to conflict situations, State and non-State
actors alike, to respect the laws of armed conflict,
international humanitarian law and human rights law,
as well as specific domestic criminal laws.

Sierra Leone unequivocally condemns the
increasing attacks on humanitarian personnel, including
health-care providers, women and children, and it urges
Member States to ensure respect for protected persons,
in compliance with international humanitarian and
human rights law. We commend the support of the
United Nations and international partners for the work
of the Special Court for Sierra Leone. Through its
work, the Special Court for Sierra Leone has made a
number of critical contributions to the advancement of
the rule of law at the national and international levels.
In particular, we hail the Special Court for bringing to
justice the perpetrators of crimes against humanity and
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law committed in Sierra Leone during the course
of conflict.

The United Nations is the only organization through
which the forces of all major Powers, including rising
regional Powers, can jointly participate in providing
stability. The participation of major Powers in missions
would not only enhance rapid deployment but also
signal to potential spoilers that opposition to the mission
carries real political costs. It would particularly hamper
the activities of those who supply arms in situations
where violations of international law can be regarded
as a shared responsibility for the use of their weapons
to target civilians. Success in reducing the human cost
of unregulated arms proliferation will depend largely
on creating a sense of responsibility and accountability
among those who produce and distribute and those who
use arms against innocent civilians.

Next month, the final United Nations Conference
on the Arms Trade Treaty will be held here in New York
in order to finalize the terms of the treaty in an open
and transparent manner. It is hoped that the platform
will comprehensively tie up all loose strings in order to
better serve those for whom we have a responsibility to
protect. If we continue to delay in that respect, we shall
continue to face the risk of the their use in committing
grave violations of national and international law, which
have the potential to destabilize peace and security. We
therefore urge Member States to consider our moral
obligation to humankind as our key guiding principle,
and to sincerely commit themselves to contributing
to the establishment of mechanisms to prevent the
diversion of such weapons into the illicit market.

In conclusion, the timing of this debate could not
be more appropriate, given that Africa is still home
to a number of conflicts. In particular, the spate of
extremist activities in northern Mali is regrettably
leading to the extensive loss of lives and massive
destruction of property, including coveted World
Heritage sites. Sierra Leone strongly condemns such
cowardly acts and will continue to work closely with
all partners, particularly within the framework of the
wider international community, in seeking a lasting
solution to protect civilians. Let me further express
the hope that our collective resolve in this open debate
would continue to translate into concrete improvements
in the implementation of international human rights
and humanitarian law to address protection challenges.

