Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Senegalese presidency for having convened today's
emergency Security Council meeting on the situation in
Aleppo at the request of France and the United Kingdom.
I would also like to thank the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura;
the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Relief Coordinator, Mr. Stephen O'Brien; and
UNICEF's Geert Cappelaere for their briefings.

On 15 November, the Al-Assad regime and its
supporters launched another ground offensive on
Aleppo, which intensified on 26 November. That major
ground and air offensive led to the taking of half of the
area under the control of the opposition. The toll stands
at at least 225 civilian deaths, including 27 children.
More than 20,000 people were displaced because of the
fighting and more than 200,000 remain under siege.
As has been said, the humanitarian situation is simply
tragic. The areas that remain under opposition control no
longer have operational health infrastructure. Hospitals
in eastern Aleppo have been repeatedly bombed without
respite. United Nations emergency food reserves have
been exhausted for more than 10 days now and access
to drinking water is insufficient to meet the needs of
the entire population. The ancient city of Aleppo, in
which many of the greatest civilizations flourished, is
collapsing before our very eyes.

Each of us is aware of the extreme cynicism and
brutality that characterizes the Syrian regime's current
offensive in Aleppo, which is a strategy oftotal warfare.
The regime does not hide its objectives. But even war has
rules, established, inter alia, by the Geneva Conventions,
which apply everywhere and at all times. Those rules
embody respect for international humanitarian law,
and in particular the protection of civilian populations,
by banning belligerents from deliberately targeting
areas in which humanitarian workers and civilians are
present, carrying out indiscriminate attacks against
them, hampering humanitarian assistance and medical
evacuations and using famine as a weapon of war. Those
basic legal and moral principles have been persistently
flouted by the regime and its backers, who have shown
themselves prepared to do anything to regain control
of the city and break the insurgents' resistance. The
civilian population of eastern Aleppo is not even a
factor in this implacable, unrelenting equation. Eastern
Aleppo is a victim twice over, of constant shelling and
a siege that is medieval in its ferocity. In their targeting
of civilians, including hospitals and medical personnel,
they both constitute war crimes.

During the past week France has continued to
hammer home the same message, demanding that the
regime and its backers end the offensive and all their
indiscriminate attacks and finally allow humanitarian
aid access to the people of eastern Aleppo as soon
as possible. The priority is providing assistance and
protection to the civilian population, whether they wish
to leave or stay. Those who want to leave should be able
to do so and should be able to choose which direction
they wish to take. At the moment they are rightly
terrified by the strikes that are killing those who try to
flee, the massacres of those who enter areas controlled
by the regime and the camps they have been dumped in.

Today we have seen that the Council has once again
been unable to agree on a path for saving the people of
eastern Aleppo. Every initiative in the Council aimed

at saving them - the draft resolution proposed by
France and Spain, that of New Zealand and, finally,
the humanitarian penholders' initiative - has come

up against the same rejection, by Russia. That is why
France is once again asking those Council members
who are involved in the conflict and have influence
on the regime - Russia in particular - to bring all
their efforts to bear to interrupt the current spiral,
whose legacy will be a devastated country condemned
to decades of instability, violence and terrorism. We
should emphasize that the current policy of total war is
also a strategic error.

Let us not deceive ourselves, the painful tragedy
of Aleppo does not represent the road that should
be taken if Syria is to ultimately be stabilized in a
viable, reconstituted form. No, the tragedy of Aleppo
represents yet another stage in Syria's descent into the
abyss, at the bottom of which lie its children, blown to
bits by bombs or disfigured by hunger, and with the
potential for a never-ending conflict of which terrorists
will of course be the greatest beneficiaries. The tragedy
of Aleppo automatically fuels radicalization and, as a
consequence, terrorism. It simply presents the terrorists
with a gift of blood and bullets. Sadly, the comparison
between eastern Aleppo today and Guernica during the
Spanish Civil War is an apt one. Aleppo is at once a vast
humanitarian tragedy - the epicentre of the worst such
tragedy since the twenty-first century began - a black
hole that swallows and destroys every value that the
United Nations upholds, and, ultimately, a harbinger of
terrible tragedies to come.

For France, which like others has been a victim
of terrorism and is still exposed to its threat, Aleppo
lies at the core of a challenge that goes to the heart not
just of our values but also of our interests, including
our security interests. The humanitarian tragedy and
the terrorist threat in Aleppo - the horror and the
terror - are two sides of the same coin. On behalf of
France, I would therefore like to emphasize once again
how utterly urgent it is that we end the bombing and
the war, protect the civilians and work together to find
ways to reach a political settlement, because that is the
only possible way out of this conflict. It is in that spirit
that on 10 December Mr. Jean-Marc Ayrault, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of France, will hold a ministerial
meeting in Paris for those who reject the current
strategy of total war and wish to relaunch efforts
towards a negotiated solution as soon as possible.

That is the call I am making today on behalf of
France. It is a call to action and to urge us to unite around
our shared goals, shouldering our responsibilities
together. On top of everything else, the credibility of
the Security Council is at stake and deeply engaged in
the tragedy that is Syria.

