Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I
too would like to thank Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, as well as
Mr. Dacie, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and Ms. Citaku, Ambassador
of Kosovo to the United States, for their statements.

Respectfully, I would like to remind all members
that paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507, on
the Council's methods of work, recommends that
statements by invited speakers should last no longer
than five minutes. I also believe it is equally important
to ensure that our meetings are a place for constructive
rather than polemic exchanges, which is essential if we
want to work to overcome the traumas of the past - and
we know how profound those traumas are.

With regard to the situation described by Mr. Tanin,
I will briefly emphasize four points. First, I would
like to congratulate the authorities and the people of
Kosovo on the legislative elections held on 6 October,
which represent an important moment in their lives
as a democracy. As the European Union Election
Observation Mission highlighted, the elections
generally went well, despite attempts at intimidation in
some places. We hope to see a new Government formed
as soon as possible in order to enable it to implement
reforms, especially in the area of the rule of law, which
is the central criterion for the rapprochement of the
countries of the region with the European Union.

Secondly, I also want to commend the work of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK)in support of the promotion
of security, stability and respect for human rights in
Kosovo and the region. France especially commends
UNMIK'S activities aimed at bringing communities
closer together and promoting the women and peace
and security agenda, and in a way that complements
the initiatives of other regional and international actors,
particularly the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX). The Special Representative informed
us about the initial findings in the internal investigation
of the incident involving two UNMIK personnel
in May. Excessive physical force and disrespecting
people's personal spaces are unacceptable. The Kosovo
authorities must explain how something like this could
happen and that all parties put mechanisms in place that
can ensure that such incidents never happen again.

Thirdly, I would like to come back to the key issue
for which we should be mobilizing all of our efforts,
which is the normalization of relations between Pristina
and Belgrade in the context of the European Union-led
dialogue. We deplore the fact that the dialogue has been
interrupted for almost a year and hope that as soon as
the new Kosovo Government is formed it will make it a
priority and will find a committed partner in Belgrade.
During his Visit to Belgrade on 15 and 16 July, President
Emmanuel Macron of France urged both parties to seek
a compromise. The first step is a resumption of talks,
and both parties should act quickly to take the necessary
measures. As it stated at the 29 April summit in Berlin,
France will continue its efforts in support ofthe work of
the European Union and to move the dialogue forward
with its European partners, particularly Germany.

Fourthly, I would like to reiterate that France
believes firmly in a European future for Serbia and
Kosovo. That involves making the necessary reforms
to consolidate the rule of law. EULEX is contributing
to that goal in Kosovo by focusing on the effectiveness,
ethics and multi-community nature of the Kosovo
judicial system. Beyond that, what is needed is a
full normalization of relations between Belgrade
and Pristina, which is an essential condition of both
countries' European future, which itself can only be a
shared future.

Finally, as this is the last Security Council meeting
under the presidency of South Africa, I would like to
commend the South African delegation for its leadership
of the productive work we have done this month.

