Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): I thank Kenzo
Oshima for a very interesting and useful briefing. I
think this meeting is indeed quite useful: this is a
subject to which the United Kingdom attaches
tremendous importance, and it is very important that
work on it should go on. I will own up to Ambassador
Valdivieso that I myself participated in one of the
workshops, which I thought was a very useful
occasion. It was a mix ofjust one or two - I think quite
arbitrarily chosen - Member States, people with field
experience, experts from the Secretariat,
representatives of non-governmental organizations and
other civil society actors. While I have absolutely no
feelings of pride about having had a seat at the table, I
think it would be a shame if the balance of those
gatherings were distorted too much, because I think the
workshop was a very useful melting-pot of ideas. I
think we need more of them.

I would like to endorse the points made by
Ambassador Mahbubani earlier on in the discussion.
We need to design a robust normative framework that
can help guide the practical work of the whole United
Nations system, so that we really make an impact on
the ground in terms of protecting civilians. Children
really must be civilians. It is a sad fact of life that
women very often are civilians in conflict situations,
and so it makes an awful lot of sense to integrate the
various strands of work by the Council in this general
area into a sort of coherent whole.

At the same time, it is rather important that we
should not drown in bureaucracy. For that reason, I
endorse Kishore Mahbubani's remarks, too, about
things that make a practical difference. In essence,
what we need to do is to mainstream the protection of
civilians into the work we do in dealing with conflict
situations. I would therefore very much endorse, I
think, the suggestion made by Ambassador Mahbubani
and Ambassador Corr, that if we have another progress
report later on, it would be rather good to have some
practical examples of where this initiative has made a
real difference in real situations involving conflict and
civilians. I hope Under-Secretary-General Oshima will
bear that in mind when he comes back to the Council.

I think the road map is a good idea, but to be
useful, like aides-memoires, road maps have to be
clear, straightforward and well set out, not overly
complex. I have in mind here the annex to the "road
map" document, which seemed to me to be a very clear
set of indicators on what to do about the millennium
development goals. My question to Under-Secretary-
General Oshima is about the provision in the road map
for benchmarking, because it is very important, I think,
that we should have a way of measuring progress by
the system as a whole. So I would be interested in
having his comments on what measures are going to be
included in this document so that we can make sure
that the system is kept up to the mark.

I also very much agree with what Ambassador
Mahbubani had to say about the importance of input
from humanitarian actors into planning for
peacekeeping operations. In a sense, it boils down to
mainstreaming the humanitarian dimension into the
way in which mandates are put together within the
Secretariat. I would simply point out, though, that as
we move towards approving operations that have a
civilian protection dimension to them, we need to think
very carefully about exactly what is meant by that,
because it can often have quite a disproportionate
effect on military planning. So we need to be extremely
clear about what needs to be done in any given
situation. I hope the aide-memoire will help tease some
of that out.

Finally, on cross-cutting mechanisms, it is
indubitably the case that the relationship between the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
should be a case for priority attention. But I did not
hear Under-Secretary-General Oshima say anything,
for example, about the Department of Political Affairs
or about the other parts of the United Nations system
that have an extremely valid role to play in providing
protection for civilian-related work in some of the
situations with which the Council has to deal. Again, I
do not want to suggest biting off more than it is
possible to chew in one lump. But I would be grateful
to have any indication from him about where the other
parts of the system are going to fit in, because, as
Ambassador Mahbubani said, and I strongly agree, we
need to approach this in a holistic way. We have got to
get the system working together and using synergy to
the best effect.

