Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): First of all, we would like to add our voice to
the condolences expressed here concerning the horrific
terrorist attack in Pakistan.

We welcome you, Mr. Minister, as the President
of the Security Council. We listened attentively to
the briefings. We would like to thank the Secretary-
General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and the African Union High
Representative for Mali and the Sahel, Mr. Buyoya, for
their interesting briefings.

We wish to thank the delegation of Chad for its
initiative in convening this meeting on the important
topic of enhancing the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union (AU) in the area of
peacekeeping, on the basis of Chapter VIII of the
United Nations Charter. That cooperation is based
on the principle of the primary responsibility of the
Security Council for maintaining international peace
and security, as well as on the complementarity of the
efforts ofthe United Nations and regional organizations,
which seeks to maximize their respective comparative
advantages.

It is an obvious, indisputable fact that regional
and subregional organizations operating in Africa
have better knowledge of the situations and that their
mechanisms are better suited to local conditions for the
prevention and settlement of conflicts on the continent.

Despite the overall decline in the intensity and
number of conflicts in the last decade, Africa remains
vulnerable to all sorts of crises. With regard to crisis
response, the potential of our constructive cooperation
is especially needed. In that connection, I would like
to note the joint efforts of the two organizations to
stabilize the situations in Darfur, Somalia, Mali and
the Central African Republic and on the inter-Sudanese
track. It is equally important to develop coordination of
actions in relation to the conflict in South Sudan.

We welcome the progress in the establishment of
the African Peace and Security Architecture, with the
assistance of the international community. The central
role in those efforts belongs to the Peace and Security
Council and the continental early-warning system, and
to the African Standby Force and the African Capacity
for Immediate Crisis Response, which are being
developed. The ongoing development of cooperation
in peacekeeping among the United Nations and the
African Union, the Security Council and the African
Union Peace and Security Council, as well as between
the United Nations Secretariat and the African Union
Commission, can provide great assistance.

We welcome the most active participation of African
partners in peacekeeping operations in Africa under
the aegis of the United Nations and the African Union,
and we have consistently favoured the peacekeeping
activities of the African Union under United Nations
mandates, fully supported by the authority of the
Security Council. Moreover, it is important to increase
the predictability, sustainability and flexibility of
financing, including through the African Peace Fund.
At the same time, we consider it necessary to ensure
mandatory feedback. That concerns, in particular,
adequate periodic reporting by African partners to
the Security Council on the operation of peacekeeping
operations mandated by the Council.

We are firmly convinced that further strengthening
the partnership between the United Nations and
the African Union will make possible the effective
resolution of the problems of peace and security in
Africa and will be able to significantly increase global
anti-crisis capacity.

As a permanent member of the Security Council,
Russia makes a significant contribution to the
development of the international community's strategy
and practical measures on issues of strengthening
peace and security in Africa. Russia participates in
many United Nations peacekeeping operations on the
continent. Our country is one of the leading suppliers
of goods and services for those operations, primarily
in the sphere of civil aviation. We provide consistent
political support to the relevant efforts of the African
community. We will continue to assist in strengthening
the African Governments' own anti-crisis potential,
including through training African peacekeepers and
representatives of law enforcement agencies of African
countries in Russian educational institutions.

