Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I thank you, Mr. President,
for having convened this meeting. I also appreciate the
briefers' presentations and analyses of the situation, as
well as their expressed support for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Ukraine. My sincere thanks also
go to the delegations of Sweden, France, the Netherlands,
Poland, the United Kingdom and the United States for
their initiative to bring to the Council's attention the
issue of preparations for the holding of illegal elections
to be held on 11 November in the occupied areas of the
Donetsk and Luhansk regions of Ukraine.

Apparently, I am also supposed to thank the Russian
delegation for the proposal to hold this meeting in the
Chamber for the sake of transparency. However, as has
become plainly obvious from the Russian statement,
the Russian delegation is preoccupied first and
foremost with using the Council as a platform to wage
its disinformation campaign with regard to Ukraine
and to accuse the Ukrainian Government of everything
and anything that happens in the occupied territories.
Such behaviour has nothing to do with enhancing
transparency, but it definitely has everything to do with
desperate attempts to avoid responsibility for Russia's
well-documented wrongful acts against Ukraine - its
military aggression, occupation and attempted illegal
annexation of Ukraine's territories. It is the behaviour
of a hardened and unrepentant criminal determined to
make a mockery of the justice system. I would therefore
like to express my deepest disappointment over the
stance of the Russian side, which appears to be hell-
bent on sabotaging all genuine efforts to find a peaceful
solution to the conflict and to bring peace to the war-
torn regions of Donbas.

The main trigger for today's discussion is the
intention of the Russian occupation administration in
the temporarily occupied territories of the Donetsk and
Luhansk regions of Ukraine to hold so-called early
elections, which in reality would amount to putting
the leaders of armed gangs in the seats of illegitimate
representative bodies. That is nothing but a provocation
and an outrage against the Minsk agreements and
Ukraine's sovereignty. It is very unfortunate that the
Kremlin chose the path of further escalation of the
situation instead of the full implementation of the
Minsk agreements.

As Ukraine's Foreign Ministry stated on
7 September, the results of those fake elections will be
null and void, will not have any legal effect and will be
recognized neither by Ukraine nor by the international
community. Moreover, such actions only undermine
the Minsk agreements and inflict serious harm on
international efforts to resolve a situation that arose as a
result of the Russian military aggression and occupation
of parts of Ukraine's territory. The Russian Federation
knows very well that those so-called elections violate
the Constitution of Ukraine and Ukraine's law on
interim local self-government order in certain areas
of the Donetsk and Lugansk regions, and goes against
both the letter and the spirit of the Minsk agreements,
which, as the Russian Federation is fond of recalling,
were endorsed by resolution 2202 (2015) in 2015.

On 4 October this year, the Ukrainian Parliament
extended the validity of the aforementioned law until
the end of 2019, yet again confirming Ukraine's
adherence to its commitments under the Minsk
agreements. Despite having more than enough time to
assess the damage to the political process that those
so-called elections will inflict, the Russian Federation
is deliberately pushing forward with carrying out that
provocation. None of us here has a crystal ball into the
future, but there are indications that those so-called
elections might serve as a stepping-stone towards
a new cycle of Russian armed aggression. In that
regard, I thank all members of the Security Council
that have given their clear assessment of such actions
by the Kremlin regime. Let me make it clear that only
legitimately and lawfully elected officials can represent
the local communities in Donbas, and not the Kremlin's
puppets sent from or appointed by Moscow. Therefore,
any elections that are to be recognized as such have
to be conducted according to Ukrainian legislation, in
line with the standards of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and under proper
international monitoring.

Since the scope oftoday's discussion was broadened
by the Russian Federation with its sweeping assessments,
unequivocal characterizations and historical overview,
I wish to highlight the following points with regard to
a much larger picture of Russia's destructive activities
in and around Ukraine. By the way, I was somewhat
surprised by the tone of the representative of the
Russian Federation, which is becoming more and more
undiplomatic, if not vulgar, with every successive
Security Council meeting on Ukraine.

We have all heard on numerous occasions the
Russian mantra, which has also been repeated today,
that the Ukrainian Government should engage directly
with representatives of Luhansk and Donetsk. A very
inconvenient truth for the Russian side lies in the fact
that there are no legitimate representatives of Luhansk
and Donetsk, freely elected by the people. The persons
sitting in the administrative buildings in Luhansk and
Donetsk are simply Moscow's puppets, who are installed
or removed from their positions at the whim of their
Kremlin masters. The presence of Russian citizens and
security personnel in those administrations, in addition
to the provision of crucial financial and military
support, continues to this day and remains a decisive
factor in running the day-to-day governance in the
occupied areas of Donbas. Russia continues to exercise
full political and administrative control over the
region. Moscow has created and supported the illegal
armed formations in Donetsk and Luhansk. Their very
existence would be impossible without Russia's direct
financial aid, which amounts to $1.3 billion per year.
The Russian armed forces exercise full command and
control over military formations in the occupied areas
of Ukraine.
Here are just a few facts from the latest reports
of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission in Ukraine
(SMM), since the Russian representative mentioned
the interview with Mr. Hug. In August, its unmanned
aerial vehicles (UAV) detected convoys of cargo
trucks illegally crossing at night the segment of the
Ukrainian-Russian State border currently controlled
by the Russian side. The convoy then drove to the
town of Khrustalny, a well-known storage facility for
Russian heavy weapons. Later, in the same village, the
SMM. spotted hundreds of ammunition crates, some
of which were assessed to be brand new, as well as
118 crates of multiple-launch rocket-system rockets.
According to reports of the SMM, its monitors also
identified four distinct electronic warfare systems
near a non-Government-controlled village. Do I have
to say that those systems are employed exclusively by
the Russian army? In September, the SMM. reported a
convoy of 10 Kamaz canvas-covered cargo trucks near
the border with the Russian Federation where there
are no border crossing facilities. On three occasions,
from 9 to 12 October, an SMM. UAV spotted vehicles,
including an anti-aircraft gun and an armoured personnel
carrier, entering and exiting Ukraine in the middle of
the night via an unpaved road near another Village in a
non-Government-controlled area of the Donetsk region,
near the border with the Russian Federation.

In a final stroke, on 27 October an SMM. UAV
spotted, in non-Government-controlled territories, a
surface-to-air missile system known in Russian as Osa,
which means "wasp" and English, and subsequently a
convoy of seven trucks on a dirt road near the border
with the Russian Federation. The UAV then experienced
signal interference, which was determined to be caused
by jamming, after which all communication with it
was lost. The UAV did not return to its ground-control
station and is considered lost. Maybe, as Russia often
claims, that should be attributed to peaceful retired
local coal miners, or maybe to the Russian military
officers who decided to spend their vacation time
picking mushrooms in the nearby forest.

Injust the past three months, the SMM. has observed
convoys, including trucks, on seven occasions on the
same aforementioned unpaved road in the area near the
border. We arejust talking about one small area near the
border with the Russian Federation. Does anyone have
any doubt as to who is in charge there? Does anyone
believe the Russian narrative that there are independent

authorities in Luhansk and Donetsk, and that Moscow
is merely playing the role of mediator? Really?

If anyone thinks that the only flash point in
Ukraine-Russian relations is in Donbas, they would
be gravely mistaken. Let us have a look at the Sea of
Azov, which has been turned into another theatre of
belligerent Russian actions against Ukraine. In the
past six months, the Russian Federation has stopped,
in an abusive manner, over 200 vessels bound for
the Ukrainian ports of Mariupol and Berdyansk.
As confirmed by the SMM, those interruptions to
commercial shipping have caused economic and trade
disruptions resulting in commercial losses for the ports,
which employ thousands of people. Such actions are
inconsistent with Russia's obligations under the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea and breach
the navigational rights of Ukraine and of the flag States
of the stopped vessels. Vessels bound for Russian ports
in the Sea of Azov have not been subjected to similar
disruptive stoppages.

Then there is the Kerch Strait Bridge, built
unlawfully and unilaterally in violation of Ukraine's
rights. It has become a major hindrance to international
navigation. The bridge is only 35 metres high, and only
vessels with an air draft of less than 33 metres and a
length of less than 160 metres may safely pass under
it. As a result, panamax vessels and many handymax
vessels are now prevented from transiting the Kerch
Strait. That has had a major impact on traffic to
Ukraine's ports.

Russia also uses the Sea of Azov as an additional
channel to supply its forces in Donbas with weapons
from the occupied territory of Crimea. According to
our information, Russia has not given up on the idea
of having a land corridor to Crimea. Furthermore, the
threat of a maritime assault from the Azov direction in
the case ofa large-scale military confrontation remains a
source of security destabilization in the Donetsk region.
In the occupied Crimea, active militarization proceeds
at full speed. Russia has more than doubled the strength
ofits military on the peninsula and continues to prepare
Crimean military infrastructure for the deployment of
nuclear weapons. That includes refurbishing Soviet-era
nuclear warhead storage facilities.

The human rights situation on the peninsula also
remains highly alarming. The findings of the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights confirm the continuing failure of the Russian
Federation authorities, as the occupying power, to
adequately guarantee and protect a wide range of
human rights in Crimea. Russia keeps ignoring the
order of the International Court of Justice, issued one
year ago, that requires, among other things, for Russia
to refrain from maintaining or imposing limitations on
the ability of the Crimean Tatar community to preserve
its representative institutions, including the Mejlis, as
well as to ensure the availability of education in the
Ukrainian language. Despite the clear meaning of
that order, an entire year has passed in which Russia
has continued its ban on the Mejlis and the number of
students studying in the Ukrainian language dropped
from more than 13,000 in the 2013-2014 academic year
to just 172 in the 2017-2018 academic year. Let us take
a moment and think of those numbers - more than
13,000 and 172. It is a great difference.

I would add to that the fact that during the period
from 2014 to 2017, 108,000 people moved from the
Russian Federation to Crimea and Sevastopol. What is
that if not a deliberate policy to change the demographic
composition of the region? Over 70 Ukrainian citizens
have been detained in Russia and the occupied Crimea
by Russian authorities under trumped-up, politically
motivated charges. Oleg Sentsov, facing the threat of
torture by force-feeding, had to terminate his hunger
strike after a four-month struggle. His health has
deteriorated dramatically and his condition remains
critical. The recent decision of the European Parliament
to award the Sakharov Prize to Oleg Sentsov is a
powerful signal to all those illegally detained that they
are not forgotten. The health conditions of Volodymyr
Balukh, Asan Chapuch, Emir-Usein Kuku, Stanislav
Klykh, Ihor Hryb, Yevhen Panov and many others who
do not receive appropriate medical assistance remains
of great concern.

I have behind me today Ms. Emine Dzhaparova,
First Deputy Minister of Information Policy okaraine.
She is a Crimean Tatar; she was born there. She lived
and worked in Crimea and she had to leave after the
Russian occupation. And she can tell a thousand stories
about what is happening in the current reality of Crimea.

That whole bleak picture would be incomplete
without mentioning the massive campaign of
propaganda and incitement of hatred against Ukraine
and Ukrainians launched by the Russian Government.
Russian State-owned media and public figures spend
hours on prime-time television to promote insinuations
about the Ukrainian people. That has already played
a significant role in the occupation of Crimea and in
fuelling the conflict in Donbas.

What is to be made of all this? It is both quite
simple and extremely difficult at the same time. The
keys to the resolution of the conflict lie in Moscow. On
our part, we are ready for constructive engagement to
end the conflict. Alas, such readiness is not yet present
in Russia. As regrettable as it may be, until there is
a tangible change in Russian policy towards building
genuine neighbourly relations with countries around its
borders, based on respect for sovereignty and territorial
integrity, instead of creating areas of instability and
waging wars, the Council will continue to gather around
this table to discuss the never-ending follies of Russia's
expansionist and aggressive policies. One thing is for
sure - appeasing the Kremlin and playing along will
not contribute to building a more stable and safer world.

The meeting rose at 4.50 pm.
