Mr. Bamba (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
The protection of the civilian population in Cote
d'Ivoire, which is living under threat, compounded by
a deteriorating humanitarian situation marked by
massive numbers of refugees and internally displaced
persons, remains a matter of the greatest concern to the
President of the Republic of Cote d'Ivoire, His
Excellency Mr. Alassane Ouattara, and his
Government. The international community, like the
Ivorian Government, cannot remain silent and
impassive. We must find the means to protect the
civilian population and to deliver humanitarian relief
and assistance to the victims.

The African Union and the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) have called for the
strengthening of the mandate of the United Nations
Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI) and the
imposition of targeted sanctions against the outgoing
President - who refuses to peacefully give up
power- and his entourage. Subsequently, in my most
recent statement to the Security Council (see S/PV.6506), my delegation sought the adoption of
robust deterrent measures to prevent the use of
violence against innocent civilians and restore lasting
peace and security in Cote d'Ivoire

The Security Council has just provided a strong
response to our concerns by adopting resolution 1975
(2011), which encompasses a number of objectives.
The first is to strengthen the mandate of UNOCI in
terms of the protection of civilians. The second is to
impose sanctions against Ivorian individuals who
refuse to recognize the polling results and also incite
hatred and violence. The third is to prevent the use of
heavy weapons against the civilian population. The
fourth pertains to a potential referral of the situation to
international legal institutions, such as the International
Criminal Court, with a view to tracking down the
perpetrators of the massive human rights violations in
Cote d'Ivoire. The fifth is a demand for the departure
of Mr. Gbagbo. Finally, the sixth is the effective
installation of the legitimate President of the Republic
of cote d'Ivoire, Alassane Ouattara, in full exercise of
his functions.

In that regard, my Government would like to pay
tribute to the Security Council for its sense of
responsibility. Indeed, in taking such measures, which
first and foremost strengthen the operational capacity
of UNOCI, the Council has demonstrated its sensitivity
to the distress calls of the civilian population living in
C6te d'Ivoire and currently under threat.

My Government recognizes and once again
wishes to pay tribute to the outstanding work of
UNOCI. We reaffirm that we intend to spare no effort
to ensure that UNOCI fulfils its mandate under the best
possible conditions. Furthermore, my delegation
reaffirms the consent of the legitimate Government of
C6te d'Ivoire to authorize the presence of UNOCI in
Ivorian territory. That is why my Government
condemns any attack, regardless of its nature, against
UNOCI. We also wish to provide assurances that
concrete measures will be taken to bring to justice any
individual - Ivorian or not - found guilty of
attacking not only UNOCI and its personnel, but also
any individual residing in the territory of Cote
d'Ivoire.

In that connection, my delegation would like to
say here that the Forces republicaines de C6te d'Ivoire
were not in any way involved in the shots fired at a
UNOCI helicopter.

Incidents of post-election violence, which had
claimed 860 lives as of 23 March according to the
figures provided by the medical and social unit of the
Rally of Houphouetistes for Democracy and Peace,
have disfigured our beautiful country. Today, it is
imperative to stop the cycle of violence in cote
d'Ivoire and declare an end to impunity. Ivorians wish
to re-establish peace and respect for human life. The
very painful sacrifices by our brave civilian population
during this post-electoral crisis are but a reflection of
their deep yearning for the emergence of democracy,
the exercise of their fundamental rights and respect for
human rights in Ivorian society. That is our priority. In
the same vein, during his address to the nation on
15 March, President Alassane Ouattara appealed to all
Ivorians for reconciliation and the reconstruction of
Cote d'Ivoire in peace and with dialogue, love and
fraternity.

While awaiting the establishment of a
Government of national unity, whose most important
tasks will be national reconciliation and the reform of
the defence sector, the Government of Cote d'Ivoire
has just set up a presidential emergency programme
8
funded by $97 million. The programme's goal is to
meet, as rapidly as possible, the most pressing needs of
the population stemming from the post-electoral crisis.
The programme is focused on the distribution of
drinking water, education, electricity and combating
unhealthy living conditions.

As a fervent disciple of the late former President
Felix Houphouet Boigny, President Alassane Ouattara
is a man of peace and dialogue. He wishes to unite all
of C6te d'Ivoire's daughters and sons so that they can
live together, and together rebuild their country. My
delegation would therefore like to reaffirm here the
desire of President Ouattara to cooperate fully and with
goodwill with the United Nations, the African Union
and ECOWAS in the framework of any process of
constructive dialogue aimed at restoring lasting peace
and security in Cote d'Ivoire.

