Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): Let me begin
by welcoming the presence today of Vice-Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs and Regional
Integration of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Mr. Okitundu. I also thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Zerrougui for updating the
Security Council on the intensifying instability and
dire humanitarian consequences in the Democratic
Republic of Congo.

The United Kingdom is deeply concerned about the
proliferation of violence in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, particularly in North and South Kivu,
Tanganyika, Ituri and Kasai, and the significant
increase in human rights abuses, with 744 violations
in January, 60 per cent of which were perpetrated
by State agents. As is too often the case, and as the
civilian population of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo knows all too well, the result of that instability
has been devastating. Some 4.5 million Congolese have
now fled their homes and communities. There are more
internally displaced people in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo than anywhere else in Africa. This year
alone, 40,000 people have fled from Ituri to Uganda,
bringing the refugee population to 670,000 people. That
has caused a devastating humanitarian crisis. More
than 13.1 million people are in need of humanitarian
assistance and protection. That number has doubled
since 2017.

There is clearly a link between the ongoing
political uncertainty and the increasing insecurity.
The Congolese people cannot express their legitimate
concerns with the political situation without risking
their lives. On 21 January and 25 February, security
forces once again violently repressed demonstrations,
leaving at least nine people dead, dozens wounded and
hundreds arrested. This must stop.

The holding of credible and constitutional elections
by 23 December this year leading to a democratic and
peaceful transition of power is essential to ending
the political crisis. Without this, there is a significant
risk of further Violence destabilizing not just the
Democratic Republic of the Congo but the wider region
also. We welcome the progress made towards elections
so far, including the completion of voter registration,
the passing of election laws and the announcement
of an electoral budget. However, this is no time for
complacency. There is much more to do. It is essential
that the election calendar be honoured and that key
dates set out in the electoral timetable are met, including
the completion of the voter register list by 5 April, the
audit of the electoral list by 25 May, convocation of
the electoral process in June and the registration of
presidential candidates in July.
But holding credible elections is about more than
complying with timelines. It is also about creating the
conditions that enable free and fair elections to take
place. In order to do this, we call on the Government to
implement the 31 December agreement in full, including
the full implementation of the confidence-building
measures set out in the agreement. The Government
must also respect the fundamental rights and freedoms
of the people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, opening political space and allowing peaceful
demonstrations and freedom of expression.

The United Kingdom is extremely concerned
at the high number of violations of political rights
and fundamental freedoms in January, and we were
appalled by the disproportionate use of force against
churchgoers and peaceful protesters on 31 December
2017 and 21 January and 25 February 2018, and the
subsequent loss of life.

We recognize that the onus is not only on the
Government to deliver credible elections, and in
this context we call on the opposition to engage
constructively in the process on the basis of the
31 December agreement, which will demonstrate their
credibility and potential to govern.

The United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) has a crucial role to play in this crucial
year in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
protecting civilians and supporting the implementation
of the 31 December agreement. We welcome the efforts
to improve MONUSCO's ability to carry out these tasks
more efficiently and more effectively. In particular,
we welcome efforts to enhance the flexibility and
mobility of MONUSCO'S forces and to improve their
performance. It is important that these reforms be
implemented swiftly.

In conclusion, let me be clear. The violence and
resulting dire humanitarian situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo are the result of the continual
disappointment of the people in the political process
and the political leaders responsible for this process.
The only way to avert further violence is for free
and fair elections to take place in December and for
the 31 December agreement to be fully implemented.
Further excuses and delays will only lead to more
violence and despair. The Security Council cannot
allow this to happen. The people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo cannot afford to wait any longer.

