The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
Secretary-General, the Secretary General of the League
of Arab States, ministers and other representatives here
in the Chamber. Their presence is an affirmation of the
importance of the subject matter to be addressed.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/20l2/686, which contains a letter dated
6 September 2012 from the Permanent Representative
of Germany to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Federal Republic of
Germany.

Since Germany began its current term in the
Security Council, in January 2011, we have witnessed
a dramatic change across the Near and Middle East.
The people in the region have expressed their hopes for
dignity, democracy, economic and social participation,
prosperity and respect of their fundamental human
rights. At the beginning, we spoke of the Arab Spring.
We have learned that it would be better to speak of Arab
seasons.

The movement for change in the Arab world has
not followed the same pattern in every country. Indeed,
more than ever, the situation differs from one country
to another, but the process of change continues.

We are all concerned about the recent turmoil
in many Arab countries in response to a shameful
anti-Islam Video. Let me be very clear.

I can understand very well that believers feel deeply
offended by that horrible and shameful video, but the
response to such provocations cannot be violence.
There is no justification for violence and murder.

What we are witnessing now is not a confrontation
of religions, nor is it a clash of cultures. What we are
witnessing is a clash within societies. It is a struggle
of the open-minded with the closed-minded. It is a
struggle of the reasonable with the fundamentalists. It
is a clash of the peaceful with the violent. This week has
to serve to strengthen those in all societies all over the
world who stand up for respect and tolerance, for those
who know that freedom and responsibility are but two
sides of the same coin. There is no doubt about where
Germany stands. Now more than ever, we are with
those who work for peace. We see the challenges, but
we believe in the historic opportunities that the change
in the Arab world is opening up. Germany's offer of a
transformation partnership to provide education, jobs
and growth continues to stand.

The League of Arab States has assumed a leading
role with regard to regional peace and security. It
has taken a clear stance on the conflicts in Syria and
Libya. For the Syrian people, however, the prospect for
peace still seems a distant dream. As the international
community, we must be united to stop the violence and
help initiate a process of political transition. We must
find a common response. We owe it to the people. We
appreciate the active leadership of the Arab League to
halt the killing in Syria.

The change in the Arab world has made peace in
the Middle East more urgent than ever. Negotiations are
the way to achieve a two-State solution that satisfies the
legitimate demands on both sides - the Israelis and the
Palestinians. We must therefore ensure that the peace
process remains a priority on the international agenda.
By endorsing the Saudi Peace Initiative the League of
Arab States has made a constructive offer that is of
critical importance.

We believe that it is necessary to solidify and
develop the cooperation between the United Nations
and the Arab League. The commitment of the Arab
League to the values enshrined in the United Nations
Charter is the basis for more cooperation. Above all,
more focus is needed on what we can achieve together
in the areas of conflict prevention and resolution. We
need practical progress. For instance, we could think
about more frequent briefings and consultations with
representatives of the League of Arab States. I would
also welcome the establishment of a United Nations
office in Cairo to improve cooperation With the
secretariat of the Arab League.

The time has come. As the Arab world undergoes
historical change, let us seize the opportunity to open
a new chapter of cooperation between the League of
Arab States and the United Nations.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The President: I now give the floor to the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.


