The President: At the outset, I should like to
acknowledge and welcome the presence of the Deputy
Foreign Minister for Humanitarian Affairs of Argentina,
Her Excellency Ms. Alicia Martinez Rios.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Report of the Secretary-General to the Security
Council on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict (8/1999/957)

The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Botswana, Egypt, Finland, India, Iraq, Japan, Mongolia,
Norway, the Republic of Korea, Rwanda, Slovakia, South
Africa, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Tunisia and Ukraine, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Legwaila
(Botswana), Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt), Ms. Korpi
(Finland), Mr. Sharma (India), Mr. Hasan (Iraq),
Mr. Takasu (Japan), Mr. Enkhsaikhan (Mongolia),
Mr. Kolby (Norway), Mr. Lee See-Young (Republic of Korea), Mr. Mutaboba (Rwanda), Mr. Tomka
(Slovakia), Mr. Kumalo (South Africa), Mr. Calovski
(the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia),
Mr. Hachani (Tunisia) and Mr. Yel'chenko (Ukraine)
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.


The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter dated 10 September 1999 from
the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United Nations,
which has been issued as document S/ 1999/980, and
which reads as follows:
"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the Security
Council invite Ambassador Nasser Al-Kidwa,
Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United
Nations, to participate in the upcoming meetings of
the Security Council, beginning on Thursday,
16 September 1999, regarding civilians in armed
conflict".

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
the Permanent Observer of Palestine to participate in the
current debate in accordance with the rules of procedure
and the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al-Kidwa
(Palestine), took the seat reserved for him at the
side of the Council Chamber.


The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, if I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation to the
Permanent Observer of Switzerland to the United Nations
to participate in the discussion, without the right to vote.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Maurer
(Switzerland), took the seat reserved for him at the
side of the Council Chamber.


The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall take
it that the Security Council agrees to extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mrs.
Sylvie Junod, head of the delegation of the International
Committee of the Red Cross to the United Nations.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in
its prior consultations.

 

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General to the Security Council on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, document
8/1999/957.
I give the floor to the Secretary-General.


