Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to express our gratitude to your presidency of
the Council this month, Madam President, and for
the importance you have attached to the discussion
of the presidential statement you have just read to us
(S/PRST/2013/l4). At the same time, we would like to
thank all Council members who have participated in
the discussions on the statement.

We are satisfied with the content of several of the
statement's paragraphs, which welcomes the extension
of the mandate of the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel owing to the continued progress
that has been made by the African Union through that
mechanism. The extension of its mandate is directly
due to those developments.

In addition, we welcome the fact that the Council
has referred in a positive light to the commencement of
work by the African Union border programme technical
team to delineate the border line, which is extremely
important in determining the safe demilitarized
border zone and which will probably resolve several
outstanding issues between the two countries. In
that regard, I reaffirm my country's commitment to
implementing the outcome of the work of the group that
will be determining the demilitarized border zone.

I would like to mention what is contained in the
paragraph that addresses the situation in Southern
Kordofan and Blue Nile states and the provision
of assistance to those regions. I reiterate that the
Government of the Sudan has always cooperated and will
continue to cooperate to ensure that urgent assistance
is provided to those two regions. The Council is surely
also aware of that the obstacles and the non-delivery of
such assistance is due to the fact that the Sudan People's
Liberation Army (SPLA)-North and some other parties
have rejected the tripartite initiative of the African
Union, the League of Arab States and the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation, which we have accepted. I
would like to repeat that when the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General is able to convince the other party to
implement that initiative, we will also be prepared to do
the same. I would therefore have hoped that the Council
would have been able to explain who the responsible
party was for creating those obstacles, rather than
putting the parties on an equal footing, which is not
actually true in the case of the humanitarian situation
in the regions of Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile.

I had also hoped that, in that paragraph, the Council
would have condemned the position of SPLA-North and
referred to the other rebel groups that support it, as they
have terrorized civilians and exposed them to killings
and displacements in Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile.
The fact that this was not explicitly mentioned could
encourage the rebels to continue terrorizing civilians
and exposing them to various types of violence, murder
and displacement. I would have appreciated that.

I thank the Council and would like to reiterate that
we remain in contact with Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas,
Joint Special Envoy for the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, who is today
beginning negotiations in Arusha, United Republic
of Tanzania, to convince the rebels to join the peace
process. We have reiterated at all levels that the Sudan
intends to continue to negotiate with them in order
for them to join the peace process and move towards
stability and peace in the Sudan. That will have a
positive effect not only on the Sudan but also on our
brothers in South Sudan and the region as a whole. We
therefore appeal to all the members of the Council that
could make a difference to try to influence the rebels to
come to the negotiating table so that we can peacefully
resolve the conflict.

I again thank the Council. Perhaps I will be able to
take the floor again to shed light on certain points that
may require it.
