Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to thank you, Madam President, for
organizing this open debate. We have taken note of the
concept paper (S/2012/l95, annex) prepared by your
delegation to guide our deliberations, for which we are
also grateful. We also express our gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his clear introductory statement.

As you are aware, Madam President, although our
delegation did not object during your initial
consultations to the holding of a debate on the general
topic of illicit cross-border trafficking and movement,
the discussions leading up to today's meeting turned
out to be quite lively. I would like to explain the basis
for our own concerns, as seen from our national
perspective.

Most of our concerns stem from whether
emphasis should be placed on securing borders or on
illicit trafficking. With regard to the former, our
concern is simply that securing borders against the
illicit movement of goods, services, financial flows and
persons can be defended on its own right; however, it
always poses the risk of hampering licit movements,
thereby causing more harm than good. With regard to
the latter, we wonder about how one is to distinguish
between illicit and licit movements - and the grey
areas in between - and about how one is to
differentiate between various types of movement,
taking into account that dealing with, for instance,
narcotics trafficking is quite different from human
trafficking or dealing in stolen cultural artifacts, not to
mention the cross-border movement of persons.

Moreover, not all illicit cross-border activities
pose an actual threat to international peace and
security, although some certainly have that potential.
Furthermore, however we approach the scourge of
illicit trafficking, whether under the purview of the
Security Council or, in more general terms, within the
overall context of the United Nations system, we
should be motivated by the idea of promoting
cooperation between Member States on such matters.
However, by emphasizing controls and regulations, we
run the risk, perhaps unintentionally, of encouraging a
more defensive approach on the part of sovereign
States, with an every-man-for-himself mentality, which
would be contrary to the purposes and principles of the
Organization.

Besides such comments of a conceptual nature,
we also have some more specific observations to make,
mostly of a more positive nature.

First, we believe that this discussion can
contribute to our efforts to prevent conflicts with a
view to maintaining international peace and security
and strengthen our responses to emerging threats and
challenges. Like terrorism, the phenomena of
transnational organized crime and illicit trafficking in
arms, goods and persons are shared responsibilities; in
order to prevent and combat them, we must work
collectively. Moreover, we need to secure our borders
and combat illicit trafficking and movement in order to
uphold the rule of law at the national and international
levels.

Secondly, a wide range of existing strategies and
initiatives to address these issues has been developed at
the national, regional and international levels, which
makes it more difficult to identify synergies and
similarities. That can be attributed not only to the
particular nature of each issue, or to the fact that each
is discussed in separate expert forums, but also to the
fact that each topic is governed by its own legislative
and treaty frameworks. That is additional justification
for strengthening international cooperation and for
providing technical assistance, particularly to promote
and facilitate the implementation of the relevant
international conventions and protocols.

Thirdly, distinct strategies are required to address
specific threats posed by different types of illicit
trafficking and movement, including appropriate
strategies designed to reduce the demand and supply of
illicit drugs. In effect, we need to address the
underlying causes of that phenomenon and to take
actions designed to reduce the market for illegal drugs
as well as the profits from their sale. Unless the
underlying issues are addressed, the problem will
simply be displaced, or else it will be replaced by
another illicit activity. Governments must therefore
strengthen the rule of law in their countries in order to
develop social antibodies to fight organized crime and
eventually break the cycle of crime and
underdevelopment.

Fourthly, strengthening the capacity of the United
Nations to assist Member States to secure their borders
against illicit trafficking and movement is only one
aspect, albeit an important one, in the wider arsenal of
measures to address this issue. While recognizing that
the United Nations has a role to play in helping the
States concerned, which should be carried out within
existing mandates, upon the request of Member States,
with full respect for their sovereignty and under
national ownership. Moreover, adequate resources are
also needed to ensure that sustainable efforts yield
significant results.

Fifthly, many parts of the United Nations system,
including most visibly the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, the United Nations Development
Programme, the Department of Economic and Social
Affairs, the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development and the regional commissions, are either
directly or indirectly involved in supporting countries
in the effort to combat the illicit trafficking of goods,
services and people. There is a case to be made in that
regard for greater coherence and coordination within
the system.

Finally, the Security Council should continue to
strengthen its mechanisms under resolutions 1373
(2001) and 1540 (2004), which specifically address the
implementation of counter-terrorism and
non-proliferation obligations, since they also concern
cross-border control and management.

