Mr. Mulet (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for giving me the opportunity to brief
the Security Council on the security situation in Darfur
as well as on the national political and electoral
environment, following the issuance of Secretary-
General's report of 16 November (8/2009/592). My
briefing will also provide an overview of the actions
that are required to implement the objectives of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID). Afterwards, the Joint Chief
Mediator, Mr. Djibril Bassole, will provide a complete
update on the political process and the efforts of the
Mediation to facilitate a political solution in Darfur.

The security situation in Darfur remains unstable.
Carjackings and attacks against humanitarian workers
have not stopped, and we remain extremely concerned
by the fate of two UNAMID employees who were
kidnapped in Zalingue 94 days ago. Furthermore, the
beginning of a new round of peace talks in Doha on
17 November coincided with an increase in fighting on
the ground. That same day, 17 November, in Southern
Darfur, combatants affiliated with the Sudan Liberation
Army (SLA)/Minni Minawi faction attacked two
villages close to Neghea, killing 11 people. On
19 November, the Sudanese Armed Forces reported the
deaths of 29 soldiers in an ambush in Sindy, in
Northern Darfur, allegedly orchestrated by the rebels
belonging to the SLA/Abdul Shafi faction, but for
which responsibility was also claimed by the
SLA/Abdul Wahid faction. In the same period,
UNAMID also reported clashes between SLA/Abdul
Shafi and SLA/Abdul Wahid in the Jebel Marra in
Western Darfur. These attacks are unacceptable and
clearly show - if proof were needed - that the
fragmentation of Darfurian rebel movements remains a
reality, with obvious consequences for the Mediation
and the peace process.

Lastly, as indicated in the Secretary-General's
report, over the past three months, UNAMID has had
to face significant obstacles to its freedom of
movement. Given the extent of the problem, these were
brought to the attention of senior Sudanese officials
during discussions in New York on 28 September. The
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Alain Le Roy, then sent a detailed list of incidents
to the Permanent Mission of the Sudan to the United
09-6229]
Nations on 14 October. We are determined to resolve
this problem in cooperation with the Sudanese
authorities, and we will continue to raise this matter
with them in an open and transparent fashion.

It goes without saying that the rebel movements
must be held to the same obligations. In
mid-November, SLA/Abdul Wahid repeatedly denied
UNAMID access to the zones under its control in
Northern Darfur and the Jebel Marra area, notably in
Sortony and Deribat. That is why the armed
movements must be asked to make similar
commitments to ensure freedom of movement for
UNAMID in the zones under their control if we want
the Mission to succeed in its effort to help the parties
restore full peace and stability. UNAMID will continue
to work with the Government as well as with the
movements in pursuing this objective, but it is clear
that we will need the support of Security Council
members in this undertaking.

(spoke in English)

In the national political context, the Government
of the Sudan is carrying out registration for the
national elections, scheduled to take place in April
2010. As foreseen in the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA), national elections can play a
significant role in building national unity and
democratization in the Sudan. To date, significant
challenges remain with regard to preparations,
including agreement on the census results, clarification
of constituency delimitation and completion of the
registration process. A transparent and meaningful
debate must also take place with regard to what is
required to hold inclusive elections in Darfur. To date,
a number of Darfur groups, including internally
displaced persons and the movements - the Justice
and Equality Movement and the SLA/Abdul Wahid -
continue to express concerns about the holding of
elections before the conclusion of a peace agreement.

In this connection, the start of elections
registration on 1 November led to heightened tensions
in some areas of Darfur. On 9 November, SLA faction
leaders threatened to attack election registration
officials who attempted to enter territory they control.
On 18 November, assailants attempted to force their
way into a voter registration team accommodation near
Mornei in Western Darfur. We are investigating these
reports, which describe an unacceptable threat to the
electoral process in the Sudan. UNAMID is also
09-62291

working to disseminate a strong message that no group
has a right to use violence to disrupt preparations for
the elections. We must demand more both of partners
in the Government of National Unity and of the Darfur
movements in addressing outstanding political and
technical issues associated with the elections, with a
view to ensuring that they meet the objectives set down
in the CPA.

The release of the report of the African Union
High-Level Panel on Darfur chaired by President
Mbeki represents another major political development
for the Sudan. As the Council is aware, the
recommendations of the report were endorsed in a
29 October communique issued by a summit-level
meeting of the African Union Peace and Security
Council. In the meantime, we are preparing for
forthcoming discussions with the African Union on the
next steps.

With regard to the peace process, Joint Chief
Mediator Bassole will provide you with a detailed
update on the positions of the parties and his mediation
efforts. From our perspective, with the pressure and
urgency of the electoral time frame in mind,
Mr. Bassole has been working for over a year to
facilitate the resumption of direct talks between the
Government and the armed movements, with civil
society consultations alongside those talks. In the
meantime, the Government and the movements must
demonstrate a readiness to give up completely the
military option.

In our view, the Sudanese know what they have
to do, and the report of President Mbeki's panel
highlights the issues that need to be addressed: power-
sharing, wealth-sharing, security and compensation.
Considerable progress needs to be made on those
issues in the coming months in order for the elections
to be meaningful in Darfur. If progress is not made, the
holding of elections could have significant implications
for peace. The challenge for this Council, for the
United Nations and for the African Union, is therefore
how best to assist the parties in achieving a political
solution that addresses these issues.

The report before the Council describes a set of
concrete benchmarks and indicators for measuring
progress towards the achievement of UNAMID's
mandate. Progress in all four areas is long overdue for
the people of Darfur: the achievement of a
comprehensive political solution; the establishment of
3
a secure and stable environment; enhancement of the
rule of law and a stabilized humanitarian situation.
Among the Mission's mandated activities and the
efforts of the United Nations in Darfur, none are as
important as those aimed at achieving a comprehensive
political solution to end Darfur's marginalization and
to enable its rightful representation in the national
political process.

