Ihave the honour to brief the Council on ways of strengthening the performance and accountability of the United Nations police. United Nations police (UNPOL) have demonstrated their strong potential in peace operations, a potential that can be further expressed, for the benefit of the populations and of the United Nations, in the context of a renewed collective engagement in peace operations. Many avenues have already been identified for UNPOL under the leadership of the Police Adviser, Luis Carrilho, whom we thank for his ongoing support. I am thinking in particular of the strong wish to make UNPOL a service provider for the entire United Nations system and beyond - a generally unobtrusive, unnoticed and therefore sometimes forgotten provider. Allow me to cite some examples that illustrate the success achieved by the police force of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic in discharging our mandate and in terms of the major strategies of the United Nations. With respect to political solutions to conflicts, UNPOL was able to successfully carry out 40 different missions in support of the Political Accord for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic. In terms of the protection of civilians, eight individual police officers were able, without weapons, helmets or accompaniment, to radically change the situation in one year in PKS, the most difficult district in Bangui, using community policing. UNPOL has maintained continuous and flawless cooperation in the Central African Republic with all human rights actors. It has been able to anticipate, devise, gain acceptance for and implement an integrated model for securing elections in the Central African Republic beyond just uniformed experts. In terms of improving United Nations security, UNPOL has been able to maintain its activities in the face of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), with very few cases. UNPOL also ensured the conviction in January of several people responsible for the killing of peacekeepers in Bangassou in 2018; more of these instances will follow. UNPOL has performed very well and handled an increased number of responsibilities. In terms of its male-to-female ratio, it is several years ahead of schedule. In addition, UNPOL has a higher percentage of women in positions of responsibility than the component overall. It is also carrying out more than 10 action plans on major issues. Concerning the strengthening of its efforts towards a lasting peace, UNPOL strikes a balance between security and development in its activities. It has doubled the number of police and gendarmerie in the Central African Republic in two and a half years, and women represent 26 per cent of its recruits. Humanitarians have developed a strong relationship of trust with UNPOL and are asking for our support, for example in Batangafo, where we are constrained to maintain a diminished Rwandan formed police unit. Exemplary results have been achieved and are being strengthened. Indeed, UNPOL has been able over the past three years to eliminate cases of sexual abuse or exploitation. The initiatives it has developed in the field of the environment are regularly cited as examples. In terms of improving partnerships, UNPOL works on a daily basis with the United Nations Development Programme, the European Union, the European Union Military Training Mission, the European Union Advisory Mission and major bilateral partners. These are just a few examples of what the management and command methods used by UNPOL in the Central African Republic have made it possible to achieve. Seven factors have made this possible. First, UNPOL has benefited from enough space, breathing room, autonomy, visibility, attention and support as well as strong leadership, particularly from the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mankeur Ndiaye, and Police Adviser Luis Carrilho. They believed in UNPOL's potential, and UNPOL has paid them back in spades, benefiting also the people. Second, UNPOL has been able to integrate the major United Nations strategies. Third, UNPOL is implementing, to the extent possible, the United Nations leadership framework of 18 April 2017: a leadership that is respectful of norms and principles and one that is inclusive, accountable, multidimensional, collaborative, transformational, lived at first hand and focused on the impact on the ground. Fourth, UNPOL draws a great deal of inspiration from Peters and Waterman's "prize for excellence" theories: taking action, listening to clients, empowering whenever possible, achieving productivity through staff motivation and being flexible yet disciplined. Fifth, UNPOL promotes integration according to McKinsey's seven keys to organizing, also supported by Peters and Waterman. Sixth, UNPOL never hesitates to identify its weaknesses in order to correct them or to offer warm congratulations for specific and concrete impacts on the ground that are felt directly by the population. Seventh, UNPOL maintains a people-centred approach. In conclusion, in order to further improve the performance and accountability of the United Nations police, attention, space and breathing room should be given to UNPOL. By proceeding in that way, as in the peaceful revolution launched in Bangui PKS by the local police, the years-ahead level of gender parity, the remarkable progress made in terms of ensuring election security, the major initiatives in the area of the environment and the outstanding resilience in the face of COVID, UNPOL will repay all that it has been given.
