Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed (spoke in Arabic): I
thank you very much, Sir, for the opportunity to brief
the Council on the latest developments in the Yemeni
peace process.

Tragically, the violence continues on numerous
fronts, deepening the suffering of the Yemeni
people. Much of the violence has focused on the
western coastline of Taiz governorate, where pro-
Government forces are attempting to make progress
from Al-Dhubab and Al-Mokha towards Hudaydah
port and inland towards Taiz city. An assessment
mission carried out by humanitarian agencies in early
April found that Al-Dhubab town was largely empty
due to widespread destruction of infrastructure and
contamination by unexploded ordnance and landmines.
In Al-Mokha town, an estimated 40 per cent of houses
and infrastructure have been damaged by the fighting.

Violence has also continued in Hajjah governorate
and the border area between Yemen and Saudi Arabia.
There has been a significant escalation of violence in
Taiz, including intensified shelling from 21 to 23 May by
forces allied with Ansar Allah and Ali Abdullah Saleh,
leading to the deaths and injury of tens of civilians and
significant damage to civilian infrastructure in the city.

The shelling of civilian areas and civilian infrastructure
is a serious violation of international humanitarian law.

Air strikes have hit numerous other locations
in the country. On 29 March, an air strike in Saada
governorate reportedly killed 12 civilians, including
several children. In addition, ballistic missiles were
fired into Saudi territory. The persistent military action
is leading to an increased militarization of the Yemeni
population, the extensive proliferation of weapons
and widespread use of deadly landmines. The terrible
scenes witnessed on the west coast and other areas ofthe
country show yet again how the conflict is laying waste
to the civilian population, its homes and livelihoods.
The parties must urgently come together to prevent the
deepening of the catastrophic situation.

I will not hide the fact that we are nowhere close
to reaching a comprehensive agreement from the
Council. The reluctance of the key parties to embrace
the concessions needed for peace, or even discuss them,
remains extremely troubling. Yemenis are paying a
price for their needless delay.

As the holy month of Ramadan begins, we must
remember that 7 million Yemenis are at risk of famine
unless the conflict ends. A quarter of Yemenis cannot
afford food on the local market. Half of Yemen's
population lacks access to clean water, sanitation
and hygiene services, thereby increasing the risk
of infectious diseases. The most recent outbreak of
cholera has led to more than 500 deaths and over 60,000
suspected cases in 19 governorates. The rapid spread
of the disease has been aggravated by an inadequate
health-care system. Fewer than 45 per cent of medical
facilities are functioning and medicines for diabetes,
hypertension, cancer and other chronic diseases are
in short supply. As the World Health Organization has
underlined, Yemenis are dying not just from violence;
the violence, lack of salaries and the loss of their
livelihoods prevents them from receiving the basic
treatment they need to survive.

So far, we have managed to avert military action
in Al Hudaydah. The spread of fighting to the city
would lead to a devastating loss of civilian life and
infrastructure. It would threaten the flow of food and
medical supplies through the port and bring further
suffering to the Yemeni people. I made it clear to the
parties during my recent meetings with the Government
of Yemen and with political leaders in Sana'a that
they must reach a compromise on the situation in Al
Hudaydah, in order to prevent such a horrific scenario.
I regret that the delegation of Ansar Allah and the
General People's Congress in Sana'a did not meet with
me to discuss the framework for such an agreement.

My proposal, which includes security, economic
and humanitarian elements, would allow for the
continued flow of commercial and humanitarian
supplies and ensure the end of any diversion of customs
revenues and taxes so that they could be used to support
salaries and services rather than the war or for personal
benefit. Agreement between the parties on those
issues will safeguard the population of Al Hudaydah
against further harm and preserve commercial and
humanitarian supply chains and the payment of salaries.

I have proposed an agreement that would prevent
military clashes in Al Hudaydah and should be
negotiated in parallel with an agreement to ensure
the resumption of salary payments nationally to
all civil servants. The lack of salary payments is
driving millions of Yemenis into destitution. Such an
agreement would require mechanisms to ensure that
all State revenues, whether collected in Al Hudaydah,
Sana'a, or elsewhere, are used in support of salary
payments and the preservation of essential Government
services in all areas of the country. I call on all parties
to engage with me, without delay, on the basis of my
proposal. Salary payments are possible only through
an agreement between the Yemeni parties. It requires
cooperation and negotiations about the use of existing
resources in the country rather, than the scapegoating
of the United Nations.

In parallel with efforts to avoid destructive
conflict, we must also preserve systems that can serve
the Yemeni people now and in the future. I am grateful
to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the World Bank
for organizing a conference to discuss urgent measures
to support Yemen's economy and State institutions, as
well as its longer-term recovery and reconstruction. I
praise the work of the World Bank, UNICEF and local
Yemeni institutions in restarting cash assistance to the
poorest families through existing distribution social
safety mechanisms. Such mechanisms will be a vital
boost for household purchasing power and will help
millions of Yemenis keep their children out of the
growing ranks of the malnourished.

Commercial importers currently lack access to
the financing required to sustain imports of essential
goods, in particular during the holy month of Ramadan.
I welcome efforts to create a trade finance facility that
will allow commercial importers access to the hard
currency that they need in order to pay for imports.
That will ensure the continued availability of key
commodities in Yemeni markets and will prevent the
degradation of supply chains, allowing for more rapid
economic recovery in the long term. That effort is
just a part of a dynamic and innovative collaboration
between the World Bank and the United Nations, which
is unprecedented in scale and in the rapidity of its
deployment. I am confident that it is having a positive
impact today on the lives of Yemenis and will help
to ensure a more rapid and stable recovery following
the conflict.

The prospect of economic recovery and stability
is still a distant prospect for most Yemenis and the
country continues to be fertile ground for extremist
groups. Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula operations
have persisted in several governorates, including
Hadramout, Aden, Al-Dhali, Ma'reb and Shabwa. The
absence of stability, economic opportunity and rule of
law means that Yemen will continue to be a haven for
such groups unless there is lasting peace.

I would like to express my deep concern regarding
recent reports from Yemen of efforts to suppress and
undermine the work of journalists, human rights
activists and civil society, including harassment,
beatings, arbitrary detention and trials without due
process. I am particularly worried by the sentencing
to death of Yahya Al-Jubayhi, a prominent Yemeni
journalist, by a court run by the Houthis and General
People's Congress on 12 April. I am also concerned
by the arbitrary arrest and threats to the safety of
members of the Baha'i community. The parties must
uphold their obligation to respect the integrity of civil
society and allow such actors to carry out their valuable
work without fear of threat or intimidation. They must
also allow religious minorities to live without fear
of persecution.

I must highlight the important and effective role that
Yemeni women continue to play in resolving conflict
and in contributing to the vision for lasting peace and
reconciliation, despite the atmosphere of violence and
increasing risks to their safety. During my visit to
Sana'a, I had the pleasure of meeting representatives of
the Yemeni Women Pact for Peace and Security, which
brings together Yemeni women from different political
parties, as well as independent members of civil
society. The meetings, which were convened by UN-
Women, discussed issues that are central to the current
conflict in Yemen, including the economic crisis,
political deadlock and the possibility of preventing an
attack against Al Hudaydah. The members discussed
mechanisms to increase women's inclusion in the peace
negotiations and the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000).
Yemeni women, civil society and political leaders
have also been meeting regularly in discussions on
the peace process and the future of the transition. I
am very grateful for the efforts of Germany and the
Berghof Foundation for hosting the events that will help
Yemenis build consensus on their way to a return to a
peaceful, orderly transition that meets the aspirations
of Yemen's people.

During the past two months, the demands of the
southern governorates for greater autonomy have
become more prominent. Such calls demonstrate once
again the urgent need for a peace agreement so that
Yemenis can engage in discussions to finalize the
Constitution, agree on a framework for addressing past
injustices and prepare for the election of a Government
that puts the country on the path towards recovery and
prosperity. Yemenis across the country have been worn
out by the conflict.

My meeting with an inspiring group of youth
activists in Sana'a last week reminded me of the great
Yemeni hopes for political transition before the war. The
hopes of those young women and men for the resolution
of issues have been ignored for too long. We discussed
the political and security challenges facing Yemen, as
well as the cholera outbreak. In my discussions with
those members of civil society, women and youth groups
proposed very practical ideas, including opening the
Sana'a airport for civilian flights and urgent demands
for the thousands of students and Yemenis requiring
urgent medical treatment throughout the country.
The demands of those young people are just, logical,
inspiring and practical.

I very much regret to inform the Council that the
call for peace from Yemeni women, civil society and
the international community is still falling on deaf
ears. An agreement on Al Hudaydah and salaries should
represent a first step towards a national cessation of
hostilities and renewed discussions on a comprehensive
agreement. Yet, serious negotiations on those first steps
have been slow to start.

I am deeply concerned by the attack on my convoy
while traveling from the airport to the United Nations
compound on 22 May. Such an incident cannot be
ignored, and I call on the local authorities to conduct
a full and transparent investigation into the attack and
hold those responsible for the attack to account. Despite
its gravity, it has increased my determination to continue
with my efforts to fmd a negotiated political settlement
that best serves the interests of the Yemeni people.
I urge the Council to strongly convey to the
parties that they need to engage immediately with
the United Nations to agree on steps to avoid further
bloodshed, halt the slide towards famine and recommit
to a peaceful end to the war. The humanitarian crisis
and the threat of famine are entirely man-made. If the
conflict stops, then Yemenis and their partners in the
international community will have the capacity and the
will to rebuild the country. With the unified backing
of the international community, the path towards peace
has been clearly laid out for the parties involved.

I take this opportunity to remind this Council of
the thousands of Yemenis who have lost their lives
for no other reason than paying the price of a war
between their leaders. I would also like to remind the
Council of the millions of Yemeni victims affected
by man-made hunger, violence and famine. I appeal
to the parties to stop fighting for power and instead
to strive to build a country that respects the rights
of all its citizens - a country with a prosperous
economy and strong institutions for all Yemenis just as
Yemenis deserve.

