Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. Kalomoh for his
comprehensive briefing.
Today's meeting is taking place against the
backdrop of important events in the Middle East
region. I am thinking in particular of the outcome of
the elections in Israel and the completion of the efforts
to form a new Palestinian Government.

In analysing the changes that have taken place in
Palestinian territories, Russia expresses its hope that
the Government of the Palestinian National Authority
will pursue a policy that serves the vital interests of all
Palestinians by fulfilling their aspirations to peace and
nationhood. Such a policy must be based on the
principles agreed within the framework of the Quartet
of international mediators. Those principles provide for
a renunciation of violence as a means to achieve
political goals, the recognition of Israel's right to exist,
and compliance with previous agreements and
commitments, in particular the road map, whose
implementation is the most reliable path towards a just
resolution of the Palestinian issue. Russia will continue
to assist energetically in that regard.

We welcome the stated intention of Mr. Haniyeh,
the Prime Minister of the Palestinian National
Authority, to conduct his relationship with President
Abbas in a spirit of dialogue and cooperation. It is
important that such cooperation be carried out within
the constitutional framework on the basis of the
authority set forth in the laws of the Palestinian
Authority and the principle of power-sharing.

It is worth noting that the new Cabinet Ministers
of the Palestinian National Authority recognize the role
of the Palestine Liberation Organization as the leading
faction among the remaining national movements. It is
also particularly important that the Palestinian National
Authority Government has reaffirmed its readiness to
discuss all requirements and to provide the necessary
safeguards to donors providing assistance to the
Palestinian people.

We believe that there is a need to continue the
basic approach, building upon the policy initiative of
the President of Russia of dialogue with the Hamas
movement and working closely with that organization
so as to encourage it to fulfil the conditions set out by
the Quartet. We do not share the view that it is
impossible to work with the newly formed Government
of the Palestinian National Authority in addressing
issues related to providing assistance - including
humanitarian assistance - to the Palestinians. The
rejection of such assistance could be a serious error
that would lead to chaos and unpredictable
consequences and cause a grave humanitarian crisis in
the Palestinian territories.
Instead of closing the door on the prospects for
achieving peace in the region and punishing the
Palestinians with sanctions and ultimatums for the
democratic choice that they have made, we propose to
focus on joint efforts to establish a mechanism that
would ensure reliable monitoring of the provision of
donor assistance. Such an effort could draw widely on
the experience of United Nations specialized agencies
and on the potential of the missions of the Quartet's
Special Envoy, Mr. Wolfensohn.

Russia is resolved to carry out its commitments
and to address the issue of providing the Palestinian
National Authority with financial assistance totalling
$10 million under conditions of full transparency and
openness.

We expect any Government formed on the basis
of the outcome of the Israeli elections not to undertake
unilateral steps with respect to the Palestinians or to
prejudice the outcome of the talks on the final status of
the Palestinian territories. We note with satisfaction the
statement of the Acting Prime Minister of Israel,
Mr. Olmert, regarding his country's readiness to
resume talks with the Palestinians on settlement issues.
That statement is in keeping with the previously stated
desire of the head of the Palestinian National
Authority, Mr. Abbas, to continue the peace dialogue
with the Israeli leadership, and it establishes a good

basis for further peaceful efforts to resolve the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict on the basis of the road map.

It is also important to ensure prompt resumption
of the negotiating process on the Syrian-Lebanese track
of the Middle East peace process. The Security Council
will soon have an opportunity to look at that issue in
greater detail. Today, we would simply like to highlight
in particular the importance of continuing the inter-
Lebanese dialogue and of achieving a consensus within
that framework on the most pressing issues related to
ensuring peace and stability in Lebanon and the entire
region.

