Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I thank the
Prosecutor for her report and briefing.

We are deeply concerned about the situation in
Darfur. As the report clearly illustrates, the past six
months have seen an increase in violence against
civilians, including a significant increase in aerial
bombardments and rape on a scale never previously
seen in Darfur. Oftentimes, that violence is committed
by the Sudanese armed forces and associated militia,
and the most vulnerable - women, children and
internally displaced persons - are targeted.

Today, we not only mark 10 years since the Council
heard the findings of the Commission of Inquiry and
its International Criminal Court (ICC) referral, but
we also mark another sobering illustration of that
crisis. Today, we have the highest number of internally
displaced persons from Darfur that we have seen in the
past decade - 2.55 million. Today's discussion brings
the Council face to face with the fact that one of its key
decisions - the Darfur referral to the Court - is being
flouted not only by the indictees, but also by States that
have Rome Statute commitments. There has also been
criticism of the referral by some other African Members
of the Organization. This outcome - whatever its
causes - is very bad for the Council, for the Court
and for peace and justice. The Council, the Court and
the African Union, along with their members, need to
reflect very deeply about the longer-term implications
of the divide between the Court and key African States
that were once among the Court's strongest and earliest
supporters. That is also a crucial issue for the Assembly
of States Parties, which should look, beyond Darfur, at
the state of these relationships.

For the Council, we need to reflect on the fact that
the Darfur referral has led to a chain of events, with
some aspects predictable and some not, resulting in the
Court's authority being reduced both within Africa and
also more broadly. As a country that is a party to the
Court's Statute and committed to upholding the rule of
law, New Zealand finds that situation very troubling.
We consider that the Council needs to reflect carefully
before using its referral power. While referring a
situation to the Court may satisfy an immediate
objective, if there is no genuine commitment on the
part of the Council to support the implementation of
that referral, the longer-term consequences could be
very negative. The Prosecutorjust made a similar point.
The status quo presents challenges for the
effectiveness and credibility of both the Council and
the Court. The existence of these challenges does not
diminish the gravity of the crimes or the need for
accountability, nor does it justify inaction. We need
to work in a careful and considered way to overcome
those challenges, including in the context of referrals.
That will not be an easy or a short process, but we
believe that it needs to be done. In the case of the Darfur
referral, the Sudan's non-compliance with the Council's
referral to the ICC is, as we know, not an isolated
incident. There is a range of Council interventions in
Darfur, and, in fact across the Sudan, and Khartoum's
non-compliance or, at best, sporadic acquiescence, is a
systemic challenge to them all.

In relation to the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), that was
highlighted in the peace operations review, which refers
to UNAMID as a Mission that is a mere shadow of its
original purpose because parties undermine its presence
through restrictions on its ability to operate. While
we hope that this morning's renewal of the UNAMID
mandate will allow the establishment of a new and
more cooperative relationship between UNAMID and
the Government of the Sudan, the past 10 years have
been a sad history of studied non-cooperation by the
Government. The same story can be seen even more
patently in relation to sanctions, which have since the
outset been heavily frustrated by the Sudan.

The backdrop to all of those challenges is an
extremely serious humanitarian crisis, including, as
we have heard, record numbers of internally displaced
persons and widespread human rights violations. After
10 years of the Council failing to make in-roads with
the Government of the Sudan or de-escalating the crisis
in Darfur, it is the relationship with Khartoum that
we should focus on. The Council needs to think hard
about how it can change the paradigm with Khartoum,
and Khartoum needs equally to think deeply about the
relationship it wants with the international community,
starting with the Council.

