The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Afghanistan, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provision rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Tanin
(Afghanistan) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
special report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
Security Council resolution 1806 (2008) on the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(S/2008/434).

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the special
report of the Secretary-General on the
International Conference in Support of
Afghanistan, held in Paris on 12 June 2008
(S/2008/434), and on the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), as
well as the briefing by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan, Mr. Kai
Eide, on 9 July 2008.
"The Security Council welcomes the
outcome of the Conference, including the
generous financial pledges made in support of the
Afghanistan National Development Strategy
(ANDS) and the commitment by the Government
of Afghanistan to promote security, good
governance, the rule of law, human rights and
socio-economic development, and to pursue
political and economic reform, including by
taking concrete steps to combat corruption. The
Council welcomes the strengthened partnership
between the Afghan Government and the
international community resulting from such
mutual pledges and commitments. The Security
Council endorses the key elements identified in
the Paris Declaration as essential for the security
and prosperity of the Afghan people, including
the importance of holding free, fair and secure
elections in 2009 and 2010, the importance of
ensuring respect for the human rights of all
Afghans and the provision of humanitarian
assistance, and the need to improve aid
effectiveness in order to ensure that the benefits
of development are tangible for every Afghan.

"The Security Council also welcomes the
review of the Afghanistan Compact presented at
the Conference. In this regard, the Council
reiterates its call on the Afghan Government and
the international community to implement the
Afghanistan Compact and its annexes in full.

"The Security Council recalls the
strengthened role of UNAMA and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in
leading and coordinating international civilian
efforts in Afghanistan through an integrated
approach and guided by the principle of
reinforcing Afghan ownership and leadership.
The Council reaffirms in particular the priorities
for UNAMA and the Special Representative
identified in paragraph 4 of Security Council
resolution 1806 (2008) and endorses the views of
the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative on the areas that require greater
attention. The Council calls on all relevant actors
to give their full support to UNAMA's enhanced
coordinating role.

"The Security Council endorses the
recommendation that, in order for UNAMA to
fulfil its mandate, much greater substantive,
08-4194]
administrative and security resources will need to
be expeditiously mobilized in the areas
mentioned in the report of the Secretary-General,
through the relevant processes and procedures
within the United Nations system. The Council
welcomes in particular the intention to proceed,
pursuant to resolution 1806 (2008), with another
expansion of UNAMA's field presence through
the opening of six new provincial offices over the
next 12 months. The Council also welcomes plans
to improve the coherence of action of the United
Nations Country Team in support of UNAMA's
priorities.

"The Security Council reaffirms once again
its strong commitment to the sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity and national
unity of Afghanistan. The Council expresses its
strong concern about the security situation in
Afghanistan and stresses the need to continue to
address the threat to the security and stability of
Afghanistan posed by the Taliban, Al-Qaida,
08-4194]

the

illegal armed groups, criminals and those
involved in the narcotics trade and in the
diversion of chemical precursors, including
through the implementation of measures
introduced in its resolution 1267 (1999) and other
relevant resolutions of the Council. The Security
Council notes the links between illicit drugs
trafficking, corruption and terrorism, and stresses
the need for full implementation of its resolution
1817 (2008) on international cooperation to
prevent trafficking and diversion of chemical
precursors of heroin for illicit use in
Afghanistan."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2008/26.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on the
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.

