Mr. Dangue Rewaka (Gabon) (interpretation from French): The persistence of armed conflicts in the Great
Lakes region, particularly in Rwanda and Burundi, in our
opinion justifies adopting any measures that could restore
peace and confidence there.

Thus, the draft resolution under consideration, which
would reactivate the International Commission of Inquiry
on arms flows in Rwanda, is a clear sign of the will of
the Security Council to arrest the phenomenon of illegal
arms transfers in this particularly unstable region.

Indeed, it is important to do all we can so that the
illegal transfer of large quantities of arms to the countries
of the Great Lakes region - in flagrant violation of the
embargo imposed by the Council - will not continue to
encourage armed violence, in Rwanda in particular.

Given the excellent work done by the International
Commission of Inquiry established by resolution 1013
(1995), it would be wise for the Council to again avail
itself of the Commission's expertise. This would make it
possible to achieve at least two essential objectives. First,
the offenders could be identified and a record drawn up
of all violations of the Security Council resolutions
imposing the embargo on arms traffic with Rwanda.
Secondly, the information and disclosures provided could
encourage the Council to adopt effective measures to
combat the illegal flow of arms to this already very
fragile subregion.

In this context, the work of the International
Commission of Inquiry could make an effective
contribution to stemming a massive arms build-up in
Rwanda and thereby help prevent the outbreak of new
widespread conflicts in the region.

 

For, beyond the issue of illegal arms flows to Rwanda
and to the Great Lakes region as a whole, the work of the
Commission must be seen as a stage in an overall process
to restore a lasting peace in the entire Great Lakes region.

This is why the Council, concurrently with the
Commission of Inquiry's investigations, should continue its
efforts to find concrete solutions to the basic problems that
underlie the political instability in this region.

It is our belief that, as long as we have not found the
ways and means to renew the political dialogue among all
the parties, the chances of building a lasting peace among
the countries of the Great Lakes region in general will
remain extremely slim.

It is in this spirit that my delegation will vote in
favour of the draft resolution before us.

