Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me in turn to thank Special Representative Tadamichi
Yamamoto, Ms. Sima Samar and Ambassador Adela
Raz for their very enlightening briefings and their
commitment to their respective roles in the promotion
of peace and of the rights and respect for the freedoms
of all Afghan men and women.

France aligns itself with the statement to be made
later on behalf of the European Union.

I will make three observations.

The primary and fundamental urgent need is
to redouble efforts to protect civilians, including
humanitarian and medical personnel, and to respond
to humanitarian needs. The number of casualties,
although it has decreased slightly compared with last
year, is of particular concern. With 11,000 deaths in
2018, Afghanistan has the most civilian casualties of
any conflict- affected country. The number of attacks
against aid workers increased by more than 150 per cent
in one year, and schools are also being targeted. This
is unacceptable. It is imperative that all parties to the
conflict respect their obligations under international
humanitarian law, and France welcomes the efforts
undertaken by the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in support of the Afghan
authorities to limit the number of civilian casualties
and minimize the impact of operations on civilians and
their infrastructure.
France welcomes the laws and action plans adopted
to protect children, which must be fully implemented
and provide protection against the six serious
violations. This must also be the case more broadly
with regard to laws on the protection of women and
children from violence, including sexual violence. It is
vital that the capacities of the judiciary be strengthened
in that respect.

As the Secretary-General notes in his report
(S/2019/493), we must meet the growing humanitarian
needs of the 6.3 million Afghans requiring assistance
and ensure safe and unhindered humanitarian access
throughout the country.

Secondly, our priority must be, now more than ever,
to ensure the success of efforts to achieve a negotiated
and lasting peace in Afghanistan. I commend the work
carried out by several partners, including the United
States, Qatar and Germany, which have engaged in
discussions with the Taliban with a view to bringing
them to engage in peace talks with the Afghan
Government. France calls on the Taliban to immediately
and concretely demonstrate its commitment to peace by
accepting direct talks with the Afghan Government and
declaring a ceasefire.

As the Special Representative recalled, the peace
process must be inclusive, led by and for the Afghan
people. It is crucial in this regard that women participate
directly and meaningfully in peace talks at all levels of
decision-making. The preservation and strengthening
ofthe achievements made in the areas ofjustice, the rule
of law and respect for rights and freedoms must remain
a top priority, particularly concerning respect for the
rights of women, respect for fundamental freedoms
in particular, the freedoms of opinion and expression
and the protection of journalists. Sacrificing those
achievements could jeopardize the support, including
financial support, of the international community for
the ongoing process.

Finally, the third priority is to ensure the holding
and smooth conduct of the presidential elections of
28 September, which must be free, transparent and
inclusive. The weaknesses identified in previous
elections must be remedied and preparations intensified.
The Independent Election Commission must continue
to work to enable the widest possible participation of
the people in the elections, including that of women as
candidates and as voters.

Given the high level of threat, including in Kabul,
poll security will also be a determining factor. We
reiterate our full support for the Afghan security
forces, whose efforts during the legislative elections
were notable.

Allow me to conclude by recalling the vital role ofthe
United Nations in continuing to support Afghanistan. In
this regard, I wish to commend the outstanding work of
UNAMA and of the various United Nations agencies in
Afghanistan in a particularly difficult security context.
In reviewing the mandate of the Mission, which we will
be doing soon, we must not lose sight of the crucial
work that it does on a daily basis. It is imperative that
the international community, in particular the Security
Council, remain united in supporting Afghanistan's
journey towards peace, democracy and economic and
social development.

