Ms. Kane (Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs): Yesterday morning, Wednesday
8 November, at approximately 5.30 a.m., Israeli forces
fired 12 to 15 shells into north-west Beit Hanoun in the
northern Gaza Strip. Shelling continued for 30 minutes
and a house was destroyed. At least 18 Palestinians
were killed, including eight children and seven women.
A further 55 people were injured.

This incident followed a weeklong military
operation undertaken by the Israel Defense Forces
(IDF) in northern Gaza. The operation, code-named
Autumn Clouds, began in the early hours of
Wednesday 1 November, when the IDF entered Beit
Hanoun in tanks and armoured vehicles. Israeli forces
remained for a week and conducted arrests, door-to-
door searches and military operations. During this
period, the IDF controlled all movement in and out of
Beit Hanoun and imposed a strict curfew on its
inhabitants. According to the IDF, the operation was
intended, "to prevent and disrupt the launching of
rockets at Israel and to damage the terror infrastructure
in the Beit Hanoun area". The IDF withdrew from Beit
Hanoun on Tuesday 7 November.

According to the World Health Organization, 82
Palestinians were killed during the operations in Gaza
between 1 and 8 November. Of those killed, 21 were
children, 12 were women and 49 were men. A further
260 Palestinians were injured. According to the IDF, 57
of those killed in Gaza this week were "armed
terrorists". The IDF also recovered a large number of
weapons. One Israeli soldier was killed and at least one
other was injured during the military operations in
Gaza.

Palestinian militants continued to fire rockets into
Israel during the week. According to the Government
of Israel, 52 rockets and mortars were fired towards
Israel between 31 October and 6 November, of which
06-60930

35 detonated in Israel, notably in the cities of Sderot
and Ashkelon. At least four Israeli civilians were
injured by these rockets. At least three rockets landed
today, but no one was hurt.

The humanitarian situation in Beit Hanoun
deteriorated over the course of the week. Most areas of
the town were without electricity and water, and there
has been extensive infrastructure damage. At least 18
homes, a mosque and non-governmental organization
offices were demolished, and a further 150 homes and
nine commercial properties were damaged. The
hospital continued to function, but primary health care
services ceased to operate, as health staff were unable
to leave their homes.

United Nations agencies and the International
Committee of the Red Cross were able to provide food,
water, powdered milk, fuel and hygiene kits on three
occasions during the week, when the IDF lifted the
curfew briefly to allow humanitarian access. On 3
November, two volunteer paramedics of the Palestinian
Red Crescent Society died following IDF fire received
in Beit Lahiya while performing their emergency
medical duties. The individuals concerned and their
means of transport were clearly marked with a
distinctive emblem conferring the protection of the
Geneva Conventions.

Since the launching of the IDF operation on 1
November, the United Nations has been in contact with
the Israeli Government at the highest levels to express
concern about the situation in Gaza. The Prime
Minister of Israel gave assurances to the Secretary-
General over the weekend that no operation would be
launched that was not essential to stop the firing of
rockets by militants. On Tuesday, the IDF announced
that the Beit Hanoun incursion was concluding.
Yesterday, however, the Israeli artillery continued
attacks.

The United Nations was in contact with members
of the Israeli Government again yesterday to reiterate
the call for restraint and the urgent need to protect
civilians.

The Secretary-General publicly expressed his
shock to learn about yesterday's incident and extended
his condolences to the families of the victims. His
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Alvaro de Soto, also issued a statement the same day.
Prime Minister Olmert and Defense Minister Peres
yesterday expressed their regret over the deaths of
3
Palestinian civilians. Prime Minister Olmert also
announced the suspension of IDF artillery fire pending
an investigation of the circumstances of this latest
incident.

Yesterday, Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas
and Prime Minister Ismael Haniyeh postponed their
talks on the establishment of a new Palestinian
Government "until further notice". The talks had been
intense during the past week, and the Prime Minister
and the President had agreed in principle on Monday to
a formula for the composition and programme of a new
Government.

In the meantime, in Damascus, Khaled Mashaal,
the exiled leader of Hamas, called for renewed attacks
on Israel. He urged other militant groups to join the
struggle.

The incident that occurred in Beit Hanoun on
Wednesday is shocking. Men, women and children who
posed no threat were killed as they slept in their home.
While this incident is unusual in scale, it is, however,
not the first time that an Israeli military operation in
the occupied Palestinian territory has resulted in a high
number of civilian casualties.

The Secretary-General has repeatedly expressed
his deep concern about the rising death toll caused by
the Israeli military operation in northern Gaza, given
that such operations inevitably cause civilian
casualties. The Secretary-General has reminded both
sides of their obligations under international
humanitarian law regarding the protection of civilians
in armed conflict and reiterated his call to the Israeli
Government to cease its military operations in Gaza
without delay.

The Secretary-General took note of the reported
announcement by the Israeli Government of a full
investigation into this latest incident and looks forward
to its early results. We see the investigation as an
opportunity for Israel to reflect not only on the obvious
military and operational implications, but also on the
policy of military pressure as a whole, which is quite
clearly not producing the desired goal of stopping
rocket attacks. The Palestinians need, more than ever, a
respite from the siege to which they are subjected so
that they can see on the horizon a credible, negotiated
way out.

The United Nations has repeatedly condemned
Palestinian rocket fire. We do so again today, as we
note that a large number of rockets have been fired by
Palestinian militants into Israel during the past week. It
is of critical importance that responsible Palestinian
forces should join in action to make sure that militant
attacks are stopped. This is one of the reasons why the
United Nations and its partners in the Quartet continue
to encourage the efforts of President Abbas to bring
about a national unity Government. Such a new
Government is the best way for the Palestinians to
tackle the problem of law and order.

We hope that both Israelis and Palestinians will,
in the wake of yesterday's tragedy in Beit Hanoun,
pause and reflect on the fact that the conflict between
them will not be resolved by force and that ways must
be found to bring about negotiations. We therefore
reiterate our call for a return to dialogue as the only
way out of this spiral of violence.

