Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing today's meeting on
Kosovo. The Council is right to deal regularly with the
situation in Kosovo, in view of the gravity of the crisis
recently. There is a need to closely follow
developments in the situation, which - as we
understand from Under-Secretary-General Jean-Marie
Guehenno's very concrete and useful briefing - while
remaining calm and stable, is nevertheless ambiguous.
Unfortunately, stability is still far from being achieved
once and for all.

As a country associated with the European Union,
Bulgaria fully aligns itself with the statement to be
made shortly by the Ambassador of Spain on behalf of
the Union. I will limit myself to a few comments in my
national capacity.

We welcome the political developments in
Kosovo, which are going in the right direction. I am
thinking in particular of the appointment of Ministers
of Serb origin. But now it seems to us that the time has
come for the Kosovar authorities, along with the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), to focus on solving the day-to-day
practical problems of all the inhabitants of the
province.

Bulgaria hopes that the local elections will take
place with respect for the timetable established by the
international community. From this standpoint, we feel
that the role of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe is crucial. Bulgaria will do its
utmost, both within this framework and on a bilateral
basis, so that these elections can take place in the best
possible circumstances.

We welcome the improved cooperation between
UNMIK and the Belgrade authorities. This allows us to
find practical and very useful solutions to Kosovo's
problems in the framework and spirit of Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999). I would like to take
this opportunity to commend the activity of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Michael
Steiner, especially his actions to foster strict
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999). I think we
all remember the painful incident when, with the
Council's support, he had to declare null and void a
decision taken by the Kosovar Assembly that was
above and beyond its purview and that created some
tension with the neighbouring Republic of Macedonia.
Steps undertaken by UNMIK and KFOR to
reduce tensions in the southern part of the province,
which borders on the Republic of Macedonia, should
also be noted and welcomed. We believe that UNMIK
and the Macedonian authorities will continue to find
practical solutions to the border problems in order to
improve daily life for the local population. Any attempt
by local political authorities to use this issue for
political purposes is totally unacceptable and counter-
productive for the stability of the province and for the
region as a whole. From this perspective, it is
important that the international community and the
Security Council find ways to convince the Kosovo
political leaders that respect for resolution 1244 (1999)
and the implementation of other constituent documents
for Kosovo are matters of crucial importance.

Mr. Guehenno spoke to us about the efforts of
UNMIK and of the Kosovar authorities to combat
organized crime and establish the rule of law. We
welcome success in this sphere, particularly the priority
being given to combating corruption and the trafficking
of human beings. These, in our View, are the major
problems in the province.

The other aspect that we deem important and
which Mr. Guehenno discussed in his briefing is the
economy. We have to realize that the return of refugees
will not be possible until the economic situation is
improved. This improvement involves economic
reforms and the creation of a trust agency and a trust
fund, which are extremely positive developments. I
would like to highlight one problem that remains and
that is the debt of enterprises to be privatized. In our
view, the debt problem of Kosovar enterprises should
be settled also by taking into account their obligations
to international creditors, or debts entered into before
1999.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the
position of my delegation and my country that the
Security Council should continue to consider regularly
the situation in Kosovo, and I would like to express my
thanks, Mr. President, for this being done during this
month.

