Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I would like to thank you, Madam President, for
organizing today's meeting on Afghanistan. China
listened carefully to the briefing provided by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, Mr. Haysom, and the statement made
by the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan,
Ambassador Saikal.

The year 2015 marks the starting point of the 10-
year transitional period in Afghanistan. Over the past
year, the National Unity Government made tremendous
efforts to promote national stability, promote economic
development, strengthen the rule of law and achieve
positive results, which should be acknowledged by the
international community. However, Afghanistan still
faces serious challenges in terms of reconstruction
and economic and social development. In addition,
the achievement of peace and prosperity remains a
long-term task that calls for the unremitting efforts of
the various sectors of Afghan society and the robust
support of the international community. I should like to
stress several points.

First, it is necessary to continue to help the
National Unity Government to strengthen its national
governance. Judging from its rule over the past year, the
Government is still pressing forward to explore its path
of national development, despite the many challenges
it faces. For that reason, the international community
should continue to provide support and assistance on
the basis of respect for the sovereignty, independence,
and territorial integrity of Afghanistan, and effectively
honour its commitment to assist Afghanistan, and
help the National Unity Government strengthen its
capacity for self-reliance. We hope that the different
sectors of Afghan society will grow in unity and
continue to prioritize the resolution of their differences
through dialogue and negotiation, and work together to
achieve national reconstruction and economic social
development.

Secondly, it is important to provide firm support
for the peace process in Afghanistan, to push for an
Afghan-led and -owned peace process and to achieve
broad and inclusive political reconciliation as the
ultimate way forward to resolve the Afghan question.
China calls upon the different factions in Afghanistan
to place the interests ofthe country and the people first,
and to resume negotiations as soon as possible. We hope
that the relevant countries will continue to provide
the conditions necessary for the resumption of talks
between the Afghan Government and the Taliban, and
to provide assistance in that connection. China is ready,
together with the countries concerned, to continue to
play a constructive role in Afghanistan's peace process
and to create platforms where the resumption of talks
can be facilitated.

Thirdly, it is imperative to improve the country's
current security situation, which remains fragile.
Armed clashes and terrorist activities, which have
resulted in serious casualties among civilians, are a
frequent occurrence. Countries in the region and the
international community should adhere to a common,
holistic and sustainable approach to security based on
cooperation, and help the Afghan Government build
capacity in that regard. They should also help the
country's security and police forces effectively deal
with all types of security threats and challenges. It
is necessary to promote the exchange of information
on counter-terrorism and border control, and to fight
terrorism, transnational crime and drug smuggling
jointly.

Fourthly, continuous efforts are required to bring
Afghanistan into the realm of regional cooperation.
China welcomes Afghanistan's membership to the
World Trade Organization and commends the positive
results achieved at the fifth ministerial meeting of the
Istanbul Process. China is ready to continue to work so
as to ensure that that mechanism plays a greater role
in Afghanistan's peace and reconstruction process.
Countries in the region and the international community
should continue to provide support and assistance to
Afghanistan in terms of transportation, infrastructure,
trade, investment, markets and tariffs, and should help
the country fully leverage its advantages in terms of
geography and resources with a view to enhancing
its capacity for sustainable self-development. China
welcomes Afghanistan's active participation in the Silk
Road Initiative and supports the fact that Afghanistan
may soon join the regional development tide.

As a neighbour to Afghanistan and a good friend of
the Afghan people, China has been a strong supporter
of Afghanistan's efforts to explore a development
path that takes into account its own conditions and
reflects the aspirations of its people. China has been
supporting Afghanistan's peace and reconstruction
process in our own way, including by providing support
and assistance based on the needs of the country.
Recently, China announced the provision of ¥/RMB
500 million in the form of gratis assistance, which will
be used towards the construction of housing. And in the
immediate aftermath of the recent earthquake, China
provided humanitarian relief, materials and emergency
cash assistance. China is ready, together with the
international community, to continue to work so that
Afghanistan may achieve durable peace and prosperity
as soon as possible.

