Mr. Zehnder (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
thank Sweden for convening this important debate.
The multiple crises that we were faced with in 2016
show how acutely necessary this debate is and how
important it is to draw lessons from the situation and
improve conflict prevention. Switzerland is pleased
that this debate is taking place in the presence of the
Secretary-General, and we support his call for the
strengthening of prevention. We would like in that
connection to make three remarks.

First, we need to invest more in United Nations
instruments aimed at preventing conflict and
maintaining peace. Those tools include the United
Nations Development Programme-Department
of Political Affairs Joint Programme on Building
National Capacities for Conflict Prevention and the
Peacebuilding Fund, which have produced excellent
results. The Department of Political Affairs entities in
charge of mediation and good offices, as well as special
political missions, play an important role. Nevertheless,
Switzerland regrets that those instruments are
chronically underfunded, and we remain firmly
committed to providing our political and financial
support to those key instruments.

Secondly, prevention is a responsibility to be
shared by all United Nations entities. That means
that all parts of the United Nations, including its
intergovernmental forums, need to conduct their work
within the framework of their respective mandates
with a preventive mindset, in line with the new notion
of peacekeeping endorsed by the Security Council
and the General Assembly. That calls for adopting a
proactive, inclusive, comprehensive and coordinated
approach to conflict, as well as for national ownership
of peacekeeping.

We need to work on our institutional measures in
order better to understand the links between peace and
security and between development and human rights.
The nexus between peace and security and human
rights has, in our view, particular potential with regard
to conflict prevention. Human rights violations can be
precursors that lead to conflicts. They can also indicate
potential instability or an escalation of conflict. We
must therefore step our efforts aimed at taking greater
advantage of that capacity. For that reason, Switzerland
launched the appeal of 13 June 2016 in the Human Rights
Council. The appeal is aimed at putting human rights at
the core of conflict prevention and is now supported
by 70 States. In that same regard, we firmly support
the Human Rights Up Front initiative and commend the
fact that the new Secretary-General will follow up with
efforts to that end.

That brings me to my third point, which is the role
of the Security Council. In resolution 2171 (2014), the
Council conveyed its determination to take effective
and rapid measures to prevent armed conflicts. We
stand ready to support the Council in its work aimed at
strengthening its capacities in the area of prevention.
In accordance with the appeal of 13 June, cooperation
between the Security Council and the Human Rights
Council is a central component. For example, the
members of the Security Council can request periodic
informational meetings with the High Commissioner
for Human Rights. They can use the reports of the
Human Rights Council and its various mechanisms
as a source of information and enhance cooperation
between the Security Council's subsidiary bodies and
the relevant mechanisms of the Human Rights Council.
More generally, we encourage the Security Council to
further reflect on the nature of the existing interlinkage
between its own mandate and activities and those of the
other parts of the United Nations system.

In order to strengthen prevention, partnerships,
for example, between local, national, regional and
international actors, or between States, organizations
and civil society, are crucial. Accordingly, Switzerland
will continue to work with entities committed to such
goals and stands ready to give its full support to the
Secretary-General in the context of a renewed effort to
prevent conflict.

