Mr. Adeniji: It is a great pleasure to be appearing
before the Security Council today. The Council has
been meeting under your able direction, Mr. President,
during a month of momentous activity. My appearance,
of course, is in connection with the presentation of the
tenth report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL),
document 8/2001/627.

Since my last opportunity to brief the Council on
UNAMSIL, on 14 February 2001, the Sierra Leone
peace process has witnessed changes that are
remarkable both in magnitude and in pattern of
development. A detailed account is contained in the
Secretary-General's report. I shall recall what I said on
the last occasion I addressed the Council in relation to
the Ceasefire Agreement signed at Abuja on 10
November 2000 between the Government of Sierra
Leone and the Revolutionary United Front (RUF). I
said on that occasion that the Agreement encompassed
not only undertakings relating to the cessation of
hostilities, but also other important elements, such as
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, which
obviously required more time than the 30 days
stipulated for the review of the Agreement.

Happily, in View of the fact that they were
enjoying the benefits of the cessation of hostilities,
which continued to hold, neither the Government of
Sierra Leone nor the RUF was anxious to resume
generalized armed conflict, notwithstanding the fact
that several other provisions of the Abuja Agreement
had not been implemented by the end of the 30 days.

Throughout this lull, UNAMSIL continued to
work closely with the Government of Sierra Leone. It
also intensified its contacts at several levels with the
RUF, aimed at building mutual confidence, exploring
ways to ensure progress on the provisions of the Abuja
Agreement, and making a realistic assessment of the
intentions of the RUF. That period also enabled
UNAMSIL to build up the strength of its troops from
the low level it hit after the withdrawal of two
contingents.

The combination of those activities and
consultations carried out by UNAMSIL, which
included the delicate consultations on Kambia, resulted
in such positive trends and signals that I considered it
appropriate to commence the process which ultimately
led to the holding of the review meeting on 2 May
2001 at Abuja, which we now refer to as "Abuja II".

In line with the decisions taken at that meeting,
UNAMSIL, the Government of Sierra Leone and the
RUF met again, in Freetown, on 15 May 2001 to
discuss the details of the practical implementation of
the resumption of the process of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration. Modalities for the
commencement of the simultaneous disarmament of the
RUF and the Civil Defence Force (CDF) in the Kambia
and Port Loko districts were agreed upon. The
operation was to commence on 18 May and was to last
10 days, and it was to be followed immediately by the
deployment of the new Sierra Leone army in Kambia.

Permit me to dwell a little on the significance of
the agreement concerning Kambia and its successful
implementation. Kambia was deliberately chosen in
order to tackle several problems at the same time - to
kill several birds with one stone. First, on disarmament,
it was to be the first positive proof that the RUF
genuinely meant their commitment to that programme;
they had assured us and UNAMSIL all along that they
were deeply committed to it. The turnout and
disarmament of RUF combatants in the Kambia district
on 18 May - beginning with the brigade commander
himself, whom I personally disarmed - was indeed an
impressive show of commitment. The CDF - the other
militia group, which is allied to the Government of
Sierra Leone - whose turnout at the beginning on 18
May was rather lacklustre and was a disappointment to
us - obviously felt challenged when they heard, from
their own leaders whom I had taken with me to witness
the disarmament of the RUF, how the RUF had turned
out and how they had disarmed and carried out the
exercise. Thereafter, they took the programme
seriously.

Secondly, the deployment of the Sierra Leone
army in Kambia after the evacuation by UNAMSIL of
the disarmed RUF forces was to stop RUF incursions
into Guinea, which had provoked massive retaliatory
attacks by Guinea. The uneventful deployment of the
Sierra Leone army justified my insistence that it could
be done without what, in retrospect, could have been a
very, very bloody battle with unpredictable results.
That had been the plan: to send the newly trained
Sierra Leone army against the RUF. I opposed that,
because I thought that the new Sierra Leone army was
very much untried and untested and that it would be a
very sad mistake to expose them in that way. We then
found, when we went to Kambia to disarm the RUF,
that in fact the numbers of RUF combatants in that
district had been so grossly underestimated that, sadly,
there would have been disastrous consequences.

Thirdly, the presence of an arm of Government
such as the army in the Kambia district, for the first
time since the RUF occupied that area about four years
ago, was to represent a major step in the extension of
the Government's authority.

Fourthly, these three earlier reasons for going into
Kambia were intended to address a subregional
dimension of the Sierra Leone conflict. In accordance
with the plan, the removal of the RUF and deployment
of the Sierra Leone army ensured the security of the
Sierra Leone-Guinea border in that area. It thus
removed one of the flashpoints in the Mano River
Union conflict. It also created a secure corridor for a
possible overland return of Sierra Leonean refugees
from Guinea, whose plight, of course, had been of
serious concern to the international community, with
various plans being proposed, none of which,
unfortunately, ever worked.

Fifthly, and lastly - and this was one of the
consequences that neither I nor any of my colleagues in
UNAMSIL had foreseen - the success of the Kambia
operation precipitated the unexpected urge of Sierra
Leoneans in the other border area of Sierra Leone with
Guinea - that is, in the Kono district - to wish to
return immediately to their own districts. This has
since occasioned the leapfrogging of the disarmament
programme into the Kono district. It has thrown out of
gear the plan that the secretariat of the National
Commission on Disarmament, Demobilization and
Reintegration had made.

The decision of the joint tripartite committee of
the Government of Sierra Leone, the RUF and
UNAMSIL, at its meeting of 2 June, to commence
disarmament in the Kono district, and to associate with
Kono the Bonthe district for the CDF, had to be in
response to that development, which as I said, was
unforeseen. The delay in the implementation is clear
evidence that the disarmament programme has become,
one could say, a victim of its own successful
relaunching. With disarmament in Kono not envisaged
until towards the end of the whole programme, no
facility for the programme exists in Kono, or even near
Kono. It is now being constructed and should be ready
in a couple of days, on 30 June. Thus, I envisage the
formal commencement of the disarmament programme
in Kono, as well as in Bonthe, on 1 July.

Meanwhile, in the course of this month of June,
we have continued the final phase of disarmament in
the Port Loko district, which, again, had to be delayed,
because no camp was available in which to keep the
combatants. As of yesterday, the total figure of
disarmed combatants since the relaunching of the
programme on 18 May stands at 6,342, which consists
of 2,004 RUF, 4,210 CDF and 128 remnants of the
Sierra Leonean army and the Armed Forces Ruling
Council.

Considerable progress has also been made in
other aspects of the peace process, which thus
strengthens the general perception in Sierra Leone that
peace is at last in sight. Most of the roads in the
country have been reopened and are free of security-
related roadblocks, hitherto erected by the RUF and the
CDF. This has considerably improved humanitarian
access and the resumption of humanitarian operations
by agencies and organizations.

On 26 June, a multidisciplinary team, led by
UNAMSIL, and composed of representatives of United
Nations agencies and the Sierra Leone National
Commission for Resettlement, Rehabilitation and
Reconstruction, conducted an assessment of the
humanitarian needs in the Kono and Kailahun districts,
even in advance of the disarmament programme in
those areas. This is indicative of the forward planning
that the general improvement within the country has
made possible.

The release of child combatants and other
abducted children, including females, has also
continued. The number of released today stands at
1,215. Of these, 1,062 were released by the RUF and
153 by the CDF.

The expansion of Government authority
throughout the country is being actively pursued, with
the advice and support of UNAMSIL. The Mission has
also continued to promote confidence-building
measures in order to encourage Government
functionaries, including ministers, to go to areas which,
up until the present time, have been under the
domination of the RUF, and vice versa. This has
considerably reduced mutual suspicion and virtually
stopped the RUF's questioning of the authority of the
Government. For its part, the Government has begun to
make concrete gestures, such as the process that will
lead to the recruitment of some RUF combatants into
the Sierra Leone army.

Of course, more will need to be done in
recognition and encouragement of the present RUF
leadership's demonstrated commitment to the peace
process. In this connection, the Government of Sierra
Leone will meet to devise ways of absorbing qualified
elements of the RUF into other arms of Government
besides the army. It will also need to start the release of
the RUF elements other than the co-leadership, of
course, who have been in detention since May 2000. In
addition, the Government will have to take further
measures to encourage the transformation of the RUF
into a political party, fully committed to making
whatever contribution it can within the political setting.

For its part, the international community will
need to step up its support for the rapidly evolving
peace process. The disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) programme, as emphasized in the
tenth report of the Secretary-General, will run out of
funds in August unless the $31 million in additional
funding, which is required, starts coming into the
World Bank's multi-donor trust fund. The donors'
conference on the programme, which was convened in
Paris on 11 and 12 June 2001, was encouraging in the
unanimous applauding of the important strides that
have been made. However, this, unfortunately, did not
immediately result in definite financial pledges.

It cannot be overemphasized that the greatest
danger that could disrupt the progress currently being
made is a mishandling of the DDR programme. Funds
have to be available to provide the facilities for the
programme; funds have to be available to take care of
incentives for the combatants; and funds have to be
available to assure provision of reintegration packages.
In that context, therefore, the Security Council may
wish to back up the efforts of the Secretary-General to
encourage donors to take urgent follow-up steps to the
Paris conference and for them to convey firm pledges
to the Sierra Leone DDR trust fund, which is being
managed by the World Bank. If the response is not
quick enough, the Council, in my view, may be called
upon for an alternative source of funding.
UNAMSIL's increased role in the programme has
placed it at centre court, to use a tennis expression
during this week of Wimbledon. It would be totally
incomprehensible if the international community were
not able to provide the relatively modest amount that is
required for this programme when that amount is
compared with what is being spent on peacekeeping.
The Sierra Leonean people would just not understand.

So far, UNAMSIL has maintained a decision
which it arrived at jointly with the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the
Government of Sierra Leone as far back as
November - when the first meeting was held, to agree
on the Abuja Ceasefire Agreement - not to discuss
political issues with the RUF. Since then, at the
subsequent meetings, we have held to that position.
The position was to ensure progress in the decisions of
the first and second Abuja meetings.

Given the present progress, it will become
difficult to maintain that position. Indeed, as I was told
by the Chairman of ECOWAS, President Konare of
Mali, and President Obasanjo of Nigeria, at their
bilateral consultation in Abuja on 18 June, that both
ECOWAS and UNAMSIL must henceforth be prepared
to focus on political issues which, from the information
that the two Presidents said was available to them, the
RUF would begin to raise at subsequent meetings. The
issues that would arise suddenly would concern the
governance of the country after the expiration of the
six-month extension of the Government on 30
September this year, the extent of the transition period
before elections and the date of the elections.

In the political vision announced by the
Government of Sierra Leone, elections are to be held in
December 2001 in accordance with the strategic plan of
the National Electoral Commission. There are many
doubts as to the feasibility of that date. Besides, the
Government's vision is silent on the issue of the period
after September and before the elections. These and
other related issues - such as the nature of the
electoral system to be adopted, assurance that a large
segment of Sierra Leoneans, notably refugees and
displaced persons, are not to be disenfranchised,
linkage between the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) programme and elections - will
all draw attention in the coming period. I hope that
consultations will be held between us and ECOWAS
and the Government of Sierra Leone, as has been the
case.

In conclusion, at a time when there is a general
feeling of the dawn of peace in Sierra Leone, it is
heartening to note the commencement of the
demonstration of this period of reconciliation and
national healing. The experiment of lodging together
disarmed RUF and CDF combatants in the same DDR
facility was spontaneously repeated by the two groups
in Kono, when, in what they termed a gesture of the
feeling that the war is over, according to them, these
two opposing groups received each other in their
reciprocal camps in visits which they called overnight
visits of brotherhood.

The Government of Sierra Leone, and the
President personally, are in the forefront of promoting
this process of reconciliation. UNAMSIL, as indicated
in the report of the Secretary-General, has been playing
a leading role also. With the continuing consensus by
all sections of Sierra Leonean society, including the
RUF, as to the value of a Truth and Reconciliation
Commission, we in UNAMSIL have been making
intensified efforts for the establishment of that
Commission. The High Commissioner for Human
Rights and I, as selection coordinators, have advanced
in the process of identifying the commissioners. I do
hope that the relatively modest amount that will be
required for the operation of the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission will be quickly donated so
that the Commission can commence operations as fast
as possible. It is certainly desirable, as many Sierra
Leoneans have expressed, that priority of operation
should be given to the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission. This priority is the desire of many Sierra
Leoneans.

Finally, may I express my appreciation for the
continued support which members of this Council have
always given to UNAMSIL, even in the darkest days,
as it were, of the Mission. I think that the unflinching
support of the Council gave a lot of courage not only to
UNAMSIL but also to the people of Sierra Leone to
persist in the efforts which have led us to where we are
now.

May I also express particular appreciation to the
countries that have contributed troops on the ground.
Despite the problem of their small numbers - which
we still have, because the expansion that the Council
accorded to UNAMSIL recently has really not been
translated physically on the ground, and we are still
awaiting the Pakistani battalions - the troops on the
ground, under the very capable and inspired leadership
of the Force Commander, Lieutenant-General Daniel
Opande, whom I have the pleasure of having with me
here for this briefing session, have been willing to
exert themselves, perhaps sometimes beyond the call of
duty. This is what has enabled us to handle the Kono
incident in the way that it was handled, because we
really do not have a deployment as such in Kono. It
was not part of our deployment plan at this time,
because of the lack of troops. This is the area we have
reserved for the additional troops that were coming.
But with some degree of foresight on our part, and with
a lot of push by the Force Commander, a device had
been worked out whereby we have a permanent
rotating presence in Kono assured by part of the
Bangladeshi contingent. I must say here that that
presence 4 the presence of those two companies -
made all the difference in the manner in which Kono,
which everyone had thought was taboo and a no-go
area, had been handled.

