Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General, Martin Griffiths, for his
detailed briefing on the recent round of intra-Yemeni
consultations held in Sweden, as well as to Under-
Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for his overview of
the humanitarian situation in the Republic of Yemen.
We thank the Government of Sweden for its assistance
in preparing and holding these extremely important
negotiations, and we welcome the new Permanent
Representative of Yemen to the United Nations.
Like many other members of the Security Council,

we would like to believe that in the light ofthe agreements
arrived at in Stockholm, we are entering a new stage in
the conflict in Yemen. We hope that through further
concerted efforts we can establish a ceasefire throughout
the country and help the millions of Yemeni civilians in
dire need of one kind or another of aid and who are
starving and have no access to the necessary medical
treatment and medicines. Mr. Lowcock's briefing gives
a clear picture of the scale of the humanitarian crisis in
Yemen, now the worst in the world. The Rubicon that
we have reached as a result of the process launched
in Sweden must now be crossed. That will hinge on
implementing the agreements reached during the first
round of the intra-Yemeni consultations. We must all
give the Special Envoy our collective support.

We believe that the first task is facilitating the
implementation of the ceasefire agreement and the
withdrawal of troops from Al-Hudaydah port and city.
Success in that area is important not only to advancing
the de-escalation process throughout the country but
also to ensuring the sustained delivery of humanitarian
and commercial cargo to Yemen's northern regions,
where the majority of the country's population is living.
We must also assist as much as we possibly can, with
United Nations participation, in establishing a bilateral
coordination committee to monitor the disengagement
of forces in Al-Hudaydah. We believe this part of the
agreement package is critical to Mr. Griffiths' further
mediation efforts including in the context of the holding
of a new round of talks early next year.

We welcome the other important mutual
understandings that will help to bring the parties to the
conflict to a new level of dialogue and trust, achieved
with Mr. Griffiths' active coordination. This applies
to the agreements on the exchange of thousands of
prisoners of war, which will be implemented before
the end of January 2019 under the oversight of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, and on the
modalities for resuming oil and gas exports.

We would like to highlight the Special envoy's
enormous professionalism and the Secretary-General's
personal contribution to the successful completion of
the Stockholm talks. Russia has also contributed to
facilitating progress in the intra-Yemeni negotiation
process in its national capacity, as a permanent member
of the Security Council and as a member of the Group
of 19. In our View, the support to Mr. Griffiths'
efforts in Sweden provided by representatives of the
international community was virtually ideal. We felt
that the cohesive efforts of the five permanent members
of the Security Council were particularly helpful to the
Special Envoy at critical moments, and we think this
effective assistance format should be made permanent.

Some equally important issues remain unresolved,

however, specifically regarding the economic front and
the airport in Sana'a, and which the Yemenis will have
to agree on in subsequent negotiation rounds. Needless
to say, the prospects for their resolution depend a great
deal on maintaining the political will of the conflicting
parties to implement the agreements that have already
been reached. Our shared goal is to keep the political
process afloat so that it is the political dialogue that
sets the tone for the developments on the ground rather
than the other way around. That is the only way to
make progress in ending this bloody war, which has
done colossal damage to Yemen's economy and people.
We have the power to remedy the situation. We must
act collectively. We call for further joint efforts in
support of United Nations efforts in Yemen. There can
be no military solution to the conflict there, and the
sole priority must be focusing on the Yemeni people's
interests.

Russia is open to cooperation in settling the
conflict in Yemen as well as in advancing peace and
stability throughout the Middle East. We consider
Russia's concept for security and cooperation in the
Persian Gulf - and, ultimately, the entire Middle
East - very relevant. We will continue our efforts to
implement it in consultation with all interested parties.
We firmly believe that it will enable us to exchange the
atmosphere of threat and confrontation in the region for
one of dialogue and cooperation.

