Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I welcome Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta and ask him
to convey our greetings to the other representatives of
the people of a State that we hope will very soon
become a Member of the United Nations. My special
thanks go to Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello not only for
his excellent introduction of the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2002/80) but also for the fine
work that he and his team have done and are continuing
to do in East Timor. Their work is the basis of the
success that we are all hailing today.

As an associated State of the European Union,
Bulgaria fully supports the statement that the Spanish
presidency of the Union will make later today. I should
like now to make some very brief comments in my
national capacity. First, Bulgaria welcomes the
unquestionable success of East Timor for the United
Nations and the international community. That country,
with its nascent democracy, is on the right path. That is
not to minimize the enormous difficulties it will have
to confront. Others have spoken of these today: sources
of concern include the fragile security situation and the
question of the return of refugees.

But my delegation has no doubt that on 20 May a
new State and prospective Member of the United
Nations will be born. To be sure, the presidential
elections set for 14 April will be a moment of truth for
this nascent democracy. But 20 May will see the birth
of the new State. It is my country's position that United
Nations involvement cannot cease on 20 May. The
challenges facing East Timor are of such magnitude
that we cannot afford to disengage the Organization
from that country at such a crucial moment in its
history.

Bulgaria believes that the United Nations must
deploy the full range of its agencies and its capacities
to foster true success in building the new State. In that
connection, the proposals of the Secretary-General set
out in the annex to his report (S/2002/80) are entirely
consistent with our wishes. These, of course, need to be
more clearly spelled out before independence.

Accordingly, Bulgaria will give its full support to
the draft resolution now being prepared. Here, we
thank the delegations of Singapore and of the United
Kingdom for their work. We shall vote in favour of
extending the mandate of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor until 20
May.

