Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the delegation of France for having
organized today's meeting on the timely theme of
United Nations peacekeeping operations. We welcome
the participation of the Secretary-General, the Under-
Secretaries-General and the leaders of three important
United Nations missions. We listened carefully to their
assessments.

Russia attaches the highest importance to the role
of United Nations peacekeeping in maintaining
international peace and security, and seeks to build up
its capabilities for peacekeeping operations. United
Nations peacekeeping is now more necessary than ever,
and it is quite possible that the demand for
peacekeepers will only grow.

United Nations peacekeeping operations are
undergoing not only quantitative but also qualitative
changes with the growing complexity of peacekeeping
mandates. Many peacekeeping operations are given a
whole range of varied duties, such as helping to
advance political settlements, monitoring compliance
with peace agreements and identifying tasks to
strengthen national capacities. In addition to military
and political stabilization in zones of conflict,
peacekeepers also provide support to security sector
reform, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration,
the building of durable governing institutions and the
completion of other complex tasks of State-building.

The challenge before us is how to further improve
the work of United Nations peacekeeping. Addressing
that challenge will require our collective efforts and
productive cooperation among the Security Council,
General Assembly and Secretariat. A major line of
action should be aimed at increasing the effectiveness
of United Nations peacekeeping operations. They
should be undertaken in strict conformity with the
Charter of the United Nations, with unfailing respect
for the Security Council's primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security. That is
the political guarantee of the successful conduct of
peacekeeping operations.

The lack of financial, logistical and technical
resources dictates the need to enhance the quality of
management of peacekeeping operations and to make
optimal use of existing potential in that respect. A
relevant issue is the need to ensure the effective
transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding
functions for the purpose of consolidating stabilization
achievements.

It is important to clearly delineate between
peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities, which
should be clearly defined in mandates. United Nations
peacekeepers should be given only initial recovery
duties, while, for peacebuilding processes and
interventions of a purely socio-economic nature, we
should more actively involve United Nations
specialized agencies, regional and subregional
organizations and the donor community.

In developing and adopting peacebuilding
decisions, we need to consider the interests of all
parties, respect the sovereignty of States and encourage
national responsibility for implementing relevant
programmes. Such programmes must be implemented
solely with the consent and in coordination with
national Governments.

The problem of ensuring the required level of
military expertise in the Council's peacekeeping
decisions deserves particular attention. We believe that,
along with related initiatives, it remains relevant to
consider the Russian proposal on reinvigorating the
work of the Military Staff Committee, with a full
complement of 15 Council members and the flexible
involvement of leading troop-contributing countries.
The assessments of the Committee with regard to the
situation in countries where peacekeeping operations
exist, its recommendations on operational aspects of
peacekeeping and its participation in and cooperation
with the Secretariat in missions and in defining the
preparedness of contingents and the infrastructure of
peacekeeping operations would provide the Council
with reliable and timely information and build up the
military expertise of United Nations peacekeeping.

The scope of the challenges to contemporary
peacekeeping requires effective interaction between the
United Nations and regional organizations. Experience
has shown that more active use of the potential of
regional organizations and subregional mechanisms is
justified so long as they operate in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and their relations with the Organization, and
with the Security Council in particular, are governed
by the provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter.

Good opportunities for establishing cooperation
with the United Nations in the area of peacekeeping are
emerging as a result of the establishment of the
peacekeeping capabilities of the Collective Security
Treaty Organizations (CSTO). The upcoming adoption,
on the initiative of Russia and other CSTO members,
of a General Assembly resolution on cooperation
between the United Nations and the CSTO will provide
further impetus in that regard.

Of particular significance is the development of
strategies for the drawdown of peacekeeping
operations once their Security Council mandates have
been implemented. We believe that a discussion on the
exit of operations and a transition from peacekeeping
operations to other types of United Nations presences
will help us to address this challenge.

We were interested to acquaint ourselves with our
partner's concept paper (S/2010/67) on the theme
"United Nations peacekeeping operations: Transition
and exit strategies". We believe that a wide range of its
ideas and concepts could serve as a reasonable basis
for further discussion aimed at achieving concrete
results. Of course, the major criterion in planning such
strategies must be to ensure that peacekeepers create
favourable conditions for advancing the process of
political settlement.

We thank the delegation of France for preparing
the draft presidential statement to be adopted today. We
also appreciate the flexibility and constructiveness
shown by colleagues in discussing the draft statement,
which is a substantive and useful document.

