Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I
wish at the outset to welcome Their Excellencies the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Serbia and of Kosovo,
Mr. Jeremie and Mr. Hyseni, and to thank them for
their important contributions to this debate. I also
thank Mr. Zannier, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for all the information he has
provided in the framework of the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2008/692).

First of all, we note with satisfaction the relative
calm that continues to prevail in Kosovo. We are
pleased to note that since the declaration of
independence no major crisis has occurred, despite the
fact that a number of difficulties remain to be resolved.

We welcome the efforts of the Kosovo
authorities, who continue to work to establish viable
institutions, making it possible to exercise the
prerogatives of a sovereign State, despite resistance
here and there and a boycott of the new administration
by a small minority of the population, in particular in
the north. The resulting tension is minor, but it should
not be minimized. That is why we appreciate the joint
efforts of the police of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the
Kosovo Force (KFOR), which have made it possible to
maintain calm thus far.

It is clear that Kosovo's declaration of
independence, followed by the adoption of its
constitution, has greatly changed the situation in the
region. Hence, we endorse the Secretary-General's
initiative to reconfigure the international civil presence
on the basis of the provisions of resolution 1244
(1999). This should enable the European Union to play
a larger role in Kosovo, through the European Union
Rule of Law Mission (EULEX).

We are sure that EULEX can contribute a great
deal to consolidating UNMIK's achievements, and we
can only welcome the agreements entered into between
UNMIK and the European Union Mission on
facilitating EULEX's deployment in Kosovo.

We welcome the dialogue on the six key points
that has begun in Belgrade and Pristina, involving all
the parties and under the auspices of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. We stress,
however, the importance of taking account of the views
expressed by the Kosovo authorities, including in their
sovereign statement of 18 November (see S/2008/692, annex I).
In addition to support for the Kosovo authorities
in the key areas of security, rule of law, protection of
cultural and religious heritage, integration and the
protection of minorities, it is important also to support
the country's socio-economic development efforts:
pillars which are vital to strengthen stability.

Since both parties aspire to integration into the
great European family, the Republics of Kosovo and
Serbia should overcome their differences and give top
priority to what is essential: stability, security and
prosperity in Kosovo, in Serbia and throughout the
Balkans.

In conclusion, we express our thanks to UNMIK,
KFOR and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe for their joint efforts, which
have made it possible to maintain stability in Kosovo.
We thank the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative, who is present in the Chamber, for
their initiatives aimed at bringing the views of all the
parties closer together. We urge them, together with the
European Union, to continue on the path towards a
lasting solution that is acceptable to all the parties.

