Mr. Ntsoane (South Africa): Thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting on the
humanitarian situation in Yemen. We would also like to
thank the briefers for their remarks. My delegation would
like to address three points today - the implementation
of the Stockholm Agreement, the humanitarian situation
and the impact of the conflict in Yemen on women and
especially on children.

First, with respect to the Stockholm Agreement,
South Africa is encouraged that the Agreement
continues to hold despite its many challenges. We urge
the parties to fully implement it, as it remains the only
hope for bringing peace and stability to Yemen. We also
welcome this morning's announcement that both parties
have accepted the redeployment plan. We are sorry to
have to note the recent clashes around Al-Hudaydah,
which are the most intense that we have seen since
the signing of the Stockholm Agreement. We urge all
the parties to refrain from further escalation and call
for a resumption of the exchange of prisoners and the
statement of understanding on Taiz, as the Stockholm
Agreement requires, and other confidence-building
measures. It is also vital that all parties redeploy their
forces from Al-Hudaydah. That requires a political
solution with compromises on the part of all the parties
concerned. We are encouraged that neither side has
sought to seize new territory in Al-Hudaydah so far.
We are also encouraged by the positive developments
on the ground, including the recent session of Yemen's
House of Representatives, the first in more than four
years to convene more than 130 parliamentarians.

Secondly, it is clear that the humanitarian situation
remains dire. South Africa continues to call on all the
parties to respect international humanitarian law and
protect the safety and security of humanitarian workers
in order to ensure the delivery of humanitarian aid.
Where there have been reported violations, we call for
independent investigations. Furthermore, we call on
all the parties to the conflict to take tangible steps to
address the country's humanitarian crisis, particularly
the risks of famine and another cholera outbreak.
We further appeal to the donors to work urgently to
disburse pledges made to the humanitarian response
plan in order to address the humanitarian situation on
the ground.

Thirdly and importantly, on the issue of the safety
of women and children, we welcome the signing of a
memorandum of understanding to develop a programme
of activities in the next two months to strengthen the
protection of children. South Africa is encouraged
by those positive steps and looks forward to seeing
further steps to strengthen child protection. It is also
important that the memorandum of understanding be
fully implemented to ensure the safety and security of
vulnerable groups. Despite that positive commitment,
we were appalled at the reports ofthe killing ofcivilians,
including four children, on 26 March in an explosion
near two schools in Sana'a, and again on 7 April, in
which 14 children died. Schools should be places of
learning and should never be targeted during a conflict.
Children are among the most vulnerable members of
society. Our collective conscience cannot allow us to
condone such acts and we therefore condemn these
attacks on children. We call on all the parties to the
conflict to put in place measures to ensure that such
incidents are never repeated in future. South Africa
also calls for the perpetrators to be listed accurately in
the Secretary-General's annual report on children and
armed conflict, in line with United Nations practices.

In conclusion, my delegation continues to call for a
peaceful, Yemeni-led solution to the conflict. It is our
hope that the sum of the positive momentum gained
with the discussions in Stockholm and the signing of
the Agreement will lead to further progress on the
political front. The differences in Yemen cannot be
solved militarily and will only be further exacerbated
as this avoidable conflict continues. The current talks
are hampered by the continued fighting, which is not
conducive to building trust, the first step in creating
a negotiated settlement. If the status quo remains, the
international community will have failed the people,
particularly the children, of Yemen.

