We thank Under-Secretary-General Voronkov and Assistant Secretary- General Coninsx for their comprehensive briefings, which introduced fresh findings as contained in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/774) on the threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and its affiliates. Estonia notes that the command-and-control arrangements between the ISIL core and its so-called provinces are loosening. Further, the ongoing pandemic has resulted in travel restrictions, which, according to the report, have complicated terrorist planning and operations, making it harder for terrorists to move, recruit and raise funds. In the light of those changes, it is encouraging to hear that at least temporarily, the direct threat posed by terrorism appears to have decreased in various regions across the globe. However, we must remain vigilant. We appreciate the role played by the European Union Agency for Criminal Justice Cooperation and the European Union Agency for Law Enforcement Cooperation in combating all forms of terrorism in European Union and beyond, and we welcome the increased cooperation of those agencies with the United Nations. Despite the aforementioned positive developments, we remain concerned about conflict-affected areas where ISIL continues to undermine regional security. As such, we note that compared with last year, attacks have increased in ISIL core areas, in both Syria and Iraq. Estonia further recognizes the threat posed by the Islamic State in the Greater Sahara. That organization continues to mount attacks on international security forces as well as local communities in the tri-border area of Mali, Burkina Faso and the Niger. In those areas, terrorism is closely interlinked with other forms of communal violence. Therefore, in order to address extremism and terrorism, we need a holistic approach that could build truly resilient communities. Greater attention must be given to lowering intercommunal tensions and nurturing political reconciliation. Such activities often start at the grass-roots level. Finally, the question of accountability and denying impunity to the perpetrators of crimes against civilians is an essential part of countering terrorism. It is also vital to healing communities, restoring trust and creating the conditions for sustainable peace.
