Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Salame for his
briefing today and for the excellent work that he and his
staffare doing on the ground. I also once again thank him
for facilitating last week's important, indeed historic,
visit by the members of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya.

We read the reports and our cables but nothing
can really replace a field visit. Last week, I was in
Tripoli for less than two days but that was enough to
realize how the spike in violence in Tripoli at the end
of August and in September had really shattered the
capital and put the country on the brink of collapse.
The windows of the oil company were blown out by
rockets and the building remains with glaring holes as
a symbol of fragility. If it were not for the mediation
efforts of the United Nations, and of course the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, the situation
could have easily spiralled out of control and we could
have seen a return to 2014.

Hopefully, that is now a signal to those who thrive
and hold on to the status quo that that is not tenable.
The ceasefire, as well as the recently announced
security agreement in Tripoli, must now be effectively
implemented. We urge all parties to end hostilities,
refrain from further destabilizing threats or actions and
protect civilians.

The crisis at the end of August should also be a
wake-up call for us all and serve as a turning point for
the political process. We all agree that only through
political solutions can there be sustainable peace in
Libya. The Libyans themselves must of course own the
political process. However, active international support

and unity are needed. The facilitating role of the United
Nations is critical in that regard.

Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Salame's determined efforts to use his good offices
and promote reconciliation and dialogue between the
east and the west, as well as the intention to expand
the presence of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya to the eastern part of the country, should be
commended. All international and regional partners
need to unite in fully backing the United Nations
efforts.

We welcome Mr. Salame's plans, as he outlined
to us today, to prepare for a national conference at
the beginning of next year. The upcoming conference
can provide an important opportunity to find a way
out of the current protracted transition and to promote
conditions for free and fair elections. My United
Kingdom colleague rightly pointed to the virtue of
inclusivity at the national conference.

We must therefore now urge all Libyan actors to
engage responsibly and constructively in the process
and work together in a spirit of peaceful compromise.
The House of Representatives, for its part, must honour
its commitment to ensuring a legal framework for
elections. The elections must in turn be thoroughly
prepared to ensure that the necessary conditions are in
place, and all parties should recommit to respecting the
election results.

The recent crisis also provides an opportunity to
address some of the underlying root causes. Economic
issues underpin the conflict, and there is little chance
to make progress unless serious efforts are undertaken.
Predatory economic practices and profiteering for
personal gain must be more effectively countered.
Economic reforms are also critical to ensure a fairer
and more equitable distribution of resources. Recent
initiatives are encouraging. However, more needs to
be done to enhance transparency and accountability,
fight corruption and promote the unity of the financial
institutions. I met with some key new ministers in charge
of finances and internal affairs who seem to understand
all the challenges and to be committed to starting work
to address them. They need to be supported.

To restore stability, there is an urgent need to
establish functioning and unified security institutions.
Security-sector reform and further efforts to build
professional armed forces and police should be
apriority.
Any sustainable political solution in Libya will
require the full and equal participation of women. We
stress the importance of women being engaged at all
stages and levels of the political process. For instance,
women should be adequately represented in the Libyan
delegations to the upcoming Palermo conference and
have seats at the table.

Continued reports of human rights violations and
abuses, including sexual and gender-based violence,
are of deep concern. The widespread abuses in prisons,
detention facilities and migrant centres are unacceptable
and must be stopped, as the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General rightly pointed out. We welcome
the introduction of sexual and gender-based violence as
a separate listing criterion for sanctions in resolution
2441 (2018), adopted earlier.

The sanctions Committee's visit to Libya on
1 and 2 November was the first of its kind since the
adoption of the sanctions regime in 2011. It provided
the opportunity to obtain first-hand information
from various counterparts, receive briefings on the
political transition and security situation, review
the implementation of sanctions and strengthen the
engagement and cooperation with the Panel of Experts.
I hope that the planned visit to the eastern part of the
country that had to be postponed this time can be
carried out soon.

The aim of the sanctions is to advance peace,
security and stability. In 2018, seven individuals were
added to the sanctions list for engaging in acts that meet
the sanctions designation criteria, including violations
of international human rights law and international
humanitarian law, attacks against oil installations and
attempts to export oil illegally. This shows the readiness
of the sanctions Committee to use this tool in pursuit of
peace and stability and to protect the broader interests
of the Libyan people.

The illegal flow of arms continues to fuel the
conflict and cause suffering to the civilian population.
In my meeting with President Serraj, he pointed to
reported violations of the arms embargo. All United
Nations Members must do more to fully implement the
sanctions, including the arms embargo, and the Council
needs to act on reported violations. We remain open
to further use of the sanctions instrument, including
against those who seek to obstruct the United Nations-
facilitated process.

Upholding the sanctions regime is also crucial
to helping ensure that Libya's natural resources are
protected and properly managed for the benefit of the
Libyan people. This applies also to the country's frozen
assets. As Chair, as well as in our national capacity, we
have listened carefully to Libya's concerns regarding
the management of frozen funds. We have actively
pursued a way forward on this issue in discussions with
other members of the sanctions Committee, Libyan
representatives in New York and now in Tripoli, and
the entities whose assets are frozen.

I am encouraged by the readiness expressed by
Libya to continue its dialogue with the World Bank to
start finding a way forward on this issue, even if only
a partial one. We stand ready to continue supporting
that process.

The people of Libya want peace; they want security;
and they want a brighter future for their children. The
main conclusion from my visit last week is that the
status quo is untenable. The recent crisis was a close
call. We are now at a time when momentum should
be seized to break the impasse and firmly put Libya
back on a credible path towards peace and unity. The
Council, the wider United Nations membership and
regional organizations have a common strategic interest
in Libya reaching a political solution.

From almost every situation on our agenda, we
know that unity in the Council and among the main
regional players and neighbouring countries is a key
element for success. We must therefore stand united
and rally behind the United Nations-facilitated process.
The high-level conference to be held in Palermo next
week will provide an opportunity in this regard.

