Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I join previous
speakers in congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council and also in
congratulating Ambassador Gunter Pleuger and the
German delegation for their excellent work during their
presidency of the Council during the very busy month
of April.

I should like also to express appreciation to
Mr. Danilo Turk for his comprehensive presentation,
for the progress achieved in the Bougainville peace
process and for the good prospects for tackling the
challenges ahead.

My delegation welcomes the progress achieved in
the three crucial areas of the Bougainville peace
process: the disposal of weapons, the constitutional
process and the future political status of the
Bougainville islands. We noted with satisfaction that
the third stage of the weapons disposal plan is moving
forward satisfactorily, and we hope that this process
can be concluded by the end of June, thereby ensuring
a Bougainville free of weapons and the sustainability
of the peace process.

The delegation of police functions and powers
pursuant to the Bougainville Peace Agreement, the
strengthening of the law and justice sector and public
administration, and the progress made in the
negotiation of a draft constitution for the autonomous
Bougainville Government are remarkable achievements
to be credited to the people of Papua New Guinea and
to the Bougainvilleans. While the progress attained is
encouraging, the successful implementation of the
Bougainville Peace Agreement will require further
efforts to conclude the constitutional process and to
create a level of security conducive to the holding of
elections. In this regard, we commend the efforts
deployed by the Government of Papua New Guinea
and its commitment to implementing the Bougainville
Peace Agreement.

At this crucial stage of the peace process,
economic and social development is among the
priorities for the achievement of a lasting and
sustainable peace. We encourage the donor community
to assist Bougainville in creating the needed
infrastructure and opportunities for economic recovery
and development in order to support autonomy and
strengthen peace and prosperity for all. The role played
by the international community, and particularly by the
neighbouring countries, in providing financial and
technical support for post-conflict peace-building and
the development of Bougainville is to be commended.

In the present context, the United Nations
Observer Mission in Bougainville enjoys the best
political conditions for continuing to assist the
Government of Papua New Guinea and Bougainville to
fully implement the Peace Agreement, to hold elections
and to achieve the ultimate goal of the establishment of
an autonomous Government in Bougainville. My
delegation is confident that the United Nations
Observer Mission in Bougainville will continue to
work closely with the United Nations Development
Programme and other United Nations bodies to
advance the peace-building process in Bougainville.

