Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): First and foremost, we would like to join the
expressions of heartfelt congratulations to the United
States on presiding over last month's deliberations and
to Uruguay for assuming this month's presidency.

We read the thirteenth report of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) Prosecutor on the investigation
of the situation in Libya. We see from the content that
progress 11 the main tracks ofthe Libyan dossier remains
weak. It would be hard to consider the unsealing of an
arrest warrant of Al-Tuhamy Mohamed Khaled, handed
down four years ago, as significant progress. Indeed,
it is probably further evidence that the ICC continues
to stick to a lopsided approach, focusing on only one
side of the conflict in 2011. Actual steps to investigate
the action of other sides remain absent over the past six
years. Not a single investigation has been opened on the
alleged crimes of the rebels. The Prosecutor continues
to demonstratively and without clear explanation shy
away from the consideration of the matter of civilian
casualties as a result of NATO strikes.

Regarding the situation in Libya after 2011, it is
surprising that the document lacks even the slightest hint
of an investigation of crimes committed by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), while previous
reports affirmed that such an analysis was being
conducted. Alongside ISIL in Libya, there are other
terrorist organizations listed by the Security Council.
That raises the question as to whether, from the point
of view of the Prosecutor, the atrocities committed by
those terrorists are not worth investigating.

For some reason, instead of analysing terrorist
actions from the standpoint of the ICC's mandate,
the authors of the report enter the political arena in
considering the topic of anti-ISIL action in Libya. We
should recall that Special Representative Kobler and
the members of the Security Council have frequently
acknowledged the success of the counter-terrorist
operations in both Sirte and Benghazi. In the report,
however, it is presented as if the suppression of ISIL's
base had occurred only in Sirte, and even there with
only a partial description that is silent about the aerial
support from the outside forces. In other words, the
report gives the impression that there were no terrorists
in Benghazi. It is hard to call that a quality analysis.

We would like to caution against further attempts
to present the ICC's Libyan dossier as a burden
imposed on it by the Security Council that presupposes
financial contributions from the United Nations. It
is not an accident that the note of 15 November 2016
from the Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya regarding
the financing of investigations in Libya makes a clear
distinction between the States parties to the Rome
Statute and other countries, which are invited to help on
a voluntary basis. The report's conclusions omit such
important aspects.

On a separate issue, we would like to comment
on the liberal interpretation in paragraph 28 of the
report of the provision in resolution 2323 (2016) that
stresses the need for protection in Libya associated
with United Nations personnel. The report could lead
one to conclude that this extends to ICC investigators
as well, which is a stretch. Besides which, the ICC does
not have the authority to interpret Security Council
resolutions on this or any other issues.

To sum up, we would like to note that we have
voiced our opinions regarding the referral of the
situation in Libya to the ICC at previous briefings
by the Prosecutor, and they have not changed. With
regard to the political situation in Libya, the only way
to emerge from the crisis and unify the country and
its institutions continues to be through the broadest
possible inter-Libyan dialogue, under United Nations
auspices, with coordinated international assistance and
the active participation of the regional stakeholders.

