The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in
Haiti, document S/ 1995/922.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council -

I shall suspend the meeting, as one delegation is not
present.

The meeting was suspended at 12.02 pm. and
resumed at 12.06 p.m.

The President: The statement is as follows:

"The Security Council welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General of 6 November 1995 on the United
Nations Mission in Haiti (UNMIH) (S/ 1995/922),
issued pursuant to resolution 1007 (1995).

"The Security Council commends UNMIH on the
substantial progress it has made towards fulfilling its
mandate, as set out in resolution 940 (1994), to assist
the Government of Haiti in sustaining a secure and
stable environment, protecting international personnel
and key installations, establishing the conditions for
holding elections and creating a new professional
police force. The Council commends the
Secretary-General, his Special Representative, and
other dedicated personnel of the United Nations who
have contributed to this effort.

The Security Council also commends the

Government of Haiti for holding local and legislative
elections in a peaceful and non-violent environment,
and notes the recent convocation of the special
session of the National Assembly and its approval of
the new Cabinet and plan of government. The
Council notes with satisfaction the role of UNMIH
and the joint United Nations/Organization of
American States (OAS) International Civilian
Mission (MICIVIH) in assisting the Haitian
authorities with the electoral process.

"The Security Council emphasizes that the
continued engagement and commitment of all
Haitian parties is necessary to the successful
organization of free, fair and peaceful presidential
elections. Consistent with the objectives of Security
Council resolutions 940 (1994) and 1007 (1995), the
Council welcomes the announcement by the
provisional Electoral Council of presidential
elections scheduled for 17 December 1995 that
should allow a transition of power to a duly-elected
successor before UNMIH's scheduled termination on
29 February 1996. The holding of presidential
elections on schedule is a crucial step in
consolidating long-lasting democracy in Haiti and
ensuring a smooth transition of government. The
Council calls on all political parties in Haiti to
participate in the forthcoming elections, and to
contribute actively to maintain the secure and stable
conditions necessary for their conduct.

"The Security Council notes with concern
recent instances of violence in Haiti and calls for
respect for the rule of law, national reconciliation
and cooperation.

"The Government and people of Haiti bear the
primary responsibility for Haiti's political, economic
and social reconstruction. The Security Council
underlines its firm support for the progress Haiti has
already made in this regard. The Council emphasizes
that a sustained commitment by the international
community is indispensable for long-term peace and
stability in Haiti. In this regard the Council
encourages the Haitian Government to continue its
dialogue with the international financial institutions.

 

"The Security Council shares the view of the
Secretary-General that the establishment of a
professional police force capable of maintaining law
and order throughout the country is central to Haiti's
long-term stability. As the end of UNMIH's mandate
approaches, attention should be focused on the
selection and training of the Haitian National Police
supervisors and on interested Member States providing
the police force with the necessary equipment.
"The Security Council also supports the efforts of
the Secretary-General to streamline UNMIH, including
the CIVPOL component.

"The Security Council expresses its confidence
that the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, UNMIH and UN/OAS MICIVIH
will continue to assist the Government and people of
Haiti. It notes in particular the useful role played by

the OAS and the valuable cooperation with Haiti of
interested Member States on a bilateral basis and stresses
the importance of continuing such cooperation. The
Council requests that the Secretary-General, in
consultation with the Friends of Haiti and the Haitian
authorities, report to the Council, at the appropriate time,
on next steps in the areas of security, law enforcement
and humanitarian assistance, including by United Nations
specialized agencies and programmes, which the
international community may take to help Haiti achieve
a long-term future that is secure, stable and free."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1995/55.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.15 pm.

