The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
progress report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda, document
S/ 1995/848.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/l995/86l, which contains the
text of a letter dated 11 October 1995 from the Permanent
Representative of Kenya to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the
Secretary-General's report on the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR) of 7
October 1995 (S/l995/848).

"The Security Council welcomes progress made
by the Government of Rwanda in the reconciliation
process, including the integration of more than 2,000
members of former Rwandan Government Forces
(RGF) troops into the Rwanda Patriotic Army (RPA).
The Council calls on the Government of Rwanda to
intensify its contacts with all sectors of Rwandan
society, except with those directly responsible for the
genocide. The Council reiterates its concern at reports
about continuing cross-border infiltrations from
neighbouring countries which have a destabilizing
effect within Rwanda. The Council also reiterates its
concern at the danger for peace and stability in the
Great Lakes Region which would be caused by

uncontrolled arms flows and in this context reaffirms
the relevant provisions of its resolution 1013 (1995).
The Council condemns all acts of violence in
Rwanda. The Council welcomes the fact that the
Government of Rwanda has voluntarily and without
delay initiated an investigation into the killing of
civilians at Kanama and expects that prosecution of
those responsible will follow.

"The Security Council calls again upon all
States to act in accordance with the conclusions of
the summit meeting of the leaders in the subregion
in Nairobi in January 1995 and the recommendations
by the Regional Conference on Assistance to
Refugees, Returnees and Displaced Persons in the
Great Lakes Region, held in Bujumbura in February
1995. The Council welcomes recent efforts to
improve relations among the States in the region,
which should help pave the way for the proposed
Regional Conference on Peace, Security and
Development. In this regard, the Council supports
the efforts of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General to the Great Lakes region for the
preparation and convening of such a conference. It
requests the Secretary-General to submit his report
on the results of the first round of consultations of
the Special Envoy in the region as soon as possible.

"The Security Council reaffirms the important
role UNAMIR has played in Rwanda and the
subregion. In this respect, the Council underlines its
commitment to UNAMIR which, inter alia, assists
the Government of Rwanda in facilitating the
voluntary return and resettlement of refugees and has
made available to the Rwandan authorities its
engineering and logistics capacity. The Council
underlines that UNAMIR can effectively implement
its current mandate only if it has an adequate force
level and sufficient means. The Council stands ready
to study carefully any further recommendations that
the Secretary-General might make on the issue of
force reductions in relation to the fulfilment of the
mandate of UNAMIR.

"The Security Council reaffirms its View that
genuine reconciliation as well as long-lasting
stability in the region as a whole cannot be attained
without the safe, voluntary and organized return to
their country of all Rwandan refugees. In this
respect, the Council welcomes the joint efforts of
Rwanda, neighbouring countries and UNHCR to
speed up the voluntary return of refugees through,

 

inter alia, the work of the Tripartite Commissions.
The Council underlines that, in order to foster the
process of national reconciliation, an effective and
credible national judiciary has to be established. In
this respect, it welcomes the appointment of the
members of the Rwandan Supreme Court. The
Council further underlines that the International
Tribunal for Rwanda should begin its proceedings as
soon as possible. The Council calls on Member States
to comply with their obligations with regard to
cooperation with the Tribunal in accordance with
resolution 955 (1994). It urges once more all States to
arrest and detain persons suspected of genocide and
other serious violations of international humanitarian
law in accordance with resolution 978 (1995). The
Council underlines the necessity for the Tribunal to be
fully financed, as a matter of priority, and for
continued access to the Voluntary Trust Fund
established for the Tribunal. The Council continues to
support the work of human rights monitors in Rwanda
in cooperation with the Rwandan Government.

"The Security Council reaffirms its concern at
the appalling situation in the Rwandan prisons. In this
respect, it welcomes measures initiated by the
Department of Humanitarian Affairs, in coordination
with the international community and the Government
of Rwanda, to alleviate the intolerable conditions in
Rwandan prisons. It calls on the international
community to continue its assistance in this regard
and encourages the Rwandan Government to
continue its efforts to improve the situation in the
prisons. The Council underlines the importance of
parallel action by the Rwandan Government to
restore the Rwandan judicial system and requests the
international community to assist the Rwandan
Government in this urgent task.

"The Security Council underlines that sound
economic foundations are also vital for achieving
lasting stability in Rwanda. In this respect, it
welcomes the increased commitments and funds
pledged for the Government's Programme of
National Reconciliation and Socio-Economic
Rehabilitation and Recovery following the mid-term
review of the Geneva Round-Table Conference, and
calls on the international community to continue to
support Rwanda's rehabilitation process.

"The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1995/53.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.
The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 1.25 pm.
