Mr. Mufioz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): First, I
join in the congratulations to the Philippines on its
assumption of the presidency. The Council will face
great challenges this month, and I am certain, Sir, that
you will be equal to those challenges.

I also thank the Mission of Pakistan and
Ambassador Akram for their excellent work last
month.

I welcome the presence of Chairman Bryant at
this meeting of the Council. I also thank Mr. Klein for
his introduction of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2004/430) and for the complementary information
he provided.

We are pleased to note that deployment of the
United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) is almost
completed, as scheduled. The Mission will thus reach
its authorized strength at the end of this month. The
ceasefire agreement is being observed on the ground,
although we judge that the security situation will
continue to be fragile until the disarmament process is
complete. Of course, disputes among factions and
criminal activities continue to pose a threat to security,
but, fortunately, they have not put the peace process in
jeopardy.

An important step has been taken with
resumption of the process of disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation (DDRR)
on 15 April. As we have noted, disarmament and
demobilization are essential components of the peace
agreement and are a prerequisite for tackling the
reintegration of ex-combatants.

The report of the Secretary-General underlines
the conditions that must be met in order for elections to
be held in October 2005. It is a complex process, and it
is advisable that preparations begin immediately, as the
report indicates.

The adoption of a regional focus in West Africa is
already under way with the strengthening of
cooperation among the United Nations missions in
Liberia, C6te d'Ivoire and Sierra Leone, as prescribed
in the Council's presidential statement of 25 March
2004 (S/PRST/2004/7).

In that connection, we welcome the fact that on
20 May, at Conakry, Guinea, the leaders of the Mano
River Union countries met to reactivate the Union. We
hope that the Council's mission to West Africa at the
end of June will produce concrete recommendations, in
compliance with the regional dimension of its mandate.

In conclusion, I wish to express my country's
satisfaction at the progress made by UNMIL in
carrying out the various aspects of its mandate.

Finally, we have duly noted Chairman Bryant's
statement on the important measures the Transitional
Government is taking. We wish him - and Liberia, of
course - all the best in the near future.

