Mr. Ayebare (African Union): At the outset, I thank
the Security Council for convening this meeting at a
key turning point in the history of the Central African
Republic. I also thank the Secretary-General for his
report on the situation in the Central African Republic
(S/20l3/677) and more generally for his efforts towards
the promotion of peace, security and stability on the
African continent in general.
This meeting is taking place against the background
of a particularly worrisome situation in the Central
African Republic. As we all know, the situation is
marked by a total collapse of public law and order and
by widespread and continued abuses against the civilian
population by elements of the ex-Seleka rebellion,
including extrajudicial killings, forced disappearances,
arbitrary arrests and detention, acts of torture and
sexual violence, as well as the recruitment and use of
child soldiers. That has led to the emergence of self-
defence groups and other armed groups.

The African Union (AU) is actively seized of the
situation in the Central African Republic. We have
worked closely with the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS) and fully supported
regional efforts to address the situation following the
resumption of armed hostilities in December 2012
by the Seleka rebellion, in violation of the decisions
of the leaders of the region. Those efforts resulted
in the landmark Libreville Global Peace Agreement
of January 2013, which provided a viable basis for a
lasting solution to the crisis facing the country.

As early as December 2012, the AU drew attention
to the danger that the resumption of hostilities would
pose. We indeed feared that it would undermine
the efforts of the leaders of the region and result in
widespread violence against the civilian population,
and that it could heighten tensions among the different
communities, with far-reaching consequences for the
country and the region as a whole. Following the entry
of the Seleka rebellion into Bangui, the AU Peace and
Security Council took immediate action to suspend the
country from participating in AU activities and adopted
targeted sanctions against some individuals. We sought
Security Council support in that regard.

Over the past few months, we have been working
closely with ECCAS in support of the efforts of the
leaders of the region. Allow me at this juncture to once
again express the AU's deep appreciation to Chadian
President ldriss Deby Itno, current Chair of ECCAS,
and to Congo President Denis Sassou Nguesso, Chair
of the ECCAS follow-up committee on the Central
African Republic. The region has demonstrated the
utmost commitment in addressing the situation. ECCAS
has convened peace talks, deployed peacekeepers and
provided financial assistance in support of the Central
African Republic. That proactive engagement should
be acknowledged and fully supported by the Council.

The decisions of ECCAS provide the basis
upon which the transition in the country should be
managed. We should insist once again on the need for
the transitional authorities to fully comply with those
decisions, in particular with respect to the duration of
the transition of 18 months and the ineligibility of the
current authorities to compete in the elections that will
be organized to restore constitutional order. We would
insist that the transitional authorities fully assume their
responsibilities, notably with regard to the protection of
the civilian population and the control by the State of
its sources of income.

Together with ECCAS, we continue to mobilize
the international community through the International
Contact Group on the Central African Republic. The
Group has met three times so far. The most recent
meeting, convened in Bangui on 8 November, outlined
a number of steps to be taken by the transitional
authorities. It is critical that the Security Council lend
its support to those steps.

Given the precarious security situation on the
ground, the AU, working closely with ECCAS, decided
to enhance the Mission of the Economic Community of
Central African States for the Consolidation of Peace
in the Central African Republic (MICOPAX) through
the deployment of an African-led International Support
Mission in the Central African Republic (MISCA). With
a total strength of 3,652 military, police and civilian
elements, the Mission is mandated to assist in restoring
law and order, stabilizing the country, protecting the
civilian population, reforming the defence and security
sector, and creating conditions for the delivery of
humanitarian assistance. In so doing, the force will
build on the sustained efforts made by MICOPAX in a
particularly challenging environment.

The AU and ECCAS have closely worked together
to facilitate the transition from MICOPAX to MISCA.
Following consultations with ECCAS, the Chairperson
of the Commission appointed the leadership of the
Mission. The transfer of authority between the two
Missions is scheduled to take place on 19 December.
Permit me to emphasize this point: the AU and ECCAS
are working hand in hand to ensure that the continent
effectively addresses the challenges at hand. We are
one, and we are on the same page. Central African
challenges are Africa's challenges. Overcoming them
successfully requires the mobilization of the entire
continent.

Against that backdrop, the priority of the
international community, particularly the United
Nations, should be to enhance the current efforts
through the provision of adequate support for the
deployment and sustenance of MISCA. Such support
will be consistent with the provisions of Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations on the role of regional
arrangements in the promotion and maintenance of
international peace and security. We take note of
the options contained in the report of the Secretary-
General. In taking a decision, it is important that the
Security Council bear in mind the need for predictable
and sustainable support for the Mission.

I would like to express our appreciation to the AU
partners that have already expressed their commitment
to supporting the Mission. I wish to refer here to the
European Union, France and the United States of
America. On the ground, we will work out the modalities
for operational coordination with the French forces.
The AU Peace and Security Council, at its meeting of
13 November, looked forward to that cooperation with
MISCA. I would call on AU partners to come forward
and extend much needed support for MISCA.

It is our conviction that the effective support of the
United Nations will go a long way towards enabling
the Mission to create the required conditions for the
deployment ofa United Nations peacekeeping operation
that would support the long-term stabilization and
reconstruction of the country. We call on the Security
Council to extend its full support to the political
efforts of ECCAS. The leaders of the region have
never relented in their efforts. They deserve full and
continued international support.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the AU's
determination, working closely with ECCAS, to address
the situation in the Central African Republic. In this
endeavour, it is our expectation that the international
community will extend the required support and
assistance. We look forward, in that respect, to the
early adoption of a Security Council resolution that
would enhance the joint efforts of ECCAS and the AU
and underline the active international solidarity with
the suffering people of the Central African Republic.

