Mr. Alimov (Tajikistan) (interpretation from Russian):
Allow me sincerely to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the post of President of the Security Council
this month, and to wish you success in your multifaceted
activity aimed at ensuring effective work by the Council.
Allow me also to express our gratitude to the Permanent
Representative of the People's Republic of China,
Ambassador Qin Huasun, President of the Security
Council for the month of May, for the significant and
positive work he did as President.

The Government of Tajikistan highly appreciates the
assistance of the international community in resolving the
inter-Tajik conflict. I have been entrusted, on behalf of
the President of Tajikistan, Mr. Emomali Rakhmonov,
with conveying his words of genuine gratitude to the
Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, for the
enormous attention and efforts directed to the
achievement of peace and accord in Tajikistan.

My Government notes with great satisfaction that the
Security Council pays constant attention to the question
of an inter-Tajik settlement and is taking concrete steps
aimed at the rapid achievement of national reconciliation
in Tajikistan.

We highly appreciate the efforts of the former
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Ambassador
Ramiro Piriz-Ballen, who made a significant contribution
to a settlement of the inter-Tajik conflict, and we express
the hope that the recently appointed Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Gerd
Merrem, will successfully continue these efforts.

An important and invaluable contribution to ensuring
a peaceful settlement of the conflict in Tajikistan is being
made by States and regional international organizations,
acting as observers at the inter-Tajik talks.

We note with satisfaction the existence of close and
useful ties between the United Nations Mission of
Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT) and the collective
peacekeeping forces of the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS), as well as with the border
forces in Tajikistan, which clearly is an important factor
in stabilizing the situation.

The unresolved conflict and its socio-economic
consequences are a heavy burden on the shoulders of the
long-suffering people of Tajikistan. In this connection, I
consider it extremely important to reaffirm that my
Government is fully committed to a solely peaceful
political solution to existing problems, and firmly favours
the continuation of the inter-Tajik talks under the aegis of
the United Nations, despite their relatively meagre results
so far, for which the government delegation is not to
blame.

 

In striving for an early resumption of the activities of
the Joint Commission on the implementation of the
Agreement on a Temporary Cease-fire and the Cessation of
Other Hostile Acts on the Tajik-Afghan Border and within
the Country, my Government in a note verbale dated 8 June
1996 to UNMOT once again reaffirmed its readiness to
provide protection for the representatives of the opposition
who are members of that Commission. We are counting on
this step by the Government removing the existing obstacles
and speeding up a resumption of the activities of the Joint
Commission.

Attaching the greatest importance to a negotiated
settlement, my Government is closely cooperating with the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and with
UNMOT, and is also taking additional steps to establish
civil peace and accord in the country.

The initiative of the President, His Excellency
Mr. Emomali Rakhmonov, led to the signing on 9 March
1996 in Dushanbe of an agreement on social accord in
Tajikistan, to which, along with the leaders of the country,
the leaders of nearly 40 political parties, social movements,
national associations and religious communities put their
signatures. The agreement represents a model for national
reconciliation; it offers the prospect of building a pluralistic
democratic society with high standards in the sphere of the
human rights and equal participation of all political and
regional forces in the public life of the country.

That same objective was pursued by my Government
when, at the inter-Tajik talks, it proposed the initiative of
holding a special session of the Parliament with the
participation of the leaders of the Islamic Revival
Movement of Tajikistan and other representatives of the
United Tajik Opposition. We are firmly convinced that this
session could have become a turning-point in the process of
national reconciliation. One can only regret the fact that,
despite the appeal of the Secretary-General, conveyed to the
leaders of the opposition through his former Special Envoy,
Mr. Ismat Kittani, the leaders of the Opposition refused to
take part in the work of the special session, thereby
violating the sole agreement set down in the Ashgabat
declaration.

To achieve its objectives, the irreconcilable armed
wing of the opposition - apparently not without the
consent of the leaders of the United Tajik Opposition - is
inclined to pursue its policy of exerting continuous armed
pressure on the Government. These forces continue to make
wide use of the tactics of terrorism and intimidation and
systematically and flagrantly Violate the Agreement on a
Temporary Cease-fire and the Cessation of Other Hostile
Acts on the Tajik-Afghan Border and within the Country.
On 21 May this year, the Security Council rightly
condemned the planned and organized offensive acts of
the armed Tajik opposition, which have caused many
casualties among the civilian population.
We are grateful to donor countries, the United
Nations specialized agencies and international
organizations for their efforts to provide disinterested
assistance to our country. However, despite the intensive
humanitarian support of the international community, the
situation remains critical. Moreover, heavy rains, spring
floods and mud slides have caused appreciable losses to
the national economy, the agricultural sector in particular.
There have been human casualties and significant damage
in the social sphere. As a result, the humanitarian
situation has deteriorated still further. The population of
Tajikistan continues to experience acute shortages of food
and medicine. Despite my Government's strenuous efforts
to mitigate the consequences of the natural disasters, all
this undeniably has a negative effect on the country's
economy, which has already been disrupted by civil war,
and on the social welfare of the people.

We express the hope that the Security Council's
appeal of 21 May 1996

"to respond promptly in support of the humanitarian
relief efforts of the United Nations and other
international organizations" (S/PV.3665, p. 3)

for Tajikistan will be heard and that support for the
people of my country in these difficult times will be
forthcoming.

I consider it necessary to stress once again that the
Government of Tajikistan believes that the road to peace
in the country passes through the continuation of inter-
Tajik dialogue and the resolution of existing differences
on the basis of constitutional legality and solely through
political means. We are convinced that it is precisely in
this way that stability can be restored in the country and
that our people will have the opportunity to advance
further on the path of national accord, the development of
democratic social institutions and the implementation of
economic reforms.

On this basis, the Government of Tajikistan would
welcome a decision by the Security Council to extend the
mandate of the United Nations Mission of Observers in
Tajikistan, because the personnel of UNMOT,

 

representing the United Nations presence in the region, to
a great extent promotes stability and the continuation of the
peace process as a whole.

