Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, let me thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ghassan Salame, and Ms. Rida Al Tubuly for their
useful briefings on recent developments in Libya.

First and foremost, the prolonged clashes in and
around Tripoli have proved that the conflict in Libya
cannot be resolved by military measures. We therefore
call on all parties to refrain from the use of force and
return to the political dialogue under the auspices of the
United Nations. We fully support Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Salame's three-step peace
plan, and we look forward to the positive outcome of
the Berlin conference on Libya, scheduled to be held
before the end of the year.
Likewise, we deplore the influx of weapons and
the presence of foreign fighters and mercenaries
in Libya. In that regard, the full implementation of
the arms embargo, in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions, is absolutely essential
and indispensable to protecting civilians and restoring
stability and security in Libya and the region as a whole.
Moreover, we cannot forget the fact that the immunity
of United Nations experts is crucial for the proper
functioning of the sanctions regime and therefore must
be respected by every Member State.

The humanitarian situation in Libya continues
to be of deep concern to us, especially with regard
to the destruction of vital infrastructure and the loss
of capacity to deliver basic services. Similarly, we
are disturbed by the situation of migrants in Libya,
in particular those being held in detention centres.
Therefore, echoing the recent statement made by
the International Criminal Court Prosecutor, Fatou
Bensouda, we call on all parties to immediately cease
all indiscriminate attacks and to comply with their
obligations under international humanitarian law.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Poland's full
support for all efforts made by Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Ghassan Salame' and the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya aimed at
finding a lasting political solution to the current crisis,
so as to bring security, political and economic stability,
and national unity to Libya.

