Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China regrets the fact that the Security Council heard
a briefing today from the independent international
fact-finding mission on Myanmar established by the
Human Rights Council. Such practices jeopardize the
unity of the Council and are not conducive to ensuring
that its members cooperate to jointly solve the issue of
Rakhine state.

Good progress has recently been made in resolving
the issue of Rakhine state through the joint efforts of
the country concerned, other countries in the region
and United Nations agencies. In mid-September, the
first joint mission of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the United
Nations Development Programme visited 23 villages
in Rakhine state, while in mid-October a second joint
mission visited a further 26 villages. The Myanmar
Government has promised to grant the joint mission
full access to Rakhine state's entire territory and to
actively implement the tripartite memorandum of
understanding. The recommendations made by the
Advisory Commission on Rakhine State in its report
are being implemented. Myanmar's independent
commission of inquiry on Rakhine state recently
began work and held a meeting. In consultations
with Bangladesh, the commission visited Kasba, in
Bangladesh, to conduct an investigation with a view
to establishing accountability for the human rights
violations committed in Rakhine state after the attacks
by the Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army in October
2016 and August 2017.

In mid-October, Ms. Christine Schraner Burgener,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General on Myanmar,
visited Myanmar once again. She held in-depth
discussions with Myanmar leaders and officials,
and visited Maungdaw and Buthidaung to get first-
hand information on the situation in Rakhine state.
The Myanmar and Bangladesh joint working group
will hold its third meeting by the end of the month.
Mr. Abul Hassan Mahmood Ali, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Bangladesh, indicated recently that based on
Bangladesh's list of 8,000 people and the list provided
by Myanmar, a first group of refugees will soon be
repatriated. The international community should
note and fully acknowledge that active progress. The
Government and the people of Bangladesh have been
providing significant humanitarian support for the
displaced people in Bangladesh despite the difficulties
involved. They are working hard to improve their living
conditions and make the necessary arrangements to
help them respond to natural events such as hurricanes
and the rainy season. China greatly appreciates
Bangladesh's outstanding efforts.

Myanmar and Bangladesh are both friends and
neighbours of China. Since the beginning of the
Rakhine state incidents, China has been actively
engaged in diplomatic efforts to promote dialogue and
consultations between the two countries so as to resolve
the issue. China proposed the concept of a three-stage
solution to the Rakhine state issue and has encouraged
the parties to agree on a number of important issues.
On 27 September, following the first informal tripartite
meeting in late June between China, Myanmar and
Bangladesh, Mr. Wang Yi, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of China, held another informal tripartite meeting at
United Nations Headquarters in New York with Mr. Ali
and Mr. U Kyaw Tint Swe, Minister for the Office of the
State Counsellor of Myanmar, which was also attended
by the Secretary-General and Ms. Burgener, his Special
Envoy on Myanmar. The meeting's friendly, frank and
constructive atmosphere resulted in three important
points of consensus.

First, Myanmar and Bangladesh agreed to properly
resolve the issue of Rakhine state through friendly
consultations. Secondly, Bangladesh indicated that it
was ready to repatriate the first group of people who
had fled the turmoil. Myanmar also indicated that it was
well prepared to receive those ready to be repatriated.
Thirdly, both countries agreed to convene a joint
working group meeting as soon as possible to establish
a road map and timetable for the repatriation, so that
work on it can begin without delay. We are therefore
pleased to note that the consensus I mentioned is being
actively implemented.
China is deeply concerned about the displaced
people in Bangladesh and has provided humanitarian
assistance to both countries concerned. On the same
basis as its previous assistance, China recently pledged
to donate 1,000 temporary shelters to local people
to improve their living conditions and resettle the
repatriated, and has also provided Bangladesh with
¥20 million in food assistance. We remain committed
to seeking a solution to the Rakhine state issue.

The Rahkine state issue has a complex historical,
ethnic and religious background. It is essentially
an issue between Myanmar and Bangladesh, and
resolving it will require relentless long-term effort. The
international community should respect Myanmar's
sovereignty and territorial integrity, appreciate its hard-
won positive progress, fully understand the difficulties
and challenges it is dealing with and make meaningful
efforts to help resolve the issue. The immediate
task is ensuring the early launch of the repatriation
process for those who fled Myanmar for Bangladesh.
The international community should encourage both
countries to intensify their dialogue and ensure that
the first group is successfully repatriated as soon as
possible so that they can return to their homes.

The issues of greatest concern to everyone in the
repatriation process, which are freedom of movement,
citizenship and accountability, should be gradually and
appropriately resolved. The Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the United
Nations Development Programme should intensify
their consultations with the Myanmar Government and
work for the effective implementation of the tripartite
memorandum of understanding. The Security Council
should continue to support the Special Envoy, who is
seeking dialogue and consultations aimed at helping the
Myanmar Government resolve the issue. Development
is the fundamental pathway to a lasting a solution to
the Rakhine state issue. The international community
should devote more attention to helping local authorities
and residents eradicate poverty, achieve sustainable
development, improve their livelihoods and social and
economic conditions, and foster social stability and
harmonious coexistence among the people.

Last but not least. the international community is
closely following the human rights situation and the
issue of accountability in Rakhine state. The Myanmar
Government is committed to bringing to justice the
perpetrators of human rights violations on a basis
of solid evidence. It has established an independent
commission of inquiry on Rakhine state, which has
extensive international participation and has promised
to submit a report within a year. The international
community should respect Myanmar's sovereignty
and encourage the commission to work independently,
establish the truth and hold the perpetrators of human
rights violations accountable.

With regard to the report of the independent
international fact-finding mission on Myanmar
(A/HRC/39/64), the mission did not enter in Myanmar
at all. Its results are based on biased, incomplete
information. They are neither objective nor impartial,
and therefore not credible. Its conclusions, suggestions
and recommendations constitute wilful interference
in Myanmar's internal affairs and are an affront to its
sovereignty. The fact-finding mission is not a judge.
Such practices are unhelpful to resolving the issue in
Rakhine state and can only jeopardize the possibility
of internal reconciliation and democratic transition
in Myanmar, escalate tensions in Rakhine state
and undermine the authority and credibility of the
United Nations.

Human rights are a common cause of the
international community and one of the three pillars of
the United Nations. China has consistently advocated
for dialogue on human rights issues, based on equality
and mutual respect. That is the right way to promote
the cause of human rights for humankind. China stands
ready to work with the international community to
seek dialogue and consultations, uphold justice and
impartiality, work to find a solution and continue to
play a constructive role in resolving the issue.

