The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Sweden.

For millions of people in South Sudan, the long
wait for their leaders to put an end to the fighting is
not over. Despite the commendable efforts of the region
to broker an agreement, the parties have not yet made
the necessary compromises, and the fighting continues.
Indeed, the ongoing efforts to unilaterally extend the
mandates of Salva Kiir and the transitional Parliament
raises questions as to whether participation in the
negotiations is taking place in good faith.

The Secretary-General, in his report (S/2018/609)
following resolution 2418 (2018), has confirmed that
the fighting has not ceased. In addition, the recentjoint
report by the United Nations Mission in South Sudan and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, as well as reports from the Panel of
Experts on South Sudan, contain harrowing accounts of
violence against civilians, including widespread sexual
and gender-based violence. The situation for women and
girls is extremely difficult. This must come to an end.

Along with other Council members, we share a
deep sense of frustration. The Council has stated its
determination to ensure that the parties abide by their
commitments, obligations and responsibilities. As
the violence and mass atrocities continue, in flagrant
disregard of international law and in violation of agreed
ceasefires, the international community cannot stand
idly by.

It is clear that the last thing needed in South Sudan
at this moment is more weapons. Indeed, in the light
of the commitments to a ceasefire made in Khartoum,
which we welcome, the parties should have no need
for them. Instead, all efforts and resources should be
urgently directed at responding to the dire humanitarian
situation. Doing so would help alleviate the suffering of
the 7 million South Sudanese in need of humanitarian
assistance. Unhindered humanitarian access must
be ensured.

As the Emergency Relief Coordinator said in May,

"Ending violence is the first and single most important
thing needed to alleviate human suffering".

Additional weapons should not be able to reach
parties that seem set on prolonging the conflict. We
therefore support the imposition of a United Nations
arms embargo on South Sudan, and it is for this reason
that we voted in favour of resolution 2428 (2018),
adopted today.

A regionally brokered and inclusive political
solution remains the only viable means of achieving
peace. We commend the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development and the wider region for their efforts
towards such a political solution. This process must
continue with vigour, and the Council must carefully
consider how to best support the regional effort in order
to also make a real difference on the ground, including
by striking the right balance between encouragement
and credible pressure. But most importantly,
genuine goodwill and compromise must be shown
by the countries' leaders, putting the interests of the
people first.

The Council should stand ready to consider
further targeted measures against individuals who
incite violence or seek to derail the peace process. At
the same time, we should also be ready to respond to
positive developments.

To give the peace effort the best possible prospects
for success, it is imperative that, as we move forward
now, we stand unified and speak with one voice to
the parties.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of South Sudan.

