The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Daniel Mitov, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Bulgaria.

Mr. Mitov (Bulgaria) Today's debate is timely, as
the Middle East and North Africa are going through a
deep political and security crisis that has ushered in the
expansion of violent extremism. In Iraq, the response
to terrorists has been a process of reconciliation
initiated by Prime Minister Al Abadi. Those efforts
are a prerequisite for a united, stable and peaceful
Iraq. In Syria, the issue of countering terrorism has
unfortunately been manipulated by a regime that has
used the extremist threat that it itself created and
triggered to justify the violence exercised against its
own people. The strengthening of the reconciliation
policy in Iraq and the need for promoting an inclusive
political transition in Syria reminds us also of Libya,
Yemen and other places where we hope for Governments
and States that are indeed inclusive.

As long as there is no peace in the Middle East,
violent extremism will take advantage of the situation.
The terrorist scourge of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) knows no borders. From Syria and
Iraq, it is moving to Libya. It carries out attacks in
Mali, Yemen, Tunisia and elsewhere. As a partner
in the global coalition to counter ISIL, Bulgaria is
working to degrade, and ultimately defeat, the threat
it poses to the world. But violent extremism continues
to expand, and we should start taking further measures
that will produce the necessary effects, including in the
countries of the Middle East and North Africa.

Faced with such a grave situation, we believe that
the United Nations could undertake further actions in
stepping up international cooperation in countering
terrorism. Bulgaria looks forward to the presentation
of the Secretary-General's plan of action on preventing
violent extremism. Following the Council's adoption of
resolution 2178 (2014), on countering foreign terrorist
fighters, Bulgaria has enacted legislation to amend the
penal code and operational improvements with regard
to travel documents. Measures also need to be taken to
draft a strategy for countering terrorism, radicalization
and extremism for the period 2015-2020.

My country is at the crossroads between Europe
and the Middle East and bears the consequences of
the unprecedented migration pressure generated by
conflicts in the region and the expansion of Daesh.
Besides addressing the consequences through measures,
including those outlined in our national strategy on
migration, asylum and integration, Bulgaria shares
the view that its root causes should be immediately
addressed. It is necessary to seek a lasting settlement of
the conflicts in the Middle East and North Africa and
to tackle human rights violations, dire socioeconomic
situations and the lack of good governance.

The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Kristian Jensen, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Denmark.


