Mr. Baati (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): We would like to thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary- General for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, for her valuable briefing. We would also like to thank Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant Secretary General for Humanitarian Affairs, for her important information. The Palestinian question, which is the essence of the Arab-Israeli conflict, is now several decades old. In that time, the world has witnessed major transformations and events, while this question remains idle with no solution. On the contrary, the situation in the occupied Palestinian territories continues to deteriorate because of the insistence of Israel, the occupying Power, in forging ahead with its practices against the Palestinian people and implementing its expansionist settlement schemes, in flagrant violation of international law and Security Council resolutions, especially resolution 2334 (2016). That conduct is a major obstacle to the achievement of the two-State solution and undermines any possibility of reaching a just and comprehensive peace. Despite all United Nations resolutions on the Palestinian question and the overall situation in the Middle East, including the occupied Arab Syrian Golan and the occupied Lebanese _ territories, Israel's intransigence has not simply been limited to non-compliance with any of those resolutions; rather, it has adopted a dangerous escalatory approach by adopting many unilateral measures that entrench occupation and target the foundations and terms of reference of a settlement. In that context, we once again express our deep concern about calls to annex parts of the West Bank and the continued implementation of settlement projects in the occupied territories, including East Jerusalem, as well as the ongoing siege of the Gaza Strip and the measures taken to impose restrictions on the Palestinian economy. The atrocious facts and figures cited by Ms. Mueller this morning with regard to the deteriorating living, security and economic conditions resulting from the occupying Power's continued illegal practices are grave indicators of how the situation risks further deterioration, not just in the Palestinian territories butthroughout the entire region. We therefore call for an end to those practices and the making of serious efforts to achieve a just and comprehensive solution. Moreover, Tunisia rejects practices intended to change the legal, historic and demographic status of Jerusalem, as well as the violation of Islamic and Christian holy sites. Tunisia reiterates its support for the historic Hashemite guardianship over the holy sites and the role of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan in the management, maintenance and preservation of Al-Haram Al-Sharif. That is based on our firm position on defending the causes of righteousness, international legitimacy and peace. Tunisia will continue to support all efforts to resume negotiations based on the agreed terms of reference, especially the relevant United Nations resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative and the two-State solution, which is the only realistic and viable solution for just and comprehensive peace. Accomplishing that goal is an urgent priority in restoring security and stability in the region. And it requires the international community to shoulder its legal and political responsibilities to implement international law and United Nations resolutions. Israel should be committed to ending its occupation and enabling the Palestinian people to exercise their legitimate rights, primary among them their right to self-determination and the establishment of their independent State along the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital. Given the Security Council's responsibility for maintaining international peace and security, we call on it to step up its efforts to end such Israeli practices and resolve the conflict. We reiterate the importance of the Security Council conducting a visit to the occupied Palestinian territories so that the Council can see for itself the tragic consequences of the occupation on the lives of the Palestinian people, and therefore take the necessary measures to end the occupation. Tunisia emphasizes the need to stop the targeting of civilians. We call for full use of existing international mechanisms, for respecting international humanitarian law and the Fourth Geneva Convention and for ensuring the necessary protection for the Palestinian people until a resolution of the conflict can be reached and all final-status issues resolved. In that context, given the significant importance of the Palestinian refugee issue, Tunisia reaffirms the imperative need to preserve the role of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and to provide it with adequate financial resources. We also stress the importance of achieving Palestinian national reconciliation, overcoming differences among Palestinian brothers and unifying their ranks with a view to supporting their negotiating position and thereby fulfilling the aspirations of the Palestinian people for freedom and independence. In conclusion, we reaffirm our concern at the continuation of the Palestinian question with no solution on the horizon. The ongoing unilateral Israeli measures to impose a fait accompli policy while attempting to bypass the solution and undermining its terms of reference can lead only to an escalation of tensions and the exacerbation of violence, thereby threatening regional and international security and stability. Tunisia therefore stresses the importance of safeguarding the terms of reference and implementing resolutions of international legitimacy as the steadfast foundation of all international efforts to achieve just, comprehensive and lasting peace in the region.
