Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): New Zealand
commends China for convening this debate. We
acknowledge Senegal and Angola for ensuring this
important issue receives the Council's sustained
attention. We also thank Assistant Secretary-General
Zerihoun for his briefing.

Piracy in the Gulf of Guinea is a serious drag on the
economic development of the countries of the region
and a serious threat to regional and international peace
and security.

New Zealand is a maritime nation that exports to
the world. Around 99 per cent of our trade by volume is
carried by merchant shipping. As such we understand
the importance of effective maritime security to our
well-being, as well as to the stability of our region. As
highlighted by our Minister for Foreign Affairs during
last year's open debate on the challenges facing small
island developing States (see S/PV.7469), we are a
Pacific country with a significant stake in the peace
and security of small island developing states in our
region. Many of the vulnerabilities that are faced by
countries in the Gulf of Guinea are similar to those that
small island developing States encounter in the Pacific
and elsewhere. Their capacity limitations make them
a target for transnational criminal networks, including
those involved in piracy.

One of the things we have learned from our
region in dealing with transnational organized crime
is the crucial importance of effective cooperation and
coordination between countries. Without this, criminal
networks will simply move on and exploit the weakest
link - those States that are least able to monitor and
take enforcement action against crimes committed at
sea. Such cooperation must also extend internationally.
The Royal New Zealand Navy frigates Te Mana and
Te Kaha have participated in a multinational operations
focused on counter-piracy in the Gulf of Aden and off
the eastern coast of Somalia. The Royal New Zealand
Air Force has also participated in NATO's counter-
piracy operation Ocean Shield. Last year, we also
worked closely with a number of West African countries
to share information on vessels that had been involved
in illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing in the
Southern Ocean. This cooperation with West African
coastal States was highly appreciated.

We recognize, of course, that the scale of the
problem in the Gulf of Guinea is much greater than any
that has so far arisen in our region. It is deep seated
and pervasive, and it threatens not only the economies
and security of the smaller States, but is also a major
threat to the peace and stability of larger nations,
including even Nigeria. Piracy prospers where onshore
governance is weak and the capacity of local authorities
to monitor and maintain control over their maritime
territories is limited. It is able to flourish because the
pirates at sea have collaborators and collusionists on
land. In that sense, piracy degrades the cohesion and
stability of coastal States by undermining governance,
exacerbating instability and hampering development.

As we have said many times before in this Chamber,
prevention is better than cure. In addition to enhancing
security responses to criminal activities at sea, we need
to address some ofthe roots causes ofthose issues. One
area that warrants particular attention is to ensure that
coastal States can maximize the benefits from their
natural resource bases, both at sea and on land, to ensure
that people are able to make meaningful contributions
to their own and their countries' economic prosperity.
This requires strong institutions, effective regulatory
frameworks and strong political will. The inverse
situation inhibits sustainable economic development
and propels the marginalized to consider other options
for economic survival, such as criminal activity.

In the Gulf of Guinea, much of the piracy
problem has its roots in the long-standing grievances
of marginalized groups in the Niger Delta and in
the insidious links that have emerged between local
insurgencies and cross-border criminal activity,
particularly oil smuggling. To enjoy success in the long
term, counter-piracy efforts must be part of a more
comprehensive approach to addressing the drivers of
criminality and instability.

As we learned in Somalia and elsewhere, it is vital
that the necessary national and legal frameworks be in
place to enable effective prosecution of those directly
and indirectly involved in piracy. This means ensuring
that countries of the region have the right legislation to
prosecute and punish those who are apprehended, and
this is backed by the necessary will at the senior levels
of Government to take these steps. It also requires
frameworks for operational and legal cooperation.

Within the Gulf of Guinea, there are a number of
subregional bodies playing a positive role in tackling
piracy at sea, including the Economic Community
of West African States, the Economic Community
of Central African States and the Gulf of Guinea
Commission. We encourage further progress to
operationalize the Interregional Coordination Centre
for Maritime Safety and Security in the Gulf of Guinea,
in Yaounde. This is an important step towards a joint
regional response to addressing maritime security,
including incidents of piracy at sea in what, as others
have said, is a vast geographic area.

Finally, the Council can provide an ongoing
international focus in support of the regional efforts.
For this reason, New Zealand is a strong supporter
of presidential statement S/PRST/2016/4, which was
adopted today.

