Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): First of all,
Sir, I would like to thank the Egyptian presidency of the
Security Council for taking the initiative to organize this
open debate on the theme of peacekeeping operations
and their potential contribution to the overarching goal
of sustaining peacekeeping.

I would also like to thank our briefers of
today - Mr. Youssef Mahmoud, Principal Adviser to
the International Institute for Peace and a distinguished
member of the High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations, and Ambassador Gert Rosenthal, Chair of
the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of the
United Nations Peacebuilding Architecture - whose
statements certainly help inform our debate.

In resolution 2086 (2013), the Security Council
welcomed the decisive role of United Nations
peacekeeping operations when it comes to maintaining
international peace and security, preventing and
controlling conflicts, upholding international standards,
implementing the Council's decisions and consolidating
peace following conflict. It also reaffirmed the
Council's commitment to improving the efficiency of
United Nations efforts at all stages of conflicts, from
prevention to resolution to peacebuilding.
The Council also hopes for continued, and even
greater, efforts to adopt a comprehensive, coherent and
integrated peacekeeping approach to international peace
and security. That approach must be based on conflict
prevention, the prevention of the resumption of conflict,
the establishment of sustained peace through effective
preventive diplomacy strategies, and addressing the root
causes of conflict in order to restore peace and foster
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. That was precisely
what occurred when the recommendations of the three
reviews conducted in 2015 and 2016 on United Nations
action in the areas of peace and security were looked at
together. The Security Council adopted resolution 2282
(2016) and the General Assembly adopted resolution
70/262 - the same resolution, one that put the challenge
of sustaining peace in context, along the continuum of
conflict prevention, peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
sustaining peace.

Meanwhile, in its rich diversity and under the
auspices of the United Nations, the international
community negotiated and, in 2015, adopted the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, which calls for
everyone i States and international organizations,
local and regional authorities and the private sector,
civil society and non-governmental organizations - to
do their utmost to ensure that no one is left behind. Since
then, the challenges that the United Nations continues
to face are being addressed through its willingness
and ability to reposition itself so as to ensure that no
one is left behind. That includes States, communities,
individuals, companies and so on. We all know that
exclusion, poverty, the lack of education and injustice
fuel conflict at the national and international levels.

That is why the reform of the United Nations
system, as a whole, through its three pillars of peace
and security, development and human rights, is of
particular importance. The Secretary-General plays an
important and smart role in drafting and implementing
reform programmes, with the support of the Deputy
Secretary-General and her team. It is up to the States
Members of the United Nations to participate and
assist in that endeavour. We are all aware that it is up
to the Member States to implement many of the United
Nations reforms.

As outlined today by our briefers, we must end
the fragmentation of the activities of the main United
Nations organs, which would allow for enhanced
cooperation and coordination with, for instance, the
Peacebuilding Commission, which is the principal
platform for our collective efforts in certain areas, with
clearly identified and defined goals and targets.
We are faced with a new paradigm, which has the
potential to strengthen preventive efforts and enhance
the effectiveness of current peacekeeping missions.
Through an increasingly comprehensive approach
that encompasses the entire continuum of peace,
conflict prevention, conflict resolution, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding, the concept of sustaining peace
encourages us to rectify the problems caused by the
fragmented efforts of the United Nations and other
stakeholders in the area of peace and security. It is
important to note the role of peacekeeping operations,
which, when they have clear, realistic and attainable
mandates with the necessary political support, remain
one of the Organization's most important tools in its
efforts to address the challenges of international peace
and security, in particular in an environment in which
there is an ever-increasing number of asymmetrical
challenges and, regrettably, ever-decreasing resources.

United Nations peacekeeping operations face many
challenges, including constraints imposed by States and
by State and non-State organizations, which prevent
the operations from fully discharging their mandates.
United Nations peacekeeping missions must, therefore,
be provided with the capacity and resources required
to fulfil their mandates effectively. Mandates should
be aligned as far as possible with the situation on the
ground so that they can be carried out. Before missions
are deployed, mandates should be defined on the basis
of analyses and information that are as objective and
comprehensive as possible. It bears repeating that the
action carried out by United Nations missions must be
based on a specific and viable political strategy that
has the support needed to resolve the conflict once and
for all.

There is no doubt that, as political tools,
peacekeeping operations can help to achieve the
fundamental goals of conflict prevention, mediation,
the protection of civilians and peacekeeping. The
experience of the United Nations Operation in Cote
d'lvoire, the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti, the United Nations Mission in Liberia and
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) Mission in the Gambia, among others,
provides a clear illustration of that assertion. The
Security Council should strengthen cooperation with
neighbouring States and regional and subregional
organizations, because, in Senegal's view, ECOWAS
and the African Union have been able to achieve
sustained peace through transition processes and
conflict resolution strategies. Lessons learned reveal
that it is a very demanding endeavour that requires early
planning and takes local conditions into consideration,
and clear objectives with the goal of bringing a
peacekeeping operation to an end, meeting the needs
of the population, establishing a peacebuilding office
or making other provisions, as the situation requires.

As soon as missions are established, peacebuilding
activities must also be developed by steering efforts
towards national capacity-building, addressing the
deep-seated structural socioeconomic challenges
that such countries often face and fostering ongoing
political dialogue and effective coordination among the
various stakeholders.

In conclusion, we believe that the Security Council
should give serious thought to the relevant observations
and recommendations made by our briefers today.

