Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): Every now and then,
we participate in open debates in the Security Council
in order to revisit the story of the long suffering and
denial of the Palestinian people. The Palestinians
have been subjected to a regime of oppression without
precedent anywhere on Earth. They have no security
in their homes; their houses have been bulldozed, land
confiscated, trees and crops destroyed, residents evicted,
roads and neighbourhoods blocked and fragmented and
borders walled. As a result of that systematic policy
of oppression, the quality of life of the Palestinians
throughout the occupied territories has diminished to
subsistence level. Unfortunately, all of that is happening
before the eyes of an international community that is
committed to upholding human dignity and human
rights as well as rights to self-determination and
freedom from oppression and torture. It is happening
because of the lack of any resolute action.

Despite a global outcry and an advisory opinion
of the International Court of Justice against it (see A/ES-10/273), Israel continues to build separation
walls in the West Bank, dividing and isolating
communities, destroying livelihoods and preventing
access to their jobs, families, markets, schools and
hospitals for thousands. Appeals from the international
community for improving the Palestinian people's ever-
deteriorating living conditions go unheeded. We share
the international community's concerns about Israel's
continued pursuit of illegal, unethical and unfair
policies and practices that impede the peace process
and confidence-building.

When the stalled negotiations resumed this year,
on 14 August, under United States mediation, we saw a
ray of hope. As time progresses, that sense of optimism
has started to fade as Israel continues to press ahead
with its illegal settlement policies, which present the
main stumbling block to progress. Twenty years after
the breakthrough Oslo Accords, there is no sign of a
final agreement that would ensure the creation of an
independent State of Palestine, on pre-1967-ceasefire
lines in the West Bank, the Gaza Strip and East
Jerusalem, living peacefully alongside the State of
Israel.

Although the international community routinely
restates its commitment to the concept of a two-State
solution, Israel's construction of a barrier in and around
the West Bank and the expansion of settlements on
occupied land make that solution less feasible. Even
the resumption of talks in August was preceded by the
Israeli Government's announcement of the construction
of some 2,000 new settler homes in the West Bank
and East Jerusalem. Israeli settlement activities, the
blockade of the Gaza Strip, Israeli military raids into
Palestinian territories and extremist Israeli settlers'
constant provocations to violence all exacerbate tension
and reinforce doubts about Israel's commitment to a
two-State solution.

It is undeniable that the root cause of the conflict
is the occupation; it must end, and the sooner the
better. The settlements are an existential threat to the
viability of a future Palestinian State. It is contrary to
international law and the road map, and therefore must
cease. If peace in the Middle East is to be achieved,
we must prevail on Israel to cease further illegal
settlements, dismantle the existing ones in line with
its obligations under article 49 of the Fourth Geneva
Convention, and tear down the walls 4 the sooner the
better. In that context, we consider the recent action by
the European Union to be a move in the right direction.

Although United States Secretary of State John
Kerry has invested much political capital and time in
convincing the two sides to resume talks, sustained
international pressure will be necessary to make Israel
agree to a solution on the basis of the parameters
rooted in the relevant United Nations resolutions, the
Madrid principles, the Arab Peace Initiative and the
Quartet road map. We also urge the United Nations
to play its due role to resolve this protracted crisis. In
particular, the Security Council cannot evade its own
role, particularly since its resolutions adopted over time
on the matter remain unimplemented.

Israelis have suffered in the past and they know
more than anyone else that the aspirations of a nation
cannot be denied forever. Even the mighty pharaohs
could not stop those aspirations, and the creation of
the State of Israel is proof that such aspirations can be
fulfilled. Therefore, should we expect that the Israeli
leadership will reflect on its own history and facilitate
a two-State solution? I am hopeful, as we have seen
positive outcomes in recent times - such as those in
South Sudan and Timor-Leste. They achieved their
sovereignty and independence and now live in peace and
harmony as equal members of the global community.
Let Israel and Palestine follow the same path.

The Palestinian-Israeli conflict has long been a
major catalyst of instability and turmoil in the Middle
East, fanning and fuelling violence and extremism in the
region as well as the wider world. The Security Council
has a responsibility, set forth in the United Nations
Charter, to secure peace and stability by addressing the
root causes of the prolonged conflict and negotiating a
just solution to it. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Bangladesh in the latest meeting of the Non-Aligned
Movement's Committee on Palestine, on 26 September,
reaffirmed our commitment to the realization of the
inalienable and legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian
people for an independent, viable, contiguous State of
Palestine, based on 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem
as its capital and living side by side with Israel in peace
and harmony. The realization of that goal would emend
the historical injustice visited upon the Palestinians and
greatly contribute to lasting peace and stability in the
Middle East.

