Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): 1, too, would like to
welcome Deputy Secretary-General Asha-Rose Migiro
and Mr. Antonio Maria Costa, Executive Director of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, as well
as Mr. Louis Sylvain-Goma, Secretary-General of the
Economic Community of Central African States.

We appreciate your initiative, Mr. President, in
organizing this thematic debate on the impact of illicit
arms trafficking on peace and security in Central
Africa. Your concept paper has proved valuable in
facilitating discussion on this topical issue.

Illicit arms trafficking has a profound impact on
peace and security in Africa in general, and in Central
Africa in particular. It undermines good governance
and disrupts trade, tourism and investment. It
jeopardizes economic development and generally puts
democracy and development at risk. Illicit small arms
also heighten inter-State conflicts and put the nation-
State system itself under attack. With armed guerrilla
groups proliferating and often dividing into warring
factions, internal instabilities increasingly tend to
evolve into larger regional wars. Cross-border support
for insurgent movements is also on the rise. Large-
scale wars are ongoing in some parts of Africa,
resulting in millions of internally displaced persons.
The role of natural resources in fuelling conflicts in the
region can never be overemphasized. Fighters on all
sides benefit from mineral wealth, while arms
merchants are only too happy to keep the fighters
supplied as long as they partake of that wealth.

I should like to suggest five areas where efforts
should be directed in tackling illicit arms trafficking in
Central Africa and other parts of the continent.

First, there is a need to strengthen national and
subregional mechanisms to combat the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons. The experience of the
West African subregion provides an important lesson in
this regard. To consolidate peacebuilding and
reconciliation in the subregion, the heads of State and
Government of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) decided to transform the
moratorium on the importation, exportation and
manufacture of light weapons into a legally binding
instrument, known as the ECOWAS Convention on
Small Arms and Light Weapons, Their Ammunition
and Other Related Materials. The Convention seeks to
control, regulate and prohibit the transfer, manufacture
and possession of small arms and light weapons. The
subregion has been able to develop a plan of action, the
ECOWAS Small Arms Control Programme, and also
encourage the establishment of national focal points.

Secondly, in order to prevent weapons from
ending up in the hands of those prohibited from
receiving them, we believe that Governments must
adhere to regional and international arms embargoes.
They must start to sanction violators, as contraveners
of arms embargoes have been able to act with
impunity. The United Nations should redouble its
efforts to closely monitor compliance, supervise
enforcement and suggest persuasive measures to
enhance compliance.

Thirdly, to end the impunity under which arms
brokers operate, States should adopt an international
arms trade treaty, which would provide common
international standards regarding the practices of arms
brokers. There is currently no uniform practice, with
the result that arms brokers can change locations to
avoid prosecution under one country's laws by doing
business in and through other, less regulated countries.
Such a treaty would ensure that middlemen cannot
move weapons from conflict to areas free of conflict
for fear of prosecution.

Furthermore, on the issue of standards, an
international treaty that provides criteria on exports is
needed in order to prevent arms from getting into the
hands of abusers of human rights and international
humanitarian law. International standards that
determine eligibility requirements for arms exports
would prevent arms from entering the illegal market
and from falling into the hands of those likely to divert
or use them for nefarious purposes.

Lastly, national Governments, especially those of
arms-exporting States, must strengthen and use
monitoring mechanisms in order to prevent legal sales
from being diverted into the parallel market. End-use
monitoring ensures that exported weapons are used
properly and that exploiters follow all laws, policies,
regulations and procedures, thus verifying that a
foreign Government or the authorized foreign recipient
of defence articles is using and controlling them in
accordance with the terms and conditions of a transfer.
Because many countries have non-existent or weak
end-use monitoring provisions, international standards
that require end-use monitoring are the most systematic
and complete basis. Onboard pre-shipment and post-
shipment points are required. In addition, a common
international end-used certificate that cannot be easily
forged or duplicated must be developed.

Finally, I would like to thank Gabon for the draft
presidential statement, and affirm our support for its
adoption at the end of this debate.

