Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): Thank you,
Mr. President, for your initiative in convening this
meeting. I also thank Assistant Secretary-General
Tuliameni Kalomoh for introducing the progress report
ofthe Secretary-General (S/2004/52).

The situation in Central Africa has been one of
the main concerns of the Security Council over the
years. More recently, there have been several positive
developments in the situation in the Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo and in Burundi.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
transitional Government has been working steadily for
more than seven months, the transitional Assembly is
now operational and the International Committee in
Support of the Transition is meeting regularly. The
Security Council authorized a strengthened presence
and mandate for the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC), which has been supporting the rule of law,
police reform and the organization of elections. The
Council has also authorized the transitional
Government to deploy its armed forces to Kisangani,
which is a further step towards extending national
authority over the territory, and has agreed to impose
an arms embargo in the Kivu and Ituri regions. We
certainly welcome those developments.

Last week, we had the opportunity to listen to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ambassador William Lacy Swing, on the latest events
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. As a result,
we were better able to assess recent achievements and
to weigh the series of measures still required for
stabilization.

In that connection, my delegation is deeply
saddened by the tragic death of a Kenyan MONUC
military observer in an ambush in Ituri. We urge the
United Nations, in cooperation with the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to strive to
bring to justice all those responsible for that criminal
act.

In Burundi we were pleased to note that the
delegation of Palipehutu-FNL (Rwasa) and President
Ndayizeye met in the Netherlands last month. Though
not conclusive, that initiative clearly confirms that
dialogue is the only way to solve differences in the
country. It sets the path for Agathon Rwasa's
movement to join the "camp of peace", as stated in
paragraph 62 ofthe Secretary-General's report.

My delegation must nevertheless express serious
concern over the human rights situation in Burundi.
Too many violations continue to be reported, and the
Security Council has not been sufficiently responsive.
It has been well over a year since the Council was
requested by the Burundian President to consider
establishing an international commission of judicial
inquiry, and it was only in January that the terms of
reference of the assessment mission were agreed upon
by the Council.

Despite difficulties on the ground, the mission
deployed by the African Union in Burundi is working
very effectively with the Government institutions and
United Nations agencies. We commend its work and
call upon the international community to provide
further technical and financial support to the mission.
This need will be made even clearer when we receive
in the near future the report of the multidisciplinary
United Nations mission that is expected to arrive today
in Burundi to assess the needs of the country in all
fields.

Since the Council has been considering the
individual situation of each country in Central Africa, I
wish to concentrate the last part of my remarks today
on two points: development and regional dialogue.

We consider that initiatives to create a healthy
economic environment are central if a peace-building
process is to be sustainable in the long run. We cannot
commit massive international efforts to the quest for
peace only to see them crumble for lack of enough
attention to economic stability and sustained
development. In this connection, the rule of law in the
exploitation of natural resources and the improvement
of trade opportunities in the region cannot be
overlooked.

As regards the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, we concur with assessments made by the Panel
of Experts that the time has come for institutional
reforms to be undertaken in the area of regulation and
control of natural resources now that the country is
unified. "Illegal exploitation", as stated in the
Secretary-General's report,

"remains one of the main sources of funding for
groups involved in perpetuating the conflict".
(5/2004/52, para. 19)

In Burundi, the Economic and Social Council Ad
Hoc Advisory Group was impressed by the initiatives
of the Burundian Government on sustainable
development. My delegation is, however, disappointed
that only 10 per cent of pledges made in 2000 and 2001
by the donor community have been disbursed to the
country so far, as is mentioned in the report before us
today. At this juncture, the Security Council should
reinforce the Secretary-General's appeal for donor
countries to accelerate disbursement.

The United Nations has an important role to play
in conducting long-term initiatives on the road towards
stabilization and development. That includes the
Security Council, as well as its coordinated efforts with
the Economic and Social Council. The cases of
Guinea-Bissau and Burundi are good precedents that
should be further developed. Moreover, the common
efforts of countries of the region towards improving
trade are a major step and we welcome initiatives that
are being taken bilaterally by Uganda and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo's transitional
Government.

That brings my delegation to the second point -
regional dialogue. The Secretary-General has pointed
out that prospects for convening the conference of the
Great Lakes have significantly improved. Indeed, the
organizational meeting held last month in Addis Ababa
resulted in the decision to hold the first summit at the
level of head of State in Tanzania in November this
year and a second one in mid-2005. We commend the
Special Representative of Secretary-General, Ibrahima
Fall, and all the seven core countries for this important
development. We are confident that this dialogue will
develop into a pact around the four main thematic areas
targeted by the conference: peace and security,
democracy and good governance, economic
development and regional integration, and
humanitarian and social issues.

We are also pleased by the interest shown by
other countries in the initiative. Angola, the Republic
ofthe Congo and the Central African Republic are now
working together with the core countries in the
preparatory process for the convening of the
international conference. The participation of
neighbouring countries can only add to the success of
the event. In addition, we welcome the comments made
by the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General that any other country outside the
region that has shown interest in the process can be
present as an observer - as Egypt is doing - so long
as the core countries agree to the request made by the
country concerned. Broadening participation beyond
the subregional framework, without affecting the
decision body, will certainly enhance the impact of the
conference worldwide.

As we have seen when discussing the individual
peace processes in Central Africa, the challenges ahead
are enormous, but major accomplishments should not
be discounted. To pave the way for sustainable peace in
the region, we must pay due attention to its
development component and give due support to
African ownership and regional dialogue in post-
conflict stabilization. This is where our cooperative
action is most needed.

