Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the unanimous adoption of resolution 2419
(2018), on youth, peace and security, which highlights
the role youth are called upon to play in preventing
and resolving conflicts. We would like to express
our particular gratitude to the delegation of Sweden
for joining us as co-penholder, as well as to all of the
members of the Security Council for their support,
spirit of compromise and active and constructive
participation during the consultations and negotiations
in the course of the past seven weeks.

We would also like to especially acknowledge
Jordan's commitment to this issue and its initiative of
bringing it to the Security Council through resolution
2250 (2015), adopted by the Council in December 2015.
We would emphasize that young people are crucial to
forging an inclusive vision ofa shared future, a sine qua
non for sustainable peace. The international community
must maximize and harness the potential, commitment
and resilience of young people in order to prevent and
address conflicts.

Peru believes that the resolution that we have just
adopted represents a major contribution to the work
of the Security Council, in keeping with its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. We would emphasize the importance
of ensuring follow-up on this issue in the context of
the agenda of the Security Council. We therefore stress
that the resolution we have just adopted calls on the
Secretary-General to submit in 2020 a report on its
implementation and that of its predecessor, resolution
2250 (2015).

We wish also to underscore the need to combat the
stereotyping of young people, in particular insofar as
it perpetuates forms of discrimination and violence
targeting women. Women's empowerment and the
promotion of gender equality are also key components
of the positive role that young people can play in support
of peace and security.

Finally, we would like to thank the countries that
have expressed their support for this issue through
their co-sponsorship of the draft that we submitted
together with Sweden and to highlight that this reflects
the broad support and commitment of the international
community with respect to the youth, peace and
security agenda.

