Mr. Neritani (Albania): Let me begin by
thanking Mr. Staren Jessen-Petersen, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), for his briefing. I would like to
extend to him my delegation's special thanks and my
Government's appreciation for his personal
commitment in constantly pursuing the goal of a
democratic, multi-ethnic Kosovo. During these two
years, in a difficult and challenging phase, he made a
very tangible contribution to the stabilization and
development of Kosovo. Having won the respect and
appreciation of the international community - and, in
particular, that of the people of Kosovo - we regret
his resignation and wish him the very best in his future
endeavours. His successor's continuation of his
resolute work will find an active and serious partner in
the Albanian Government.

We would like to warmly welcome the presence
in the Security Council Chamber of Prime Minister
Ceku of Kosovo. We commend him for his
achievements in implementing standards and for his
Government's realistic commitment to make the
accelerated pace a sustainable and permanent one. We
are convinced that the Prime Minister and his
Government will continue to build a viable, multi-
ethnic, democratic and stable Kosovo for all of its
citizens and for the entire region.

We also welcome the presence of Ms. Sanda
Raskovic-Ivic at the head of the Serbian delegation.
We have before us the Secretary General's report
on the activities of UNMIK and the situation and
developments in Kosovo from 1 January to 30 April
2006 (S/2006/361). Let me express my delegation's
appreciation to the Secretary-General for that realistic
and substantive document.

We are pleased with the report's overall
assessment that significant progress and tangible
achievements have been made in various important
areas in that period. We note with satisfaction the
existence of an improved and stable political and
security situation in Kosovo. The election of the
current leadership in Kosovo in accordance with
democratic principles and in closer cooperation with
representatives of the international community is a sign
of the increased capacity and maturity of Kosovo
institutions, which bodes well for the future.

The intention and determination of the new
leadership to accelerate the implementation of
standards and to create a more constructive relationship
by reaching out to Serbs and other communities has
been effectively translated into concrete actions. It is
now possible to discern progress across the broad front
of standards implementation. Many processes within
the standards programme have been revitalized.
Concrete and demonstrable results have been achieved
on priority standards. A legitimate institutional
framework, a checks and balances mechanism, and the
effective engagement of Kosovo's President, Prime
Minister and other governmental officials will be more
effective if a measured, responsible and forward-
looking approach is taken by other stakeholders of that
society. Despite their origin, the obstacles created by
some Kosovo Serbs do not contribute to establishing a
multi-ethnic and democratic society and State in
Kosovo.

We welcome the renewed vigour and fresh
achievements in the implementation of the standards,
and we encourage Kosovo's Government and political
leaders to continue to tackle energetically the
challenges in standards implementation, with a
particular focus on priority areas recently highlighted
by the Contact Group. The systematic and accelerated
implementation of the standards should continue to be
an essential part of building a sustainable, democratic
and multi-ethnic society and State firmly rooted in the
European architecture. We are convinced that Prime
Minister Ceku's Government will maintain the positive
momentum it has created and, as he has personally

vowed, will continue with the implementation of the
standards as his most important responsibility
throughout and beyond the status process.

To build a multi-ethnic and democratic Kosovo, it
is essential that all minority communities fully
participate in Kosovo's Institutions in a spirit of
cooperation and with recognition of their legitimacy.
We encourage non-participating minorities, especially
Kosovo Serbs, to respect, fully cooperate with and
participate in the political process and in the
Institutions to ensure that their needs are met. We again
appeal to Kosovo Albanians to continue their good
work while demanding responsibility and doing their
utmost to respect the freedom and rights of minority
communities. With a high degree of responsibility and
accountability towards the present and the future,
Albanians, Serbs and other minorities in Kosovo
should look forward to their common future, strengthen
their cooperation and leave behind their past.

Kosovo is going through a very important stage at
present. Its status process continues to remain the
driving force. We note with satisfaction that the
process designed to determine Kosovo's status has
moved forward during the reporting period. The
Albanian Government welcomes the direct talks
between Pristina and Belgrade in Vienna on the crucial
matters of decentralization, economic issues and
religious and cultural heritage. We encourage and urge
both sides to further continue this dialogue in a
constructive and realistic manner, despite currently
existing differences.

The political process to determine Kosovo's final
status has attracted great attention in and out of
Kosovo. With regard to negotiations to move this
process forward, Albania will continue to play an
active and constructive role in closer cooperation with
the international community's relevant institutions and
representatives. We continue to hold the view that the
status process should proceed steadily and swiftly, with
a decisive solution before the end of 2006. The
conclusion of this process within this year and the
definition of the status will serve the stability and
security of Kosovo and the whole region. Delay and
uncertainty will serve no one's interest.

We reiterate our strong support for the Contact
Group's Guiding Principles for the settlement of the
status of Kosovo. We agree that there should be no
changes in Kosovo's current territory and borders and
no partition of Kosovo or union with any other country
or with part of any other country. We do support a
realistic, stable and multi-ethnic solution of Kosovo's
status, one which will respect the overwhelming and
clear will of the people of Kosovo.

We stress our strong conviction that the most
realistic, pragmatic and just solution of this status is
independence, with the extension of a civil and security
presence of the international community for a certain
period of time. We mean an independence that will
ensure the support and protection of the rights of Serbs
and all other minorities and of their cultural and
religious heritage. We support an independence that
will achieve a society where all people in Kosovo can
live in dignity and prosperity and free from fear. We
are encouraged that the Kosovo institutions and leaders
hold the same vision and are proving their commitment
to such an outcome. We are confident that
independence will not only generate and guarantee
social and economic stability and security for Kosovo
and the whole region, but will also help to establish a
sustainable, multi-ethnic, democratic society there. It
will pave the way for a clearer European perspective.

In conclusion, let me reassure this body that the
Albanian Government will continue to play an active
and constructive role in the region and on this
particular matter. The international community and the
negotiating team of Mr. Ahtisaari will have a reliable
partner in Albania throughout the upcoming process
and beyond.

