Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this open debate on an item that concerns
one of the most important challenges to international
peace and security. I should also like to extend our
thanks to the Chairmen of the three Security Council
Committees for their briefings. We are pleased to make
the following observations, which we had previously
expressed during our two years as a member of the
Security Council, but whose importance we would like
to underline in the light of the briefings we heard this
morning.

In general terms, we note that the Security
Council deals with terrorism without a clear definition
of the word, and without addressing its root causes and
the reasons behind its spread. Nor does the Council
take into proper account the issues of human rights and
international law, including international humanitarian
law. Thus, the Council is neglecting one of the most
important elements of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, which two years ago was
adopted by the General Assembly as its resolution
60/288.

Secondly, the Security Council adopts means to
deal with terrorism without sufficient coherence or
coordination with other United Nations organs, such as
the General Assembly and its Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy and other committees and counter-
terrorism mechanisms in the United Nations system,
including the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force. It is thus important to assess and review the
Council's policy regarding terrorism.

I turn now to the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC), established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001).
Despite the fact that the mandate of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)
was renewed in resolution 1805 (2008), no end date for
the work of the Committee itself has been set. One of
the most encouraging things is that by mid-2009 the
role of the Committee will be reviewed by the Council;
we hope that this will be a comprehensive review,
taking into account the lessons learned. It was
important that the resolution included some positive
elements, such as underlining the importance of States,
in their counter-terrorism activities, complying with
their obligations under international humanitarian law,
international law, human rights law and refugee law.
The resolution referred to CTITF and the importance of
the participation of the CT ED in activities undertaken
in the framework of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy.

The organizational plan for CTED contained in
document S/2008/80, which was submitted by the
Executive Directorate in accordance with the
provisions of resolution 1787 (2007), sets forth a
number of important points, such as the establishment
of a centre for quality control to review all documents
before they are issued and a proposed amendment of
the working methods of CTED so that it may better
focus and adapt its visits to countries in all areas. But
we hoped to see in this resolution and in the
organizational plan a fuller explanation of those
positive aspects and a clearer timetable for the
resolution's implementation.

It is very important that the Council should deal
non-selectively with all aspects of terrorism, but in
particular efforts at preparing Preliminary

Implementation Assessments should be fair and the
visits undertaken by CTED should be balanced and
comprehensive, since resolution 1373 (2001) requires
all States without exception to pass counter-terrorism
legislation. Accordingly, we should not focus only on
visits to certain regions or countries, while exempting
other States because they are developed or because
they export technical assistance to other countries.

Experience and recent events have proven that
there is a deficiency in the laws of some developed
countries that do not fit the requirements of resolutions
1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005) concerning the
prohibition of incitement. Such acts of incitement to
hatred have been occurring repeatedly, particularly
with regard to sacred matters, and have thus provoked
great emotion. Those acts violate resolution 1624
(2005) and create an environment not conducive to
counter-terrorism efforts, thereby undermining efforts
undertaken in the context of the Alliance of
Civilizations. Such acts prevent dealing with the
underlying causes of terrorism that are outlined in the
Global Strategy.

With regard to the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities, the listing and de-listing of
names and groups on the consolidated list does not take
into account due process. It is quite politicized, which
strips the Council of important credibility in the
counter-terrorism arena. The nature of the work of the
Committee's Monitoring Team also needs to be
reviewed. The reports presented by the Team include at
times undocumented judgments that could be
interpreted as an implied accusation of terrorism
against specific countries and specific regions.

With regard to the Security Council Committee
on weapons of mass destruction (WMDs), established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), we should not
introduce controversial issues in the work of that
Committee. The committee should concentrate on
prohibiting the acquisition of WMDs by non-State
actors. The best means of doing that is basically the
disarmament of those weapons and the prohibition of
their proliferation by implementing international
treaties in that regard. We should not take resolutions
prohibiting the proliferation of WMDs as a pretext for
preventing States from enjoying technology and rights
for peaceful purposes, in accordance with international
treaties in that area.
On the basis of our position supporting efforts to
combat terrorism, whether nationally or through
multilateral agreements, we emphasize the importance
of full compliance with international law and
international humanitarian law, as well as all related
conventions and protocols, so that such efforts to
counter terrorism would not be vindictive, leading to
an increase in terrorist acts, rather than addressing the
causes of terrorism.

Also, we should not equate terrorism with the
legitimate struggle against foreign occupation. Since
the Security Council, in accordance with the Charter, is
responsible for maintaining international peace and
security, it is therefore very important to enhance the
credibility of this organ and to build the deepest trust
between it and the States Members of the United
Nations, so that its policies concerning counter-
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations can be
activated and implemented in full.

