Mr. Wisnumurti (Indonesia): Let me begin by
expressing the Indonesian delegation's appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his report, contained in document
S/1996/541 of 10 July 1996 and its addenda, concerning the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1054 (1996).
We consider that the report reflects a balanced and
objective view, since it takes into account not only the
measures taken by Member States but also the initiatives
taken by the Sudanese Government in its efforts to comply
with the relevant Security Council resolutions.

We, like others, are deeply concerned by the
assassination attempt against President Hosni Mubarak of
the Arab Republic of Egypt in Addis Ababa in June 1995.
Such an act of violence can only be decried in the strongest
terms, and the perpetrators must be brought to justice.
Indeed, the Indonesian delegation has always held a
steadfast position against international terrorism, as that
constitutes one of the most flagrant violations of human
rights. In this regard, the Indonesian delegation wishes to
reiterate its view that the Sudan bears the ultimate
responsibility for fully complying with the provisions of
Security Council resolutions 1044 (1996) and 1054 (1996)
by apprehending the perpetrators of this act of violence, as
well as by refraining from providing support or shelter to
terrorists on its territory. We are therefore encouraged to
note that this aspect has already been incorporated into
paragraph 1 of the draft resolution before us.

Notwithstanding this, the Indonesian delegation has
believed, from the beginning, that a gradual approach to
dealing with the matter would have been preferable,
particularly in the light of the efforts made by the Sudan.
As reflected in the letters of 31 May 1996 and 24 June
1996, the Sudanese Government has made efforts to find
two of the three suspects and has also called upon
Interpol for assistance. It has also stated its condemnation
of terrorism and has taken the necessary steps to ensure
that it is not perpetrated from its territory. Moreover, the
Sudanese Government has made efforts to extradite many
possible perpetrators of terrorism. These efforts follow the
spirit of paragraph 1 (b) of resolution 1054 (1996). We
also note that Sudan's letter of 2 July 1996 states that
efforts are being made to enhance bilateral relations
between Egypt and the Sudan as part of its intention to
improve relations with its neighbouring countries.

However, on the assumption that the three suspects
are no longer in the country, the Sudan would not be in
a position to comply fully with the provisions of the
relevant resolutions. Given the insufficient information
available at this juncture, we believe that it would be
more constructive for the Council to further encourage the
Sudan to undertake efforts to provide information on the
suspects, including their whereabouts, by allowing more
time and avoiding overly harsh measures that in the end
may prove to be counterproductive in their attempt to
ensure the Sudan's cooperation with the international
community. We therefore cannot but express our
reservations regarding the imposition of wide-ranging
sanctions against Sudan Airways, as reflected in
paragraph 3 of the draft resolution. Although the ban on
Sudan Airways is primarily targeted at its international
flights, we are none the less concerned that it would also
have an impact on its domestic activities, particularly the
transport of humanitarian needs, since these two aspects
are closely interlinked.

While fully realizing that, under paragraphs 4 and 5
of the draft resolution, implementation of these measures
and consideration of all the aspects of the modalities of
implementation would not be determined by the Council
until 90 days after the date of adoption of the draft
resolution on the basis of the facts established by the
Secretary-General, we feel that the timing of
incorporating such measures in the draft is not
appropriate. Moreover, our understanding regarding these
modalities would also include a fixed duration for the
imposition of such sanctions.

The Indonesian delegation is concerned about the
extent of the impact of sanctions on the Sudan, since it is
one of the poorest countries in the world. Their
imposition would have detrimental effects on the innocent
civilian population and impact negatively on the economy.
We would like to reiterate that, as a matter of principle,
the imposition of sanctions as a means of bringing

 

pressure to bear on Governments is a matter of utmost
seriousness. Sanctions are not meant to be punitive.
Therefore, the adverse humanitarian impact, in particular in
the case of the Sudan, must not be so quickly dismissed.

In this regard, it is my view that in order for a
resolution to achieve its desired effects and to become an
effective tool to rectify a situation, it is imperative to
address not only the concerns of the issue at hand, but also
to maintain strict adherence to the basic principle of
non-punitive sanctions. For it would be a meaningless
exercise if resolutions were adopted which were not
implementable, as this would only affect the Council's own
credibility. If fundamental principles are not respected,
however good intentions may be, a resolution may not
adequately address the matter.

The draft resolution before us today essentially
addresses the continued non-compliance by the Sudanese
Government with the requests set out in paragraph 4 of
resolution 1044 (1996) and reaffirmed in paragraph 1 of
resolution 1054 (1996). Considering that the basic tenets
remain that those responsible for the assassination attempt
must be brought to justice and that the Sudan has the
responsibility to comply with the relevant Security Council
resolutions, and in the light of the observations I have just
expressed, my delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution.

