The President: I thank the representative of France
for his kind words addressed to me.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of the United States.

Let me join those who have welcomed the
representative of Haiti to our midst for this very important
occasion.

Today, the Council marks another milestone in
Haiti's journey from tyranny to democracy. The United
Nations Mission in Haiti (UNMIH) has helped to ensure
a climate of security within which free elections could be
held and a new President inaugurated. For the first time
in Haiti's history, political power has been transferred
from a President elected by the people to a new President
also elected by the people, without violence and with
respect for democratic principles. That is an advance for
freedom and stability throughout this hemisphere, and I
was delighted to represent President Clinton at that
historic event. The joy was palpable, and the spirit of
hope evident. We congratulate both President Aristide and
President Preval on this remarkable occasion.

Today, in response to the request of Haiti's new
President, Rene Preval, we have approved an extension of
the United Nations Mission. By this decision, the
international community renews its support to Haitian
security and stability and continues its much-needed
assistance to the newly trained, newly deployed Haitian
National Police. This will allow the Haitian Government
to consolidate and expand further its recent political,
social, and economic advances.

The resolution builds on the progress that has
already occurred in Haiti. The United Nations Mission
will be reduced by more than two thirds, in both its
military and in its civilian police components. The
Secretary-General is instructed to begin planning, no later
than June, for the mission's withdrawal. The Security

 

Council's role and the need for military peace-keepers in
Haiti is coming to an end, but it has not ended yet. The
resolution approved today is designed to help finish the job,
and during the next four months the United States will
welcome recommendations from the Secretary-General on
further ways that the international community can
contribute to Haiti's development, democracy and security.

We should not forget that, through much of Haitian
history, the official outposts of authority - the military
headquarters and police - have been used not to enhance
the security of Haitian citizens, but to deprive them of it. A
new era has now dawned: Haiti's Government is committed
to providing justice to all its citizens, and we welcome that
commitment.

But an effective and professional national police
cannot be invented overnight. Today, the most experienced
of the National Police trainees has only eight months on the
job: the police need more time. The continued presence of
a modest number of United Nations peace-keepers will help
provide that time and thus reduce the likelihood of violence
and disruption.

My Government is heartened by the decision of
Canada to offer itself as a candidate for a leadership role in
the next phase of the United Nations Mission. We also
welcome the call in operative paragraph 1 l of the resolution
for voluntary contributions for the Mission to fulfil its
mandate. We urge every Member to assist in appropriate
ways.

We also urge nations and the relevant international
institutions to continue efforts on behalf of the emergency
economic recovery programme. The door to private
investment must be open: the future of democratic Haiti
depends on an economic programme that recognizes and
rewards the initiative of Haiti's people. In advance, we
express our appreciation to all those who will rise to the
occasion and give the Haitians a continuing helping hand.
We are especially grateful to the Canadians for their
generous and instant comprehension of what was needed to
assure success.

The value of the resolution we have approved today is
also reflected in the unanimous support for it demonstrated
by all western hemisphere States. This demonstration of
regional support for a democratic transition is in the best
tradition of inter-American cooperation, and it reflects the
fact that events in Haiti have had and continue to have
consequences beyond the borders of that country.

The Security Council may be proud of its role in
helping Haiti help itself. With the assistance of the
dedicated personnel of UNMIH, and especially with the
outstanding job done by Mr. Brahimi, the Haitian people
have fashioned an astonishing triumph of hope.

We must remember, though, that this victory is not
final; it is not yet complete. As the resolution we have
approved today recognizes, the future of Haiti rests, as it
must, in Haitian hands. Democratic institutions cannot be
imposed upon a society; they must be nourished from
within. The road ahead remains uphill, but the
international community can be satisfied that those with
the commitment to build a free Haiti now have that
opportunity. By allowing that chance, the Council has
kept faith with the people of Haiti and with the Charter's
pledge

"to promote social progress and better standards of
life in larger freedom".

I resume my function as President of the Council.

The representative of Canada has asked to speak. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.

