Mr. Ikouebe (Congo) (spoke in French): My
delegation also welcomes the representative of Serbia
and the Prime Minister of the Provisional Institutions
in Kosovo.

In appointing Mr. Ahtisaari to lead the
negotiations on the status of Kosovo, the Secretary-
General, with the support of the Security Council and
international community, sought to establish a political
process that would eventually lead Serbs and Albanians
in Kosovo to live together within a multi-ethnic
society.

Aware of what is at stake here, given the stability
of the whole region, Congo associated itself with the
Contact Group's appeal to complete negotiations by the
end of 2006. Today, in the light of the comments made
by the Secretary-General and with the additional
information provided by Mr. Riicker, it has to be noted
that we are at a crossroads after seven years of interim
administration and provisional status. Action without
delay appears to be an urgent necessity.

We await with great interest the submission of the
settlement proposal, which Mr. Ahtisaari had to defer
on 10 November in order to take into account the
parliamentary elections planned by Belgrade for
21 January. In the light of the situation described in the
Secretary-General's report, it is important not to delay
this process any further as that would lead to obvious
risks, including the resurgence of violence carried out
by armed groups whose only objective is to exploit
potential frustrations.

At a time when we have every reason to believe
that we are close to the finish line, the Security Council
must express forcefully its condemnation of any
unilateral act or any threat or use of violence that could
undermine the political process that Mr. Ahtisaari has
led with much effort. We should also deplore the fact
that the Serb leaders in Kosovo have chosen to remain
on the sidelines of the political process by being absent
from the workings of the Provisional Institutions in
Kosovo. As stressed by the Secretary-General,
whatever the outcome of the settlement of Kosovo's
future status, Serbs and Albanians must find common
solutions to the problems that they share, which arise
in relation to services that must be provided to all,
without distinction.

The report cites the limited progress in the talks,
caused by the apparently irreconcilable positions of the
two parties. We express once again our full confidence
in Mr. Ahtisaari and hope that he will be able to
propose a settlement that will meet the international
community's expectations.

Apart from these meagre results, it is encouraging
to note the positive impact that the question of status
has had on the other phase of the political process: the
implementation of the standards. At the initiative of the
Government of Kosovo, supported by UNMIK -
which we commend for its tireless efforts - some
positive progress has been made in areas essential for
the reconciliation of communities and the
establishment of a multi-ethnic society. That progress
concerns in particular the 13 priorities defined by
UNMIK and the Contact Group.

The establishment of pilot municipal units will
help to limit the deep division between Serbs and
Albanians in Kosovo and will eventually promote the
development that we all hope for: seeing Kosovo's
Serbs and Albanians living together with respect for
their diversity and mindful of the protection of
minority rights.

So it is up to the parties and their various
communities to shoulder their responsibilities in this
final stage. Ultimately, whatever the political
settlement that is achieved, international support will
be necessary to ensure the viability of the process.

