Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank
the Secretary-General and Special Representative
Mr. Jan Kubis for the detailed report (S/2014/163) on
developments in the situation in Afghanistan since the
end of 2013. I also thank the Permanent Representative
of Afghanistan to the United Nations for his statement.

Chad's vote in favour of resolution 2145 (2014) to
renew the mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) is a vote of
encouragement, as we note with satisfaction the
political, economic and human rights developments
with the establishment of the Kabul process. We are
also encouraged by progress on integration, regional
cooperation and human rights, as well as the improved
coordination and conditions for humanitarian assistance
thanks to the Mission's support.

We call on all the parties concerned to commit
themselves, in a spirit of conciliation and reconciliation,
to restoring and strengthening peace in Afghanistan.
We also welcome the inclusive direct talks involving
all stakeholders, namely, politicians, traditional
community leaders, religious scholars and civil society,
towards the restoration of peace in Afghanistan. We
think that the elections due to be held in April will help
to further stabilize the country.

However, we are very concerned about the
recent security situation in Afghanistan, given the
significantly increased number of incidents in 2013,
including the killing of four UNAMA staff members in
January. In that regard, Chad calls for respect of human
rights, in particular international humanitarian law,
which protects civilian populations in armed conflicts.
Particular attention should be paid to the situation of
children and women and other vulnerable people, who
often find themselves victims of incidents involving
anti-personnel mines. We are very concerned about the
increase in the trafficking in drugs and other narcotics,
which has a negative impact on the international
security situation, as was the case in Mali, where the
situation deteriorated with the rise in criminal networks
and funding for international terrorism.

Chad encourages Afghanistan's neighbouring
States to continue to cooperate in the transnational
fight against drug and arms trafficking. Chad support
UNAMA and the work of the international community
aimed at finding a political solution to the crisis
and joins the Secretary-General's call for increased
humanitarian assistance to vulnerable populations.

Finally, we condemn armed groups that recruit
child soldiers and commit violence against women. The
perpetrators of such crimes should be prosecuted and
brought to justice. In conclusion, we support the United
Nations staff in Afghanistan, in particular Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Mr. J an Kubis,
for all their ongoing efforts for the Afghan people.

