Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): Echoing Churchill's
remarks, I too would like to say that ifI had had the
time, I would have prepared a shorter statement. Ijoin
other Security Council members in congratulating you,
Mr. President, and the delegation ofUruguay for having
successully lead the Council during the productive
month of January, despite having only just recently
assumed membership of the Council. The excellent
manner in which you expertly steered the Council's
work this past month is indeed commendable.

It is noteworthy that the last the time the Council met
in this formal wrap-up format (see S/PV.7516 we hadjust adopted presidential statement S/PRST/2015/ 15, which
concerns the situation in Syria and outlines proposals
for the implementation of the Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex). Since then, the Council has made
further strides in addressing the Syrian conflict, most
notably with the adoption of several key outcomes last
December. In January, we assessed the implementation
of those decisions, particularly in resolution 2258
(2015). In our assessment, while limited access for
humanitarian relief and supplies had been secured
for Madaya, Kafraya and Zabadani, parties to the
conflict, especially the Government, must do more
to address the dire humanitarian situaion of Syrian
civilians in other besieged and hard-to-reach areas. We
strongly reiterate the call upon all parties to allow and
facilitate the movement and provision of humanitarian
relief, particularly across lines of combat. It is only
humane and right to do so. The concept of medical
neutrality, highlighted by Spain during the open debate
on the protection of civilians held on 19 January (see S/PV.7606), seems particularly relevant in this regard.
We look forward with interest to reading about the
further development of the concept.

Looking a bit further back, to the end of 2015,
strong and action-oriented outcomes were adopted,
including on Burundi, Libya and South Sudan, as well
as on thematic issues such as counter-terrorism and
women and peace and security, inter alia.

We have just now heard a briefing by the co-leaders
on the Council's visit to Burundi last week. I wish to
emphasize the point that Burundi must realize that the
Council's desire is to seek a better and more secure and
predictable future, and to address the current insecurity
issues through political inclusiveness and dialogue. We
therefore share the co-leaders' assessment, particularly
on the need for the Government to do more to restore
public confidence and in maintaining security and law
and order for all segments of society in the country.

As demonstrated by the many significant decisions
taken during the past month or so, when Council
members demonstrated significant flexibility and
goodwill, we were able to come together to effectively
discharge the mandate of maintaining international
peace and security. We should continue to build on this
positive momentum.

Such solidarity was again demonstrated in the
Council's swift and unified response to the nuclear-
test detonations by the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea earlier this month. Malaysia reiterates its
condemnation of the test detonation, which we consider
to be an unwarranted provocation that could threaten
peace and security in the Korean peninsula and in the
wider region. The test violates international norms
against nuclear testing, to which all responsible members
of the international community are committed.

We also welcome once again the possibility of
advancing or achieving closure with respect to the
long-running conflict in Colombia. We congratulate
the parties, the grantors, the accompanying countries
and other partner stakeholders for their tireless
efforts towards peace in Colombia. We look forward
to working on operationalizing the special political
mission established by resolution 2261 (2016), which
will form part of the tripartite mechanism to monitor
and verify the ceasefire and cessation of hostilities
between the parties.

The Council also saw noteworthy and positive
developments on the Iran nuclear issue. In January,
implementation day of the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action between Iran and its international partners,
prescribed under resolution 2231 (2015), has arrived,
and we welcome the lifting of United Nations and
other sanctions against Iran. We urge Iran to continue
to work closely with the International Atomic Energy
Agency and other relevant partners to remove all

lingering doubts as to the peaceful nature of its nuclear
programme.

In the light of such positive developments, we
would also encourage Iran to continue deepening
dialogue and cooperation with its regional partners
aimed at addressing the scourge of terrorism and the
various conflicts in the Middle East region.

Notwithstanding the very useful interactive
informal briefings held at the end of the past few
months, Malaysia continues to believe in the utility
and value of these formal wrap-up sessions. As such,
we are pleased that Uruguay has decided to hold this
formal wrap-up session and the informal briefing
later this afternoon, reflecting the views expressed by
elected Council members which had served earlier,
as well as the sentiments of the wider United Nations
membership. Malaysia is of the view that formal note
507 briefings such as this one should become a fixed
item on the Council's programme of work, particularly
for the month of December. Among other reasons,
formal wrap-ups in December would provide outgoing
elected Council members with the opportunity to
place on record views and reflections on the Council's
membership. At the same time, it would also afford an
opportunity for the Council as a whole to reflect on and
assess its performance over the past year. This would be
an important exercise in transparency and inclusivity
on the part of the Council.

While recognizing that the scheduling of Council
meetings, including the formal wrap-ups, is the
prerogative of the presidency during any given month,
we will be consulting closely with all Council members
in taking this proposal forward.

On that note, I conclude by wishing ambassador
Rafael Ramirez Carrefio and the entire Venezuelan
delegation all the best in taking up the Council's
presidency for February, which we believe will be
equally fulfilling and productive.

