Mr. Gillerman (Israel): For the past four weeks,
the peoples of Israel and Lebanon have been caught up
in a brutal and tragic conflict. It has caused unbearable
loss and suffering on both sides. It is time to bring this
conflict to an end.

But speeches and resolutions do not themselves
end conflicts. Neither do good intentions. Conflicts are
ended by actions, not by words. They are ended when
those who sparked the conflict and those who seek to
continue to threaten the region are confronted and
overcome. The critical test that the Security Council
faces is not whether it can adopt a resolution. The
question is whether the Council and the international
community can adopt a course of action, a blueprint for
change, which will end the threat that Hizbollah and its
sponsors pose to the peoples of Israel and Lebanon and
to the region as a whole.

That is the test, and both the forces of terror and
the forces of moderation in the Middle East are looking
to the Council to see if it is up to that challenge.

Neither the people of Israel nor the people of
Lebanon have any wish to be in this conflict. There is
no quarrel between us. Six years ago, Israel withdrew
its forces from every inch of Lebanese territory, as the
Council has emphatically confirmed.

It could not be clearer: the issue in this crisis is
not territory, but terror. During the past six years,
Hizbollah terrorists, funded, trained, armed and
directed by Iran and Syria, have dug their roots deep
into Lebanese soil and have spread their poisonous
branches throughout its towns and villages. The evil
fruit of this growth has been over 13,000 deadly
missiles murderously directed at the people of Israel.
And over the past four weeks, Hizbollah has viciously
implemented its threats, launching those lethal missiles
directly and indiscriminately at the towns of Haifa and
Afula, Nahariya and Hadera, Kiryat Shemona and Kfar
Giladi, Carmiel, Metulla and Akko, and the holy cities
of Nazareth and Tiberias, targeting men, women and
children, Jewish, Muslim and Christian alike.

No country in the whole world would, or should,
allow a terrorist organization to publicly threaten its
destruction and to develop a vast infrastructure of
terrorism unimpeded on its borders. No State
represented in this Organization would, or should, sit
passively while over 3,500 missiles are fired at its town
and villages deliberately targeting homes and hospitals,
at schools and kindergartens. No Government would,
or should, do less to protect its people than the
Government of Israel has done in the face of this
Hizbollah campaign of terror, and no people would, or
should, be satisfied unless their leaders did the same.

Israel, like any State, has done and will continue
to do whatever is necessary to protect the lives of its
citizens. It has the right and the duty to act in self-
defence, and it will spare no effort to bring its abducted
soldiers home.

In fulfilling this responsibility to protect its
citizens, Israel's task is doubly complicated. It must
defend itself against an enemy that not only
deliberately targets civilians but that also hides among
them, concealing its weapons and rocket launchers at
the heart of civilian communities, as well as in
mosques and United Nations compounds. For
Hizbollah, civilians are not just a target, but also a
shield.

In this impossible situation, in which Hizbollah
openly flouts the fundamental humanitarian principle
of distinguishing combatants from civilians, Israel has
made strenuous efforts to defend itself in accordance
with the principles of international law, to direct its
attacks against military targets and to avoid
disproportionate damage to the civilians used as cover
by the terrorists. At the same time, even as the
terrorists' missiles fly, Israel has worked to ensure that
the humanitarian needs of the population can be met,
enabling convoys carrying aid and supplies to reach
those who need them and facilitating evacuation of
foreign citizens and United Nations personnel.

Could there be a difference more striking or
profound than that between Israel and the terrorists it is

confronting, between those who equip their residential
buildings with bomb shelters and those who fill them
with missiles, between those who drop leaflets
entreating civilians to leave the terrorist strongholds
and those who hide rocket launchers beneath
unknowing apartment dwellers, or between those who
mourn the death of every civilian, Lebanese or Israeli,
as a tragedy and a failure and those who see in it a
victory and a cause for celebration?

I believe that the people of Lebanon, through all
the pain and anguish of these past few weeks, have
seen through the callous disregard of Hizbollah, which
claims to fight their cause but places a weapon next to
a sleeping child. I believe that one courageous
Lebanese youngster was speaking for many when he
wrote in his Internet blog, "It is not only Israeli
soldiers that Hizbollah has taken hostage. It is us, the
people of Lebanon". I believe it has never been clearer
that, for all its talk of bravery, Hizbollah has
demonstrated the lowest form of cowardice, cowering
behind the weakest members of society. Indeed, in
many cases, Hizbollah's lethal missiles are fired on
timers, so that the terrorists can flee the launching site
while leaving helpless families behind to shield the
military target. And this the terrorists have learned well
from their sponsors: from Iran and Syria. Just as
Hizbollah chooses to hide behind others and fight from
within their homes, so do Iran and Syria demonstrate
cowardice and disdain, fighting their wars through
proxies, on Lebanese soil. Perhaps more than anything
else it is this disdain for the lives of those they claim to
be fighting for, this chain of cowardice, which unites
Iran and Syria, Hizbollah and Hamas: the quartet of
terror.

These past four weeks of violence have taken a
painful toll on the Lebanese and Israeli peoples. But
they have also created a new opportunity. After six
years of inaction that allowed Hizbollah, with the
backing of Syria and Iran, to develop a lethal capacity
to destabilize the region, a significant part of that
capability has been destroyed. Hizbollah bases have
been dismantled, missile launchers and stockpiles of
weapons have been removed, and the area of south
Lebanon has been substantially cleared of the
infrastructure of terrorism. As a result, for the first time
in six years, there is a possibility that Lebanon and the
international community can begin anew and repair the
omissions that led to the current crisis.
5
But this requires determined and forceful action.
It requires a strong, robust and effective international
force which will ensure the dismantling and disarming
of all terrorist groups and the implementation of
resolution 1559 (2004) in all its parts. It also requires
enforceable and effective measures that will prevent
the continued supply and rearmament of weapons and
ammunition from the merchants of terror in Damascus
and Tehran, which continue on a daily basis, even as
we speak. And it requires the Government of Lebanon
to show the will and the courage to retake control of its
destiny, to confront the terrorists that have wreaked
havoc on its society and to meet the basic obligations
placed by international law and by the Council on
Lebanon to end the use of its territory as a base to
threaten the territory of others. These are fundamental
and unconditional obligations expected of any

Government, and they are not dependent on its assent.

These are practical measures needed to lead us
out of this crisis. Israel is ready to cease hostilities and
to withdraw its forces if these effective measures come
in its place, so that the terrorist threat on its citizens is
finally brought to an end. We want a ceasefire, but a
ceasefire that sows the seeds of future peace, not of
future conflict.

The test of any resolution or proposal must be
whether it will effectively bring about those practical
changes on the ground. Let us not forget that a
resolution is not an end, but a means to achieving our
end: a new and sustainable situation in which the
peoples of Lebanon and Israel are freed from the threat
of terror and have the chance to live a normal life in
peace and prosperity.

I am sure that my Arab colleagues who have
spoken today, and who I believe are sincere in their
desire for peace and stability for the region, do not
want a resolution to create a vacuum that Hizbollah
will fill. I am sure that they do not want a return to the
status quo ante, in which the terrorists and their
sponsors can hold a region and the prospects for peace
hostage. And I am sure they do not want a resolution
that demonstrates impotence rather than action.

The terrorists are watching. If the Security
Council adopts the path of half-measures, concessions
and mere declarations, they will be emboldened, and
we will find ourselves back at this table a week, a
month or a year from now, facing a tragedy of similar,
or even greater, proportions. But if the Council adopts

a path of action and takes the measures necessary to
ensure that its own resolutions are implemented,
terrorists and their masters in our region and
throughout the world will know that they have come
face to face with the will and resolve of a united
international community. And, as a result, the forces of
peace and moderation in the Middle East will have won
a crucial battle for the future of our tortured region.

We ask only that the international community
stand by those forces of peace; that it understand that
by fighting against terrorism, we fight for peace; and
that it have the courage, the wisdom and the conviction
to ensure that the end of this conflict creates a new
pattern of behaviour - a reality in which the
moderates prevail and the extremists meet with the
justice and isolation they so clearly deserve.

I turn once again to my Lebanese colleague and,
through him, to the Lebanese people. There is no
dispute between us. The horrendous violence and
suffering of these past few weeks have been fuelled not
by any interest or agenda of either of our States. They
have been fuelled only by the cynical and genocidal
intent of extremist regimes that wish to destroy any
possible prospect that we might turn their culture of
hate into a culture of hope. We must change their
culture of hate into a culture of hope - a culture in
which Lebanese and Israeli children can go to school
rather than cower in bomb shelters. We must do so
today in order to bequeath to them the tomorrow they
deserve.

I believe that this culture of hope can and will
prevail. Children are not born wanting to be shahids or
murderers of the innocent. Ultimately, the innate
human desire to create a better life for ourselves and
those around us will prove stronger than the hatreds
that have manipulated and fuelled this conflict.

For the people of Lebanon, this is a critical
moment of decision - whether to cast their lot with
those who will work to promote peace and prosperity
or with those committed to undermining any chance of
such progress. The choice, quite simply, is between
those who build and those who destroy. For the sake of
our peoples, for the sake of our children, I beg them to
choose the builders.

The flags of our two States, which show the
cedars of Lebanon and the Star of David, remind us
that the common history of our peoples is one of
building together. The biblical Book of Kings recounts
that King Hiram of Tyre, in Lebanon, sent cedar trees
and expert craftsmen to King Solomon, son of David,
to join him in building the holy temple in the city of
peace, Jerusalem. Our people have a long and glorious
history of building together. Let us find the courage to
rise from the ashes of war and the ruins of conflict, and
to build together once again.

