Mr. Sarkowicz (Poland): It is an honour for me to
deliver this statement on behalf of Croatia and my own
country, Poland. As we fully subscribe to the statement
delivered on behalf of European Union, allow me to
present a few remarks that both our countries share
with regard to the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004).

Croatia and Poland have a long-standing and
successful history of bilateral cooperation in the sphere
of disarmament and non-proliferation. In the context
of the United Nations, both our countries perceive
resolution 1540 (2004) to be one of the most important
elements of the global non-proliferation architecture. In
that context, both Croatia and Poland have undertaken
various initiatives aimed at promoting the goals and
objectives of the resolution.

In 2004, after the adoption of the resolution, both
our countries took the obligations derived from that
document very seriously. We remain aware of the
impact that the implementation of the resolution has
on international peace and security. To fully meet
high non-proliferation standards, both our countries
have undertaken measures aimed at increasing the
capabilities of the relevant national law enforcement
agencies in order to prepare them to respond to the
challenges posed by the illegal smuggling of materials
related to weapons of mass destruction to non-State
actors. I would like to draw the Council's attention to
the following initiatives, which are among the various
steps that both our countries have undertaken.

First, in 2013, the Croatian Government adopted
the National Strategy and Action Plan for the
Non-Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction.
The Strategy defines the general framework of
actions by Croatia pertaining to the suppression of
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. It
provides guidelines for strengthening the coordination
and integration of the activities of State and public
authorities and other legal entities in the Republic of
Croatia and their cooperation with other States' entities
and international organizations.

In 2010, Poland established an inter-ministerial
committee for the prevention of the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. It defines Poland's policy
in the sphere of preventing the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction and analysing proliferation trends,
challenges and threats. The committee serves as a
coordinating body for representatives from various
ministries and agencies.

As a result of our national experiences, both
our countries introduced, in 2013, the concept of
the resolution 1540 (2004) peer review, which is a
bilateral framework in which to compare experiences
and examine, jointly and on an interactive basis, the
implementation of policies, approaches and practices
related to resolution 1540 (2004). The basic idea
behind the concept was to move beyond current
implementation activities and simple awareness-raising
towards country-specific dialogue and stronger mutual
cooperation in implementation of that important
resolution. We agreed that the peer review should be
an evaluation carried out in order to enhance national
implementation and identify effective practices.
The peer review consisted of two visits by groups of
national non-proliferation experts representing various
ministries and agencies. Exchanges ofideas and relevant
experiences in implementation of the resolution have
proved to be a mutually beneficial process that has
enabled participating States to learn from each other's
experiences.

Both our countries are convinced that such bilateral
cooperation provides an excellent framework for a more
effective implementation of the resolution. The report
summarizing the initiative will soon be submitted to
the lCommittee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004). We also stand ready to share our experience
with all interested States.

To that end, in cooperation with the United Nations
Office for Disarmament Affairs, Croatia will host a
regional seminar on the peer review process in June
2014. The seminar aims at taking forward the peer
review process of cooperation between Poland and
Croatia and encouraging a regional and coordinated
approach to the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) in South-East Europe. It will bring together
participants from the region, a number of countries
interested in advancing peer review cooperation
and representatives from regional and international
organizations and civil society.

In conclusion, let me stress once again that both
Croatia and Poland perceive resolution 1540 (2004) to
be one of the cornerstones of international security. As
we speak, in the Chamber next door, the Preparatory
Committee for the 2015 Review Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) is in the final days ofits current session.
We are truly convinced that a swift and comprehensive
implementation of the provisions of resolution 1540
(2004) also serves the purposes of the NPT process.
With the peer review mechanism developed by Croatia
and Poland, which could easily be adopted by interested
countries, we can enhance the global response to the
threats posed by weapons of mass destruction.

