Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Over the past few days, the efforts of the Quartet to
draw up a plan of action leading finally to peace in the
Middle East has borne fruit. A time frame was
prepared, with a three-phase plan designed to obtain a
lasting peace built on the vision of two States, Israel
and Palestine, living side by side in peace within secure
borders and with normal, productive working relations
with all their neighbours.

The Quartet's efforts also led to the search for a
mechanism to implement, monitor and verify
agreements to be arrived at on the basis of the three-
phase plan. Agreement was reached on considering the
idea of setting up a monitoring system, to be carried
out by parties from outside the region who could
confirm that the commitments entered into by the
parties were being implemented.

Under those circumstances, the international
community began to feel that the peace effort might
bear fruit. Those expectations have been once again
thwarted, however, by the violent developments of the
past few days. The resumption of suicide attacks and
reprisals by Israel are two elements that show clearly
the endless vicious cycle. The terrorists who carried
out those acts did so with the clear intention of
undermining the peace process that could have been
under way. But it is also clear that the reprisals carried
out by Israel, whatever their objective, also represent
an obvious movement backwards and a means to thwart
hopes for peace.

Mexico condemns and repudiates the terrorist
acts that have claimed Israeli victims in the past few
days. Nothing could be more effective in preventing
the recurrence of such acts than resolute action by the
Palestinian Authority to isolate and neutralize armed
groups, such as Hamas, which resort to and glorify
terrorism. The Palestinian Authority must dissociate
itself, actively and definitively, from terrorism. It must
make a genuine and sincere effort to prevent the
continuing dissemination of hatred. We should ask
ourselves, however, how the Palestinian Authority can
do so if it is being subjected, as it clearly is, to constant
harassment and destruction.

Time and again my delegation has expressed my
country's conviction that reprisals and efforts to
destroy the Palestinian Authority simply encourage
violence and escalate hatred. Israel should be betting
on peace and assuming all the risks of such a wager.

My country appeals to Israel to act in such a way
as to help build confidence. This would include
facilitating and supporting humanitarian assistance to
alleviate tension in the occupied Palestinian territories
so that acceptable living conditions could gradually be
established there. It is imperative that we face up to the
economic and humanitarian situation, which has been
deteriorating in an unacceptable manner because of the
actions of Israel.

Mexico once again reaffirms its support for the
efforts being made by the Quartet. We will be
considering the draft resolution that is before Council
members with a view to seeking consensus and, indeed,
demonstrating the clear will of the Council and
reiterating our desire for peace.

