Mr. Fall (Guinea) (spoke in French): Madam
President, I am very happy to be here this morning to
attend this meeting. The holding of this workshop is
the fulfilment of a promise made in this very Chamber
last January during the public debate on the situation in
Africa, and attests to your country's continuing
commitment to the quest for peace in the Mano River
Union Basin. I am therefore extremely pleased to see
you presiding over this important meeting.

I also welcome the Secretary-General's presence
here at the opening of the meeting, and I welcome also
the guests who have been invited to make their
valuable contributions to the success of our work.

As is well known, the peacekeeping operation in
Sierra Leone is rightly regarded as a unqualified
success for the United Nations. The gradual restoration
of peace in Sierra Leone was possible only because of
the resolve of the international community and because
of the considerable resources that were made available.

Our first conclusion, therefore, is that this United
Nations Mission was given a clear and precise mandate
and the appropriate resources were provided. My
delegation believes that these are the factors that
contributed to the success of the operation.

We believe that what was done in Sierra Leone
can be done also elsewhere in Africa - for example, in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo - if we base
ourselves on the success of that first operation. We
welcome the important achievements that have been
registered, but my delegation continues to believe that
the situation in Sierra Leone remains fragile. Stability
and the prospects for development in Sierra Leone
depend on the resolution of several problems that still
face that country.

I believe also that it must be stressed that our
Organization must continue to promote peace-building
in Sierra Leone. Some of the measures that might be
considered include the following.

The first measure could be the establishment of a
civic and political information programme for the
army, including those RUF elements that have rejoined
the army, so as to create a genuine spirit of support for
the country within the Sierra Leonean army. We believe
that this is very important.

Secondly, a restructuring of the army and of the
police could be considered, in order to ensure that they
are of a multi-ethnic character.

When the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL) gradually withdraws, it must do so in a
manner that is in keeping with the capacity of the
Sierra Leonean army and police to take over and to
guarantee security in the country. A hasty withdrawal
of UNAMSIL today on the basis of what has been
achieved to date is not something that we would
advise.

State authority must also be extended through
decentralization, with a primary role for women in all
sectors. We have seen the role that women have played
in the resolution of the conflict in Sierra Leone and
also in the Mano River Union Basin.
The promotion of good governance is also
important. This involves a restructuring of the
judiciary - its human resources and premises - and
the promotion of human rights is also essential,
because the country has witnessed serious human rights
violations, including mutilations.

An international conference of donors for
recovery and reconstruction in Sierra Leone should be
convened. Self-sustaining projects should be
identified - projects that should be quick-impact or at
least effective in the medium term. For instance, a
better policy is needed for operating and managing the
diamond sector, so that resources from that sector can
be used in agriculture to ensure food self-sufficiency.

There must also be a programme to combat
poverty. We cannot say this often enough: poverty is
one of the basic reasons for conflicts in Africa. Indeed,
the war has plunged the Mano River Union countries
and Sierra Leone into what can only be described as
utter poverty.

While everybody seems to agree that encouraging
results have been achieved in Sierra Leone, despite the
problems I have just mentioned, it is a fact that the
situation in neighbouring Liberia is still extremely
worrisome. This is because, unlike what happened in
Sierra Leone, the end of the war in Liberia was not
accompanied by a real exit strategy. The absence of a
policy for national reconciliation, of a programme for
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
armed factions, and of an economic recovery
programme following 10 years of fighting negated the
immense sacrifices made by the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) to restore peace in
Liberia.

It is true that today armed factions continue to
fight inside the territory. These actions were
condemned by ECOWAS and by the African Union,
which, during the most recent meeting in Durban,
called on the Liberian Government to begin
negotiations with all of the factions and forces in order
to begin a constructive dialogue to ensure a better
future for the country.

Following the collapse of the Abuja and
Ouagadougou meetings, in which all actors did not
participate, the upcoming meeting to be held at Dakar,
which will be held under the auspices of President
Obasanjo of Nigeria and of President Abdoulaye Wade
of Senegal, has given rise to great expectations. We
hope that all parties will participate in this dialogue in
order that peace may be restored to Liberia.

We believe that the following additional measures
should be taken: a ceasefire throughout Liberian territory;
continued inter-Liberian dialogue, with effective
participation by all forces, including high-level
Government authorities; adoption and implementation of a
genuine disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme in Liberia; and adoption of a programme for
economic recovery using primarily income from the
lumber industry and from the maritime registry.
External assistance could supplement the financing of
this economic recovery programme. The authority of
the Liberian Government must be extended to the
entire territory, particularly in areas currently under
rebel control, and along the borders.

Naturally, the international community must
remain vigilant in monitoring political normalization
and reconciliation in Liberia and the stability of the
subregion. Accordingly, we believe that maintenance of
the sanctions imposed by the Security Council is
justified. These sanctions should be lifted only once the
Liberian Government has discharged all of its
commitments under the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council. We believe that both of these aspects
are important.

I should like to say a few words about the Rabat
peace process and what has been done to follow it up.

The meeting was held on 27 February 2002 and
chaired by His Majesty King Mohammed VI, with the
participation of the Presidents of Sierra Leone, Liberia
and Guinea. Since then, several meetings were held
simultaneously in Monrovia, Freetown, Conakry and
Agadir to monitor recent developments. The
recommendations emanating from those meetings
include the need to respect the protocol on relations
between the three countries - my brother from Sierra
Leone spoke of this earlier - and the rapid
deployment of j oint border security and peace-building
units. I am pleased to inform the Council that
arrangements have already been made in this
connection. A few weeks ago a Liberian delegation
was in Conakry to witness the establishment of joint
border patrols, which have already begun to play a role
on the border between the two countries. There are, of
course, the thorny issues of small arms and of
dissidents in all three countries. Unfortunately, we see
that as one of the key problems.

With regard to creating a favourable environment
to encourage the return of refugees, I can inform the
Council that significant progress has been made on the
return of Sierra Leonean refugees but, unfortunately,
given the fighting in some parts of Liberia, there has
been a new influx of refugees into Guinea and into
Sierra Leone. That has aggravated the situation in
Liberia. The organization of a "caravan" to restore
confidence among the three countries remains on the
agenda. We also advocate the official reopening of
borders and the free circulation of persons and goods
among the three countries.

We believe that these sound initiatives should be
encouraged and supported by the Council to promote
the definitive return of peace and security to the Mano
river basin. Contacts are now under way, at the
initiative of Moroccan diplomacy, to hold a second
Mano River Union summit to assess progress made
since the Rabat meeting. The Economic Community of
West African States is also working hard to follow up
these matters.

I cannot conclude this short statement without
noting our regret at the delay in opening the United
Nations Office for West Africa at Dakar. All the States
of the subregion are eagerly awaiting the opening of
that Office, which we believe could speed up the peace
process now under way in the subregion.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to thank
you once again, Madam President, for having taken this
very important initiative of organizing this workshop. I
am sure that the recommendations will help mark the
path to peace and harmony in the Mano River Union
region.

