Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting. I also thank Judge Theodor Meron,
President of the International Residual Mechanism of
the Criminal Tribunals, and its Prosecutor, Mr. Serge
Brammertz, for their important briefings. Taking into
account the completion of Judge Meron's mandate next
January, in my current capacity as Chair of the Working
Group on International Tribunals, I would like to pay
special tribute to Judge Meron for his great contribution
to the establishment and efficient functioning of the
Residual Mechanism and his well-known track record
in the service ofinternational criminal justice.

Recognizing the fundamental importance of access
to justice and international criminal law in building
sustainable peace, Peru underlines the importance of
the Mechanism, which was established by resolution
1966 (2010) to carry out the remaining residual
functions of its predecessors, the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. Although it is a small
and temporary structure whose functions and size
will diminish over time, the Mechanism continues to
contribute to the administration of justice. It is time
that we underscore its important role in deterring and
preventing atrocity crimes.

We welcome the fact that the Mechanism's roster
of 25 judges is expected to be filled through elections
before the end of the year and stress the importance
for Member States to nominate women candidates.
We also commend the transparent, swift, efficient and
effective manner in which the Mechanism is fulfilling
its judicial functions - which have been especially
intense in over the past six months 4 including by
having certain judges carry out their work remotely.
We also emphasize the need for the Mechanism to
maintain an even balance between civil and common
law approaches.

We highlight the assistance that several African and
European Governments have provided to the Mechanism
so that convicted persons can serve sentences in their
own countries, and we underline the need to bring to
justice those fugitives who are still at large. We must
remember that the success of the Mechanism depends
on the cooperation of States in enforcing its sentences,
complying with its orders and responding to its requests
for assistance. We also reiterate the need to respond to
concerns about the early release ofpersons convicted by
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, some
of whom have expressed no remorse for their crimes.

I would like to conclude by urging for the provision
ofsignificant assistance to the Mechanism's Department
of Management of the Secretariat and Office of Legal
Affairs, and by stressing, in line with resolution 2422
(2018) adopted in June, the need for the Council to
remain united in its support for the Mechanism. I
encourage the Council to continue to strengthen its
important action in that regard.

