Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
country's assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month, as well as to thank Mr. Martin
Kobler for his important briefing.

On behalf of the Government of National Accord,
I would like to welcome the extension of the mandate
of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL). We hope that the Mission will soon be able
to return to Tripoli and be more active in the coming
months, in particular with regard to the implementation
of the Libyan Political Agreement and in strengthening
State institutions.

IwouldalsoliketothankHis ExcellencyAmbassador
Ramlan Bin Ibrahim, Permanent Representative of
Malaysia, for his briefing in his capacity as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011), concerning Libya, as well as for his country's
efforts during its chairmanship from 2015 to 2016.

The Libyan Political Agreement was signed
almost a year ago, on 17 December2015. However,
the Agreement still faces very serious difficulties, in
particular the rejection by the House of Representatives
of the Government of National Accord. That has led
to paralysis in various aspects of the Agreement,
especially with respect to people's everyday lives and
the economic and security situation. We hope that
UNSMIL will in the future continue its efforts to cope
with such challenges with a view to establishing peace
and security in the country so that the Government of
National Accord can assume tasks.

In spite of the international consensus to support
the Government of National Accord, such support is
insufficient because the success of the Government
largely depends upon the implementation of certain
aspects ofthe Political Agreement, starting with security
measures. It also depends upon the establishment of
an armed force to secure Tripoli in cooperation with
a police force that is equipped and capable of dealing
with potential challenges. In that framework, UNSMIL
is the guarantor of the Political Agreement and it is its
duty to make known any violations of the agreement. It
is time for UNSMIL to change its mode of operations.
It ought to be more proactive by making proposals, as
a lack of institutions and a lack of experts in different
sectors makes it almost impossible to request assistance
from UNSMIL.

With respect to assistance in fighting terrorism in
my country, we commend the huge efforts made and
the successes in Benghazi and Sirte in the fight against
groups listed as terrorists in the relevant Security
Council resolutions. Those efforts have helped lead to
the defeat of those groups. We hope that the international
community will provide more assistance in accordance
with resolution 2214 (2015).

I took note of the report of the Secretary-General
contained in document S/2016/1011. In spite ofthe delay
in its publication and the fact that we did not really have
time to examine it in detail, we can say that the report
sheds light on recent developments, in particular on
political developments, and does state that Tripoli is
under the control of armed groups. It mentions certain
aspects of security, the recovery of oil exports and
efforts of UNSMIL in other domains. Furthermore, the
report also sheds light on negative aspects, including
human rights violations, shortcomings in transitional
justice and the suffering of civilians in different regions
due to military operations and arbitrary bombing. It also
mentions the weakness of efforts to empower women
and youth and the participation of women and youth
in the transition process. All of those aspects represent
very serious challenges to the stability of Libya. It is
important to overcome the current legislative impasse so
that the Government can start to carry out its functions.

With respect to the mandate of UNSMIL proposed
for 2017, we have noted very few changes because the
efforts of UNSMIL are mainly focused on the political
sector in order to bring together the differing viewpoints
ofpolitical parties. We hope that UNSMIL will focus on
other sectors, including security and the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme. We
also hope that UNSMIL will help in strengthening
institutions, particularly security institutions. We
commend the setting up of a presidential guard and
we hope that it will be able to start its operations very
soon. We also hope that it will be exempt from the arms
embargo so that it can adequately perform its duties.

With respect to the Libya Sanctions Committee, we
also commend its efforts. We hope the relationship with
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011) will be based on partnership
and transparency. We hope that sanctions on Libya will
be managed in a different manner, given that they were
originally imposed in the interests ofthe Libyan people.

Following what the representative of Uruguay has
just said - that Libyans are dying in the Mediterranean
trying to cross it - I would like to say that Libya is still
a transit country and not a country of origin.

