Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The situation in Somalia remains generally stable
at present. The Federal Government has actively
promoted national reconstruction and made important
progress on the political, economic and security fronts.
However, achieving lasting peace in Somalia remains
a challenge. The international community and the
Security Council should continue to provide support
and assistance to Somalia in keeping with the principle
of Somali leadership and ownership.

The Council has just adopted resolution 2498
(2019). China participated actively in the consultations
on the draft resolution to renew the mandate of
the Somalia Sanctions Committee and put forward
reasonable recommendations and proposals in a
constructive manner, based on the needs of the country
concerned. We have noted the efforts of the penholder
and the improvements made to the text, but some of
our proposals were not adopted, regrettably. China still
has concerns about some of the content, and we were
compelled to abstain in the voting.

China believes that the current situation in the Horn
of Africa is steadily improving and is at a new stage
of development. The relationship between Djibouti
and Eritrea does not pose a threat to international
and regional peace and security. Both countries are
committed to normalizing relations and have made
great efforts to that end. The Security Council and
the international community should recognize that,
acknowledge their efforts and, based on respect for the
sovereignty of the two countries, provide assistance in
good faith to avoid imposing a solution. The alternative
will only be counterproductive.

With regard to human rights, China has always
believed that human rights issues should be discussed
in specialized bodies, such as the Human Rights
Council. The Security Council is not the appropriate
forum to discuss human rights issues. The Council
should abide by its mandate and focus on issues
related to international peace and security, including
in the work of its subsidiary bodies, where the same
principle applies.

The relevant text of the resolution may set a bad
precedent and affect the Council's deliberations on the
issue of Somali sanctions. China has reservations in
that regard. China hopes that the Council will conduct
extensive consultations on draft resolutions in future
and avoid hastily putting them to a vote in order to
achieve maximum consensus.

