Mr. Kamara (Sierra Leone): Let me start by
thanking you for, Mr. President, organizing this open
debate on children and armed conflict and by
congratulating you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
June. My thanks also go to the entire membership of
the Security Council for its landmark resolution 1612
(2005) and all previous and subsequent Council
resolutions that seek to advance the agenda of children
caught in the middle of unfortunate conflicts, in
particular resolution 1882 (2009), from which this
debate emanated. Permit me also to thank the
Secretary-General for his very informative report
contained in document S/2010/181. We note with
appreciation the recommendations contained therein.

The adoption of the Council's landmark
resolution 1612 (2005) was a move in the right
direction. My delegation views it as a more realistic,
effective and practical approach to addressing the
scourge of the recruitment and use of children as
soldiers. The establishment of the Task Force on
Children and Armed Conflict, which reports regularly
on grave violations, and the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict gave more impetus to the

issue. Moreover, the resolution appeals to parties to
armed conflict to formulate specific action plans to
stop the recruitment and use of children as soldiers,
thereby providing a framework for compliance. Above
all, the resolution carries the message of combating
impunity, an issue that is very dear to my country.

My delegation is very much delighted to be a part
of this stocktaking exercise today. We believe that it
affords States an opportunity to examine efforts made
towards the implementation of the resolutions under
consideration. For us in Sierra Leone, it is yet another
opportunity to tell the international community that we
were not only determined to address the question of
impunity through the establishment of the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission and the Special Court, but
are also committed to working with the rest of the
international community to address the scourge of
conscription and the use of innocent children in
conflicts, together with other grave violations.

In that respect, we reiterate our wholehearted
commendation to the Council for adopting resolution
1882 (2009), which further strengthened the protection
framework for children by extending the scope of the
monitoring and reporting mechanism to include sexual
violence and killing and maiming in addition to the
issue of the recruitment of children. It is our fervent
hope that the Council will work speedily to include the
issues of abduction and denial of humanitarian access.

Having gone through a war that witnessed gross
and systematic violations of the human rights of
children, including but not limited to forceful
conscription, forced labour, rape and other forms of
despicable atrocities committed against innocent
children, we are left with no alternative but to join the
fight to end this heinous crime wherever it is
committed in the world.

As a State party to the relevant international
human rights instruments dedicated to the promotion
and protection of the rights of children, we have taken
the following practical measures to ensure our
adherence to resolution 1612 (2005) and all relevant
Security Council resolutions on the issue, including its
most recent, resolution 1882 (2009).

In February 2007, we endorsed the Paris
Commitments to protect children unlawfully recruited
or used by armed forces or armed groups. We enacted
child rights acts that raise the minimum age for
recruitment into the armed forces of Sierra Leone from
17.5 to 18 years of age. In 2002, we established a
national commission for war-affected children, which
is still functional. We also established a national
commission for human rights that has a mandate to
examine all cases of human rights, including those of
children. We set up a family support unit within the
police department to protect children against sexual
abuse and exploitation. We established a child
protection committee, headed by the Ministry of Social
Welfare, Gender and Children's Affairs, that operates
in various parts of the country to take care of
vulnerable children. Finally, on 8 April 2009, the
Special Court of Sierra Leone handed down a verdict
against three members of the defunct Revolutionary
United Front for committing serious violations of

international law - namely, the enlistment,
conscription and use of children below the age of 15 to
actively participate in hostilities - which is a very

important precedent in ending impunity.

Sierra Leone cannot choose to remain silent on
this issue simply because we are no longer at war or
because we do not appear in annexes I and II of the
report before the Council. Although the war ended
some eight years ago, its vestiges are still evident in
our communities. We are still grappling with issues
such as youth unemployment, amputees, children born
of rape and roaming ex-child combatants, to mention
but a few. All of those challenges need to be adequately
addressed if our hard-earned peace is to be sustained.

Many laudable gains have been achieved thanks
to the support and assistance provided by our
development partners. Let me take this opportunity to
assure the Council that Sierra Leone will continue to
address this issue by regularly participating in the
debate on providing protection for victims and
punishing perpetrators of violations and abuses
committed against children.

It would be remiss of me if I were to conclude my
intervention without commending the roles played by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Children in Armed Conflict, the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict and the relevant Security
Council sanctions committees - but more especially
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations for its
efforts in mainstreaming child protection into
peacekeeping missions.

I would like to conclude by calling on all parties
to armed conflicts the world over to adopt measures to

halt the participation of children in hostilities by
working closely with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
the Security Council Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict and all relevant actors to ensure that
the recommendations contained in the report before us
are adhered to in accordance with international child
protection standards.

