Mr. Hoxhaj: It is a great honour and a pleasure
for me to address the Security Council today regarding
the latest report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(S/2012/72).

First, I would like to congratulate Azerbaijan,
Guatemala, Morocco, Pakistan and Togo as new
members of the Security Council and wish them
success in that very important responsibility. Secondly,
I would like to thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, for his continuous support for building a
democratic, multi-ethnic and stable Kosovo. With the
commitment of our institutions and the support of the
international community, the Republic of Kosovo today
is a modern and viable State whose main policy goal is
integration into the Euro-Atlantic institutions.

While we are discussing my country in this
Chamber today, Kosovo prepares to celebrate next
week its fourth anniversary as an independent state.
Independent Kosovo was born, based on the will of its
people, on 17 February 2008, and our tragic history has
left a difficult legacy. Kosovo was part of the Yugoslav
disintegration of the 1990s that took the lives of tens of
thousands of innocent people - many of them women
and children - who did not accept the criminal regime
of Slobodan Milosevic. As it related to Kosovo, the aim
of Milosevie's policy was to ethnically cleanse Kosovo.
In 1999 alone, within a few months, over 1 million
people were expelled from Kosovo. In fact, those tragic
events are very well known to everyone here, as many
United Nations reports have reported on them since
1998.

However, the situation has changed in recent
years. In that time, Kosovo has made great progress in
state-building, due to the commitment of its people and
the support of the international community. We are
very grateful for the support of the Council and the
important role that it has played in rebuilding a society
and building a country from scratch and helping it to
overcome a difficult past. Today, the vision of our
government is to replace the politics of conflict with
those of reconciliation and European integration, and I
believe that lessons learned from past tragedies should
help to more effectively shape policies in the present.

Allow me to report on the progress we have
achieved during this reporting period and to go over
the challenges we face.

After four years of independence, Kosovo has
built a cohesive state and has strengthened its
multi-ethnic and democratic institutions. The internal
and international development of Kosovo has involved
various central and local-level institutions playing
vibrant roles. The parliament has been dynamic in
implementing its legislative agenda, our non-partisan
President has been active in the national and
international representation of Kosovo and the
government has been operational and effective in
reforming the country and tackling the needs of our
society.

Due to the very hard work and commitment of
our institutions, Kosovo is a prosperous, multi-ethnic
democracy and has maintained peace and stability in
the face of serious challenges and efforts to generate
instability. During this time, Kosovo's leaders and their
political parties have shown maturity and democratic
responsibility in their engagement on issues of the
common interest.

The Assembly of Kosovo has passed a number of
important laws, and many others are under review. The
Assembly has played a very important role in
monitoring the implementation of laws and has
fulfilled its important task of overseeing the work of
the government. Through heated debates and
discussion, the Assembly has provided real democratic
representation for Kosovo's citizens. The Assembly of
Kosovo adopted 20 major laws, including laws on
control of the border, international agreements,
copyright, the state budget and others.

In order to overcome weaknesses in public
administration, the government is implementing
fundamental reforms. Those reforms were strongly
commended by the European Commission progress
report. We are aware that this is a very complex and
lengthy process, but the government is very much
committed to building an independent and efficient
public administration in line with the best European
practices.

The government of Kosovo is undertaking very
serious efforts to reform the justice system and
strengthen the rule of law. Important steps have been
made in building new institutions, adopting necessary
legislation and regulations and increasing the
professional capacities and numbers of judges in
Kosovo.

The fight against corruption and organized crime
is one of the top priorities of the government, and
many measures and actions have been undertaken to
strengthen the rule of law. We have adopted a Strategy
and Action Plan against Corruption, which includes the
creation of a special prosecution and anti-corruption
task force. There is close cooperation between the
Kosovo government and the European Union Rule of
Law Mission (EULEX), which has done very good
work in combating and investigating different forms of
crime.

Let me reiterate that the government of Kosovo
welcomed from the very beginning the establishment
of the EULEX Special Investigative Task Force to
investigate all allegations contained in the report by
Mr. Dick Marty. All Kosovar institutions have offered
full cooperation to the EULEX Lead Prosecutor,
Mr. Clint Williamson, for this investigation process,
which started last year and has included visits this year
to Pristina and other regional capitals. Kosovo's
institutions are very determined to support the full
clarification of the allegations in an open, independent,
professional and transparent way.

Beside reforms in public administration and the
legal sector, the economy remains a pressing priority
for the government. Therefore the government is
engaged in ensuring economic growth, tackling

unemployment, providing social justice for all,
improving the business investment environment and
reforming the energy and education sectors. Reforms in
the financial sector are designed to ensure fiscal
stability and improved budget management. According
to the International Monetary Fund, macroeconomic
and financial policies are on track. Kosovo's economy
grew by an estimated 5 per cent during 2011.

Kosovo is not only the youngest state in Europe,
but it also has the youngest population, at a time when
many countries are facing an aging problem. The
young and well-educated represent a generation that
constitutes great social capital for Kosovo. In addition,
we have a very active and dynamic civil society, which
has continued to crucially shape politics and different
policies. Numerous institutions, organizations and
associations have been formed and play an active part
in public life and in supporting the overall process of
state-building and democratization. They contribute to
our important checks-and-balances system by
presenting their interests and views, which the
government values highly. Civil society activists help
prepare for a society that discusses, debates and
challenges every policy and action of the government
and the international community. They are very
important agents of modernization in our young state.

I have been speaking about the internal
consolidation of Kosovo's institutions. Let me now
reiterate that for Kosovo, the international
consolidation of its statehood is crucial with respect to
being part of the international system.

We are undertaking major efforts to gain our
place in regional and global institutions as a
constructive, contributing member of the international
community. Kosovo's participation in regional and
global institutions is vital for the stability, security and
development of Kosovo, the Western Balkans and even
Europe. I would therefore like to invite all Member
States to support our participation in regional and
global forums. Kosovo's inclusion would respect the
rights and needs of all the citizens of Kosovo and of
our state.
Full recognition of Kosovo's independence
remains a very important goal for my government. The
number of recognitions and their geographic scope has
made the independence of Kosovo a geopolitical
reality in the Balkans and in Europe, and the number of
independent and sovereign States recognizing Kosovo

is constantly growing. Currently, 85 Members of the
United Nations have formally recognized our country. I
would like to thank the Republic of Ghana for its
recent decision to recognize the Republic of Kosovo.
We strongly believe that even more countries will
recognize Kosovo over time; some of them are in fact
in the process of making that decision.

I have informed the Council as to how Kosovo
has become a functional, prosperous, stable and multi-
ethnic state, with a diverse society and a steadily
growing economy. Anyone who has visited Kosovo in
the last few years has seen that it has transformed itself
into a true multi-ethnic democracy. The clear goal of
Kosovo's government and the international community
was to create a state for all Kosovo citizens, in order to
overcome separations along ethnic lines and to advance
the interests of all communities in Kosovo through
participation in democratic and multi-ethnic
institutions.

I would like to report that this year Kosovo is
entering a new phase of statehood. This new chapter of
our state is an important short- and long-term
development for Kosovo, for the whole region and for
the European Union.

Four years ago, on 28 February 2008, the
International Steering Group (ISG) on Kosovo was
formed. Its role has been to help guide Kosovo's
democratic development and to promote good
governance, multi-ethnicity and the rule of law. The
ISG, a body comprised of 25 States, appointed an
experienced international diplomat, Mr. Pieter Feith, as
the International Civilian Representative for Kosovo to
lead the International Civilian Office (ICO). The
mandate of the ICO was to monitor and facilitate the
implementation of United Nations Special Envoy
Martti Ahtisaari's comprehensive settlement proposal.

In the last four years, due to close cooperation
between the government of Kosovo and the ICO,
Kosovo made fundamental progress in the
implementation of the Ahtisaari Plan through the
participation and promotion of communities - Serb,
Bosniak, Gorani, Turk, Roma, Ashkali and Egyptian -
at all levels of governance. Those national, ethnic,
linguistic, cultural and religious groups - who are
defined in our Constitution not as minorities but as
communities - today enjoy the most advanced rights
and privileges of any such communities in Europe. We
have invested more than €200 million in the
implementation of the provisions of the Ahtisaari Plan
related to communities.

As a result of the successful implementation of
that Plan, the majority of Kosovo Serbs are
participating in Kosovo institutions at both the central
and local levels of government. The government of
Kosovo, through a decentralization process, has created
new municipalities composed mostly of the Serb
community, such as Graeanica, Kllokot-Verboc,
Ranillug, Novoberde, Shterpce and Partesh. The
establishment of those municipalities has improved the
quality of the political and economic life of Kosovo
Serbs. They were created in accordance with the
European Charter of Local Self-Government and have
full managerial and executive competencies, based on a
process of devolution. As one would see if visiting any
one of those municipalities, the result has been the
rebirth of vibrant, dynamic communities.

In order to protect and promote religious and
cultural heritage and cultural diversity, the government
of Kosovo has granted special protection to 45 sites
through the establishment of special protective zones.
Those include monasteries and churches of the Serbian
Orthodox Church along with also medieval towns,
fortress, bridges, traditional houses and monuments.
The implementation of the Ahtisaari Plan has provided
communities with access to education, supported the
return of refugees, promoted reconciliation between
different communities and accelerated economic and
social development.

The beginning of a new phase in Kosovo's
development as a state was marked during the latest
meeting of the ISG, held in Vienna on 24 January 2012.
The representatives of the 25 member States
confirmed:

"Kosovo is now in the final stages of
implementing the Comprehensive Settlement
Proposal and will therefore start preparations for
an organized end to supervised independence and
the closure of the International Civilian Office,
which should be possible by the end of 2012."
The ISG has endorsed a strategy that will facilitate that
process.

Through a parliamentary resolution approved by
a majority of more than two thirds, the government of
Kosovo, opposition political parties and other Kosovo
institutions have committed themselves to taking the
necessary political steps, backed by financial
commitments, to implement specific measures on
community rights, cultural heritage and dealing with
the past.

This year, a package of amendments to Kosovo's
Constitution and relevant primary legislation will be
adopted. That will embody the key provisions of the
Ahtisaari plan in our Constitution and laws, and
thereby facilitate the formal end of the ICO's mandate
and, with it, supervised independence.

We recognize that there is more work to be done
but we are ready and willing to meet our international
obligations. I would like to inform all representatives
that, so far, 95 per cent of the Ahtisaari plan has been
implemented, although that has not included the
creation of the new municipality of northern Mitrovica.
That has been prevented by the illegal security,
paramilitary and police Serbian State structures that
still today are led, controlled and financed by Belgrade
in flagrant violation of resolution 1244 (1999).

That has been recognized by the ISG as well.

"The ISG urges Serbia to abide by its
international commitments and refrain from
interfering in Kosovo, including by withdrawing
its police, security and other State presences, and
supporting efforts by international actors and the
institutions of Kosovo to promote the rule of
law."

Let me brief the Council about the relations
between Kosovo and Serbia, the technical dialogue and
our common European future. I think that we cannot
speak of Europe as a whole, free, democratic and
peaceful without having resolved the remaining issues
in the Balkans. For the Government of Kosovo, the
integration of the whole region into Euro-Atlantic
institutions is the best means of ensuring long-term
peace and a brighter future for all.

Sharing that vision and fulfilling the obligations
of General Assembly resolution 64/298 of September
2010, Kosovo and Serbia have taken part in a technical
dialogue since March 2011. The aim of that dialogue is
to solve practical issues from which citizens of both
countries would benefit. We strongly believe in a
dialogue as a means not only to solve technical issues,
but also to build trust between the two nations and to
overcome the difficult past.

However, let me summarize what has happened
recently. On 9 December 2011, the European Council
held a summit in Brussels and deferred Serbia's
European Union candidate status. The reason was
because Serbia failed to make sufficient progress in the
European Union-facilitated dialogue with Kosovo and
due to the blocked and tense situation created in the
northern municipalities of Kosovo by Serbian
Government structures. In its conclusions, the Council
tasked the Council of Ministers with:

"examining and confirming whether Serbia has
continued to show credible commitment and has
achieved further progress in moving forward with
the implementation in good faith of agreements
reached in the dialogue, including on integrated
border management, has reached an agreement on
inclusive regional cooperation and has actively
cooperated to enable EULEX and KFOR [the
Kosovo Force] to execute their mandates".

If I translate the conclusions into simpler terms,
the Council asked Serbia to engage seriously and fully
in the technical dialogue and to implement all
provisions of the agreements that it reached with
Kosovo in Brussels, as well as to respect its obligations
under resolution 1244 (1999) to contribute to a safe
and secure environment in Kosovo and to ensure
freedom of movement for all. Serbia should not just
pay lip service to its commitments and fail to
implement its obligations on the ground. Agreements
are not worth anything if they are not implemented in
practice. If that was Serbia's intention when it agreed
to enter into a dialogue with Kosovo, the European
Union clearly did not buy into it. The Council agreed
to review Serbia's progress towards Kosovo by the end
of February.

Let me inform the Council briefly about the
current situation in the northern part of Kosovo and the
implementation or non-implementation of agreements
reached until now.

First, regarding the north of Kosovo, Serbia has
failed to meet its obligations as called for in the
European Union Council's December conclusions. The
situation on the ground, in particular in the north of
Kosovo, remains tense as a result of the roadblocks put
up by Serb extremists and Serbian State structures on
Belgrade's payroll. Since July of last year, the freedom
of movement of people and goods in the northern part of
Kosovo has been denied to the citizens of Kosovo. In

violation of resolution 1244 (1999), Serbia still
maintains security and judicial structures, including
hundreds of police officers and members of the
gendarmerie, in the north of Kosovo. Moreover, two
very important international actors - KFOR and
EULEX, missions authorized by the Security Council -
are unable to carry out their mandates due to the
barricades.

I believe that the rule of law is not negotiable and
should be applied to everyone. The north of Kosovo
cannot remain a black hole in Europe. The Serbian
policy of pursuing both the European Union and
Kosovo clearly means pursuing both the partition of
the northern part of Kosovo and membership of the
European Union.

Secondly, Serbia has also failed to fulfil its
obligations under the agreements reached last year in
Brussels in the technical dialogue. Besides the partial
implementation of agreements on freedom of
movement and free trade, all other agreements,
including the return of the civil registry and cadastre
records, mutual recognition of school and university
diplomas and integrated border management, have not
been implemented at all. On issues of
telecommunications, energy and regional cooperation,
Serbia has failed to agree to proposals coming from the
European Union itself.

The examples that I mentioned here today show
that, in the past year, Serbia understood the dialogue as
a process of taking part in meetings, not achieving
concrete results. Last year, the Serbian side accepted
some agreements and solutions in order to gain enough
credit to achieve candidate status in the European
Union. But there is no real implementation of
agreements on the ground. Kosovo will take part in the
dialogue in good faith. We will implement all
agreements reached and accept all European solutions.
Dialogue is very important to both countries as
independent States and partners on their European
path. My Government supports the integration of the
whole region into the European Union.

However, I would like to be very clear that peace
and stability between Kosovo and Serbia and the
prosperity of the whole region will depend on the
decision soon to be made in Brussels by the European
Council. If Serbia is rewarded with candidate status
without having dismantled the police and security
structures in northern Kosovo, removed barricades or
fully implemented agreements reached in the technical
dialogue, the consequences will be both short- and
long-term. The current status quo in the three northern
municipalities of Kosovo will be transformed into a
frozen conflict; agreements reached through the
technical dialogue will not be implemented; and the
process of the normalization of relations between
Kosovo and Serbia will have no future.

At the same time, there is a risk of other negative
developments in the next weeks and months for the
potential to worsen the situation. Next week, on
15 February, the Serbian State's illegal structures
intend to organize a referendum in the northern
municipalities of Kosovo, opposing the institutions of
Kosovo and calling for partition and their incorporation
into Serbia.

This year, when elections will be held in Serbia,
Belgrade intends to organize elections inside the
territory of the Republic of Kosovo as well. This is a
massive violation of resolution 1244 (1999) and of our
State sovereignty. These possible events could
represent a very dangerous development for stability
inside Kosovo, and they could put the whole
architecture of regional security into question.

To conclude, our institutions are committed to
making 2012 a historic European year for Kosovo and
the region. We started this year with the launching of
the visa liberalization dialogue, which will enable our
people to travel across the European Union without
visas. Key institutions in Brussels and member States
have pledged to Kosovo that it will enjoy trade
relations in the form of contractual relations with the
European Union and membership in the European
Bank for Reconstruction and Development.

We welcome the nomination of the former
Slovenian Foreign Minister, Mr. Samuel Zbogar, as the
European Union's Special Representative to Kosovo.
He arrived in Pristina this week. The clear goal of our
government is to make the European presence and
integration process stronger within Kosovo and to
bring our country closer to the European Union.

We call upon Serbia to refrain from violence,
destabilizing actions and provocative rhetoric. It is time
for Serbia to finally withdraw its State police and
security forces from the northern municipalities of
Kosovo. The implementation of the Ahtisaari plan in
that part of Kosovo is still the best framework for the
political and democratic participation of all Kosovo
Serbs there, in the same way as has happened in the rest
of Kosovo, where today Kosovo Serbs and our other
communities are shaping their own futures. The ideas of
exchanging territories or ethnic and territorial partition
are very dangerous. It is for the good of all - Serbia, as
well as Kosovo and all other countries in the region -
that the borders of the Balkans have been fixed once and
for all.

We thank the Security Council and all United
Nations Member States, our partners and important
State actors for supporting us from conflict and war to
a peaceful and democratic transition. Kosovo is a
viable and stable state, and can be counted on as a
responsible member of international community of free
nations.

