At the outset, Indonesia thanks the presidency for convening this meeting today. I welcome the presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Cooperation, African Integration and Nigeriens Abroad of the Niger, His Excellency Mr. Kalla Ankourao, at this meeting. I also welcome His Excellency Sir Louis Straker, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs, International Trade and Regional Integration of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, and His Excellency Lord Tariq Ahmad of Wimbledon, Minister of State for the Commonwealth and South Asia of the United Kingdom. I also thank the briefers Mr. Peter Maurer, President of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC); Mr. Ibrahim Thiaw, Executive Secretary of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD); and Ms. Inna Modja, UNCCD Land Ambassador. Across the globe, we increasingly witness the adverse impacts of environmental degradation and climate change, which affect people and livelihoods. They have become an aggravating factor that not only can prolong conflicts, but also threatens to reverse economic growth and development. Against that backdrop, I would like to outline the following points. First, we need enhanced partnership, cooperation and information-sharing. Environmental degradation and its related security impacts are indeed a complex area that is impossible for any single actor to address. A true partnership between the United Nations and its partners is vital to understanding the root cause of conflict and the impact of environmental degradation in that regard. It is the first step in finding a suitable and tailored solution. Priorities must be set in places where climate risks intersect with a fragile security situation, such as in the Lake Chad basin and the Sahel, where today nearly 10 million people depend on humanitarian aid due to the prolonged armed conflicts of the past decade. The coronavirus disease pandemic has increased the fragility. I would like to echo Mr. Peter Maurer in saying "building resilient communities alongside efforts to protect those communities from violence is critical" (annex 1). Indeed, it is important to assist such communities in building adaptive capacity and enhancing resilience based on their needs and priorities. Secondly, it is important to mainstream environmental degradation and climate change throughout the peace continuum. To do so, we need strong synergy within the United Nations system. The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change remains the leading forum to address climate change. We expect countries to uphold the Paris Agreement, including its financial commitments, and to meet their nationally determined contributions. At the same time, the United Nations peacebuilding architecture, which is currently being discussed, should not shy away from considering the impact of climate change on peace and security. Through such synergy, we can find an integrated response strategy. Thirdly, the role of regional organizations is crucial. The Security Council has recognized the efforts of the African Union and the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), as well as the leadership of countries in West Africa and the Sahel, in spearheading initiatives to address the security challenges in the region. As countries in West Africa and the Sahel face elections this year, more often the political situation becomes more fragile. In this year of Silencing the Guns by 2020, the pressure for ECOWAS and the African Union to step up is high. They need our strong and collective support. African solutions for African issues is an important concept and it should be supported internationally. We continue to encourage global and multi-stakeholder partnerships, along with regional stakeholders. In closing, allow me to reiterate what my Foreign Minister stated in a similar debate on January 2019: "Climate change is real, and it is happening now. ... Indonesia stands ready to contribute to global efforts to combat climate change." (S/PV.8451, p. 11)
