Mr. Duale (Somalia): On behalf of my country,
I would like to congratulate you, Madam President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I am grateful for this opportunity
to speak to the Council.

The Federal Government of Somalia heartily
welcomes the adoption this morning of resolution
2182 (2014), as well as the renewal of the mandate of
the African Union Mission in Somalia. We are very
grateful for the role the Mission's troops are playing in
fighting side by side with their brothers and sisters from
the Somali National Army, and now approaching the
end of the process of crushing Al-Shabaab's strength
in Somalia.

I have been here at the United Nations for almost
10 years, and I have always fully appreciated how
seriously the Security Council has been seized of
Somalia's issues. We are grateful and glad now that we
can finally see at least a glimmer of the light at the
end of the tunnel, and we thank the Council. We also
welcome the authorization of the maritime interdiction
of charcoal exported from Somalia in breach of the
Security Council ban, as well as the authorization
permitting international naval forces to seize weapons
destined for forces outside the Federal Government
of Somalia's control. The continued illegal export of
charcoal gives Al-Shabaab a financial lifeline, and
the illegal weapons in the streets of Somalia hold back
our transition to the peace and stability that everyone
here desires. We thank the Council and those allies of
Somalia who will help our Federal Government ensure
that Al-Shabaab's days are numbered.

I would also like to take this opportunity to make it
absolutely clear that the Federal Government of Somalia
will ensure that today's resolution is implemented in
a responsible manner. We note and appreciate that no
Member State will be permitted to conduct interdictions
without the express consent of the Federal Government
of Somalia. We will work with all countries in the
affected region to ensure that no country's sovereignty
or legitimate commerce is disrupted by any abuse ofthe
resolution. I believe we all hope that today's resolution
will help to usher in a much better situation than
Somalia is in at the moment.

