Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): Let me first of all
thank you, Your Excellency, for assuming the
presidency of this very important meeting. I would also
like to thank Special Representative De Mistura for his
briefing and commend the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) for its unwavering
commitment to assist the people of Iraq in rebuilding
their country. I would also like to express Austria's

appreciation for your extraordinary personal
dedication, courage and leadership, in particular in
promoting dialogue and national and political
reconciliation. I would also like to thank the
representative of Iraq for his statement.

As the Secretary-General pointed out in his report
(S/2009/284) national reconciliation remains the main
priority for a stable and peaceful Iraq. We welcome the
recent initiative of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General to launch a high-level dialogue
between the Government of Iraq and the Kurdistan
regional Government on the disputed internal
boundaries. It is of very great importance that leaders
on all sides focus on national reconciliation in the run-
up to the Kurdistan regional elections next month and
the national elections in January 2010.

On the issue of power-sharing, property and
demography in Kirkuk, we welcome the assistance that
UNAMI has provided to the parliamentary committee.
We regret that the committee has not yet been in a
position to report back on progress. We expect
continued and genuine commitment on the part of all to
resolving the outstanding issues concerning the
allocation of Government posts.

In View of budgetary challenges due to the
economic crisis and declining oil revenues, national
and regional leaders need to overcome the deadlock on
the regulation of the hydrocarbon sector. This would
also be very beneficial to encouraging foreign
investment in the country. The signing of the
memorandum of understanding on energy cooperation
with the European Union would be equally beneficial
in that regard.

The recent rise in indiscriminate attacks on
civilians, including by suicide bombers, is a stark
reminder of the fragility of the hard-won security
gains. Manifold challenges persist.

We are encouraged that Iraq's internally displaced
continue to return to their communities. At the same
time, we share the Secretary-General's view that
increased efforts towards integration, resettlement and
return are critical to allow for sustainable returns in
safety and dignity. This would also convey the message
to the more than 1.5 million Iraqi refugees abroad that
they, too, can have a future back home. We recognize
the immense efforts of the Syrian and Jordanian
Governments to accommodate Iraqi refugees.
As UNAMI's human rights report underlines,
additional steps to strengthen the rule of law and end
impunity are necessary. We are encouraged by Iraq's
commitment to strengthening the protection of human
rights. We therefore hope that the recommendations
contained in the report - in particular those relevant
to the protection of women, children and vulnerable
groups - will be implemented as soon as possible.
The Independent High Commission for Human Rights
could and should make an important contribution to
these endeavours. We therefore very much hope that
the Iraqi authorities will soon make it possible for the
Commission to begin its important work.

We welcome the progress made towards Iraq's
ratification of the Convention against Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment, and hope that it will provide fresh impetus
to the reform of the criminal justice system. We urge
Iraq to reinstate the moratorium on executions
observed since August 2007. I also wish to recall the
statement of the European Union on this subject.

Austria and the European Union stand ready to
support Iraq's efforts to strengthen respect for human
rights and the rule of law, including by translating the
national strategy to combat corruption into action.
These efforts are essential to rebuilding the trust of the
Iraqi people in their institutions. The equal
participation of women will be critical if that goal is to
be achieved. As Iraqi Security Forces assume
increasing levels of responsibility, we would
particularly encourage engaging women in the police
and in the army.

Let me underline Austria's firm commitment to
supporting the efforts of the people and the
Government of Iraq to make the country democratic,
unified and prosperous. We therefore also support the
early conclusion of a partnership and cooperation
agreement between Iraq and the European Union. We
hope for a further strengthening of Iraq's
re-engagement with its neighbours, in accordance with
relevant United Nations resolutions, and early progress
in negotiations - including, I wish to underline,
bilateral negotiations - towards the resolution of
outstanding bilateral issues.

Finally, let me say that we are grateful to you, Sir,
and to the United States of America for preparing
today's draft presidential statement. It has our full
support.
