The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Somalia in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mohamed
(Somalia) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council reiterates its previous
resolutions and presidential statements on
Somalia, in particular its resolution 1744 (2007)
and presidential statement S/PRST/2007/l3,
adopted on 30 April 2007.

"The Security Council reiterates its support
for the National Reconciliation Congress as a
mechanism for much-needed political dialogue
and reconciliation in Somalia. The Security
Council calls on the Transitional Federal
Government (TFG) and the National Governance
and Reconciliation Committee to ensure that the
Congress convenes as soon as practicable. The
Security Council appreciates the efforts of
Member States and partners to support the early
convening of the Congress and calls for further
support. The Security Council underscores the
importance of the Congress addressing in a
comprehensive and meaningful manner issues of
political reconciliation, including representation
in the Transitional Federal Institutions, and
agreeing a roadmap for the remainder of the
transitional political process, in line with the
Transitional Federal Charter and as laid out in the
Roadmap to Governance, National Dialogue, and
Reconciliation in Somalia of 14 March 2007.

"The Security Council expresses its grave
concern regarding the recent pattern of attacks by
extremist elements in Somalia, including the
increased use of explosive devices, and condemns
all attempts to use violence to undermine the
political process and prevent the early convening
of the National Reconciliation Congress. The
Security Council calls on all Member States to
cease immediately any further support for
extremist elements or those who seek to block
progress by violent means, and to support the
ongoing efforts towards inclusive political
dialogue. The Security Council recalls its
readiness, as set out in its resolution 1744 (2007),
to consider measures against those who block
progress in the political process and threaten the
Transitional Federal Institutions.

"The Security Council condemns the attack
on the Prime Minister on 3 June 2007 and the
attack on the forces of the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM) in Mogadishu on 16 May
2007. The Security Council expresses its deepest
sympathies to the families of the victims.

"The Security Council underlines its
appreciation for the efforts of the Ugandan forces
currently deployed in Mogadishu under AMISOM
and Uganda's invaluable contribution to peace
and stability in Somalia. The Security Council
reiterates its call on Member States of the African
Union to contribute troops for AMISOM, and on
other States and partners to provide financial,
technical and logistical support for this effort.

"The Security Council emphasizes the
urgent need for appropriate contingency planning
for a possible United Nations mission, to be
deployed in Somalia if the Security Council
decided to authorize such a mission. The Security
Council looks forward to receiving the report
from the Secretary-General regarding progress in
this regard by mid-June.
07-3827]

"The Security Council emphasizes again the

need for strengthened efforts to provide

humanitarian relief assistance to Somalia,

including assistance to the hundreds of thousands

of displaced persons, urges Member States to

support generously such operations, and demands

that all parties ensure unfettered access for
humanitarian assistance."
07-3827]

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2007/l9.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.

