Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): It is
good to see State Secretary Dahlgren back in town; we
thank him very much for his briefing. We are very
grateful for the way in which he and Professor
Wallensteen have given their personal commitment to
the Stockholm Process. That means a lot, and it has
resulted in an extremely effective and useful booklet.

We are also very grateful to Danilo Turk for his
statement, which my delegation carefully noted. I will
make some references to it.

The Interlaken and Bonn-Berlin processes
provided guidelines for policy makers on sanctions
design. But it is the Stockholm recommendations, as
we have heard from State Secretary Dahlgren and
Assistant Secretary-General T'urk this morning, which
take us to the next stage - that of better
implementation. We all know how crucial that is. There
is no point in adopting sanctions, however carefully
crafted and precisely targeted, if we then fail to enforce
them. One clear and obvious example is that there have
been sanctions against Liberia since 1992, and that yet
both the Government and the rebels have been able to
import arms with relative impunity - some 200 tons
of arms last summer alone - thus making a nonsense
of sanctions, making the lives of the population
absolutely miserable and undermining the whole
objective of the original imposition of sanctions. If we
impose sanctions, we must follow up.

The United Kingdom has strongly supported the
Stockholm Process, and we look forward to taking
forward its recommendations. Many delegations that
have spoken so far have identified some of the key
points. I would like just to add three points - the first
on monitoring, the second on impact and the third a
cross-reference to the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC).

On monitoring, there is no doubt that improved
monitoring should be a priority for the Council, and
Stockholm has many good ideas on this, including
guidelines for expert panels. As Ambassador Duclos
has already noted, we and the French have put forward
a joint proposal for an independent monitoring
mechanism to replace the current system of ad hoc
expert panels, and we are looking carefully at how to
adapt that idea to respond to the Stockholm
recommendations. But our key objectives will remain
the same: to maintain the independent character of
sanctions monitors, whether they are expert panels or a
monitoring mechanism; to exploit the synergy among
the different panels and make them familiar with one
another's work; to eliminate overlap between monitors;
and to make them more effective by improving their
technical backup in terms of their database, roster of
experts, network of contacts, and so on. Danilo Turk
rightly put his finger on the importance of improved
coordination and follow-up in making that process
work, and having an effective mechanism is Vital to
that.

Secondly, impact has to be a primary
consideration when designing and implementing
sanctions. We give careful thought to humanitarian
impact when we are designing sanctions and
implementing them. I think that a recent example of
that was resolution 1452 (2002) on the Taliban and Al
Qaeda. But their impact on the target is also crucial. As
Stockholm says, and as Hans Dahlgren re-emphasized
this morning, the Council must identify the Achilles
heel of a target in order to select sanctions that will
really bite and thereby force compliance with the
Council's demands.

Thirdly, I would like to make a brief point about
the CTC. I was interested to note Stockholm's
comments about lessons to be learned from the CTC.
Although, as the Stockholm Process points out, the
CTC is not a sanctions committee, the practices we
have developed of transparency, detailed reporting by
Member States and facilitating technical assistance for
all those who need it to make the process efficient are
all useful lessons for sanctions committees to consider.
I think we should try the cross-application of some of
those lessons from other fields to our sanctions work.

We very much welcome this initiative and today's
briefings, and we look forward to seeing the Stockholm
ideas come alive in Council decisions.

