Mr. Malmierca Dial (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to commend you, Sir, for your work as
President of the Security Council during the month of
February. I also take the opportunity to convey my
delegation's appreciation to the Under-Secretary-
General for Disarmament Affairs, to the Director-
General of the Organisation for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons and to the representatives of the
International Atomic Energy Agency and the World
Customs Organization for the valuable information that
they have provided today.
Cuba strongly supports general and complete
disarmament under strict international control and in
particular supports the complete elimination of
weapons of mass destruction, including nuclear
weapons, recognizing the danger that their very
existence poses for humanity.

Cuba does not possess, nor has it any intention of
possessing, weapons of mass destruction of any kind.
In our country, all programmes related to the nuclear,
chemical or biological spheres have always been
exclusively peaceful in nature. They are under the
permanent and strict control of our national authorities
and are monitored by the relevant international
agencies.

We have an effective, predictable and reliable
system in place for implementing our international
obligations at the national level as a State party to the
Biological Weapons Convention, the Chemical
Weapons Convention, the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the Treaty for
the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America
and the Caribbean.

Cuba has repeatedly expressed concerns
regarding the scope and implications of resolution
1540 (2004) and, hence, resolution 1673 (2006). Let us
recall that due to the pressure exerted by certain
members of the Security Council, resolution 1540
(2004) included some deliberately ambiguous
provisions so that some States could claim that,
through its adoption, the actions promoted within the
framework of the so-called Proliferation Security
Initiative (PSI) had supposedly been rendered
legitimate by the Council. Cuba considers that under
the PSI, unilateral actions could be carried out that
would clearly contravene key provisions of the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 1982,
such as the right of innocent passage of ships and the
legal regime governing the high seas contained in that
Convention.

We reiterate our rejection of any manipulation or
arbitrary interpretation of resolution 1540 (2004)
aimed at using it as a pre-authorization or justification
for the unilateral use of force against certain non-State
actors or even against States where the non-State actors
may be located. This is particularly disturbing in the
context of the accusations levelled by certain
permanent members of the Security Council against
some countries for supposedly developing weapons of
mass destruction programmes.

While noting the adoption of resolutions 1540
(2004) and 1673 (2006), the Non-Aligned Movement
Summit held in Havana in September 2006 underlined
the need to ensure that any action of the Security
Council does not undermine the United Nations
Charter and existing multilateral agreements on
weapons of mass destruction and international
organizations established in that regard, or the role of
the General Assembly. Moreover, the heads of State or
Government of the countries members of the
Movement warned against the Security Council's
continued practice of using its authority to define the
legislative requirements that Member States must meet
in implementing its decisions, as is the case with
resolution 1540 (2004). The Non-Aligned Movement
has stressed that it is essential that the General
Assembly address in an inclusive manner the issue of
the acquisition of weapons of mass destruction by non-
State actors, taking into account the views of all
Member States.

Cuba believes that the Security Council is by no
means the most appropriate organ to lead the fight
against the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction in all its aspects. That is not only for the
obvious reason that the five nuclear-weapon States
recognized by the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons have the veto power in that organ.
Even more important, certain permanent Council
members are adamantly opposed to moving forward
with a multilateral negotiation process to attain the
objective of nuclear disarmament.

Cuba shares the concern about the risk of links
between terrorism and weapons of mass destruction.
We fully support all legitimate international efforts to
prevent the acquisition by terrorists of such weapons
and their means of delivery. Cuba unequivocally
condemns all acts, methods and practices of terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations, wherever and by
whomsoever committed and regardless of their
motivations. Our country also condemns all acts or
actions - regardless of who their instigators or
perpetrators might be - aimed at encouraging,
supporting, financing or concealing any terrorist act,
method or practice.

Having been a direct target of terrorism ever
since the triumph of the revolution, the Cuban people
have experienced firsthand the terrible consequences of
terrorist acts. Nevertheless, the threat of the use of
weapons of mass destruction by terrorists cannot be
addressed through a selective and discriminatory
approach that is limited to combating horizontal
proliferation and disregards vertical proliferation and
disarmament. The prohibition and total elimination of
weapons of mass destruction are the only guarantee
that such weapons will not proliferate and will not,
inter alia, fall into the hands of terrorists.

If the Security Council really wants to contribute
to effectively combating the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction in all its aspects, it could adopt in
the near future a resolution committing all its
members - particularly its permanent members - to
take immediate steps towards the achievement of
nuclear disarmament under strict international control
and within a given time frame.

In conclusion, I should like to emphasize that our
country - as it has done thus far, despite the concerns
expressed - will continue to abide strictly by the
provisions of resolutions 1540 (2004) and 1673 (2006).
Indeed, Cuba has submitted to the Security Council,
within the established time frame and in great detail,
the reports required under resolution 1540 (2004).

Our country reaffirms its willingness to
contribute in every way possible to the achievement of
genuine international cooperation, within the
framework of the United Nations and the relevant
international treaties, in order to address the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction in all its
aspects and to attain the objective of the prohibition
and complete elimination of such weapons from the
face of the Earth.

