Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation)(spoke in Russian): Like other delegations, we are happy to
welcome you, Sir, as President of the Security Council
for June, and we wish you every success in discharging
the programme before us. We also are grateful to
Ambassador Wang Yingfan of China for his able
guidance of the Council's work last month, and we
highly commend him.

We are grateful to the Prosecutor for the
information about steps taken to improve the activities
of the International Tribunals. We attach great
importance to the work of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, which should become an
important factor in restoring peace and tranquillity in
Rwanda and in the region. However, we note that the
activities of the ICTR attest to the fact that its
organizational structures and working methods do not
fully meet the goals for which the Security Council set
up this international judicial organ. For more than six
years now, it has been involved in prosecuting persons
responsible for genocide, war crimes or crimes against
humanity, and, unfortunately, this has not had a serious
impact either on the normalization of the political
processes within Rwanda or on combating these crimes
in other parts of the world. The lack of speed and
effectiveness in the work and administration of the
ICTR can be explained primarily by the lack of a
proper level of cooperation from States, which is
definitely one ofthe most important factors here.

However, we wish to draw the Council's attention
to the report of the Expert Group to conduct a Review
of the Effective Operation and Functioning of the
ICTY and the ICTR, contained in document A/54/634,
which talks about delays in carrying out justice, to a
large extent because ofthe lack of due planning and the
chaotic nature ofthe activities ofthe ICTR.

We note that there is some discrepancy between
the Appeals Chamber and the Trial Chambers. There
are gaps in the rules of procedure and rules of
evidence, which results in some of the indictees in
custody waiting more than a year for trial. Suspects
whose provisional detention has been admitted to be
too long and in violation of international standards
have been released.

This was one of the Government of Rwanda's
reasons for suspending cooperation with the ICTR and
for delays in the judicial processes. The change of
defence lawyers has become common practice in the
activities of the ICTR. We think that the programme for
protecting witnesses should be improved, too. We need
an international, independent, impartial judge, as
established by the Security Council in the statute of the
ICTR. That plan is not yet fully working.

Russia supports the efforts of the United Nations
to overcome these organizational, financial and
personnel difficulties that are being experienced by the
ICTR. We have demonstrated our positive attitude
towards proposals to enhance the effectiveness of the
Tribunal's work in order that it could in short order
fulfil the mandate given to it by the Security Council
and play its role in hastening an end to the culture of
impunity. We would support the request to increase
the number of judges and to have just one Trial
Chamber. In our view, the international community
should look forward to the creation of an additional
Trial Chamber in order to improve the Tribunal's
efficiency and to have greater balance, compared to the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia.

As we see it, for the normal functioning of this
judicial body, we need primarily to continue to improve
the procedures, working methods of work and structure
of the Tribunal. These steps are being taken already;
and here we need to give careful study to the
recommendations of the Expert Group to which I
referred and the comments made on those
recommendations.

With regard to the activities of the ICTY, Russia
intends to cooperate with it, pursuant to the mandate of
the Tribunal, as enshrined in the well-known Security
Council resolutions. However, we have some serious
problems with the work of that organ, too; these relate
primarily to the politicization of its work, partiality and
bias, particularly vis-a-vis Yugoslavia.

Unfortunately, we now see that the methods and
organization of work of the Yugoslav Tribunal are not
appropriate to the task for which the Security Council
established it. The truth is, the Yugoslav Tribunal is not
helping to normalize the political process in the former
Yugoslavia. Furthermore, the consequences of its
activities have proven to be destructive to an overall
settlement in the Balkans. A clear anti-Serb stance has
been adopted and, as statistics have shown, 43 of the
59 indictees are Serbs. All the Tribunal's activities
focus on prosecuting indicted Serb leaders, which only
antagonizes Serbian society and complicates the peace
process itself. The indictments are used to squeeze
concessions from Serbian politicians and to ensure
their obedience. This practice is unacceptable.

We are also concerned by the practice of handing
down sealed indictments, which contravenes the
Statute of the Tribunal; by the comprehensive hunting
down of Serbian politicians and their arbitrary
branding as war criminals; and by the illegal use of the
Stabilization Force and the international security force,
in contravention of their mandates and on the basis of
the 1996 memorandum of understanding -
unauthorized by the Security Council - between the
Yugoslav Tribunal and the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO), which actually sanctioned
special operations to arrest indictees. We have
addressed all of these issues in detail in the Security
Council and we must continue to focus very serious
attention on them.

We take note of the information provided by Ms.
Del Ponte regarding the investigation of the illegal
NATO aggression against the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and the complaints against it. However, we
believe that the decision to halt investigations into this
to be premature, since more serious and fundamental
grounds for such a decision are lacking. In any case,
each fact must be carefully investigated and
information relating to it should accordingly be given
to the Security Council.

We are concerned by the continuing unjustified
increase in the budget of the Yugoslav Tribunal, which
currently stands above $100 million, not counting
significant voluntary contributions. We draw attention
to the fact that the staffing table for that body is
inflated. We feel that account must be taken of the
recommendations and comments made by the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
on the need to streamline and rationalize the cost of the
Tribunal.

On the whole, we feel that the Security Council
should continue carefully and thoroughly to examine
the entire set of questions relating to the activities of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, which, because of all the violations of its
mandates that have occurred, we have unfortunately
come to consider less and less as an impartial judicial
body.

