Mr. Mekel (Israel): At the outset, I would like to
extend my congratulations to you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency for the month of January.
Since this is my first statement before the Council,
allow me to say that I look forward to a productive
working relationship with you and with all the other
members of the Council.

Israel is pleased to be participating once again in
the debate on this item. Of the wide range of issues on
the Council's agenda, those affecting the well-being of
children are among the most heartbreaking. The
images, reports and statistics documenting the plight of
children in areas of armed conflict paint a truly horrific
picture. And it is precisely that horror that compels us
to take action.

The most recent report of the Secretary-General
on children and armed conflict (S/2002/ 1299) contains
a review of the progress made in implementing
Security Council resolutions and other international
instruments, as well as recommendations and
observations aimed at achieving more widespread
conformity with international norms. We welcome the
report's general focus on the horrific practice of using
children as soldiers. Children should be kept safe in
school, not in harm's way on the battlefield. Instead,
too many children are recruited to fight as soldiers in
wars they did not start and are forced to give up their
childhoods and often their lives in the perpetuation of
destructive conflicts. These offences have long
disturbed our moral sensibilities.

Israel totally rejects the practice of using children
as soldiers. We remain committed to eradicating this
horrific practice and to improving more generally the
situation of all children affected by armed conflict.
Israel also supports efforts to increase awareness of the
effects of armed conflict on children and to take
children into greater consideration when addressing
related issues, including terrorism and peacekeeping
operations.

Israel further welcomes the report's specific focus
on those parties to an armed conflict that have failed to
live up to their obligations by recruiting or using child
soldiers. Our ability to make genuine progress will
depend not only on focusing on areas in which progress
has been made but also on areas in which it has not.

Obviously, the formal practice of the forced
conscription of children is abhorrent and must be
outlawed and condemned. But the participation of
children in conflict is not limited to formal military
service. Children have also been recruited for roving
militias, armed gangs and terrorist groups. In our
region, children have been recruited and used by
terrorist organizations as human shields, for the placing
of explosives, as gunmen and even as suicide bombers,
and it is regrettable that the Secretary-General's report
does not mention this reprehensible tactic.

Moreover, children have been educated to revere
and emulate fighters and terrorists. In our region, we
are faced with the disturbing phenomenon of children's
television programmes that encourage youngsters to
abandon their studies and sacrifice their lives in acts of
war and terrorism.

The subtler but no less repugnant indoctrination
of children to hatred and violence, through official
media, educational and religious institutions and other
means, must also be the focus of widespread
condemnation. Hatred and violence are learned
behaviours. No child is born wanting to hate or kill. If
we are ever to achieve the state of global peace that is
the central objective of the Organization, we must
ensure that we are educating the next generation in the
values of tolerance, coexistence and non-violence.

In our region, children have suffered terribly from
decades of conflict and from the constant threat of
terrorism. The Middle East has endured more than its
share of wars that have left scars on all people in the
region, but particularly on children.

Israel has therefore supported international
initiatives aimed at protecting children from the
devastation of armed conflict, including the landmark
Convention on the Rights of the Child, as well as the
Convention's Optional Protocols, to which we became
a signatory last year. Israel's accession to the
Convention was followed by the adoption of its Basic
Law: Human Dignity and Liberty, a law that ensured
that rights of the child were guaranteed constitutional
protection. The adoption of that law sparked a flurry of
judicial and legislative activity that broadened and
extended Israeli society's commitment to the principles
of the Convention.

Unfortunately, broad commitment to those
principles, while reflected in the rhetoric of many
delegations, is too often not matched in practice. There
remain delegations that are quick to unite under the
banner of protecting children from armed conflict, but
whose actions betray their true political motives. Those
delegations are far too willing to sacrifice genuine
progress on these issues in favour of their political
agenda.

In its most recent session, the General Assembly
adopted a resolution pertaining specifically to the
situation facing Palestinian children. With the adoption
of that resolution, the Assembly has brought to three
the number of resolutions on the human rights of
children: one regarding the rights of the child, one
regarding girls and one regarding Palestinian children.
The latter is the only resolution adopted with respect to
one specific group of children. There is, for instance,
no resolution adopted concerning the five specific
problematic areas cited by the Secretary-General in his
report.

While Palestinian children are undoubtedly
deserving of protection, one may ask whether the 106
Israeli children killed and the many Israeli children
wounded by terrorism since September 2000, or the
children in Africa or in parts of the Arab world are any
less deserving. Notwithstanding the questionable
wisdom of adopting particularized resolutions on issues
of universal concern, it is a grave shame that those who
supported that one-sided resolution were unable to rise
above narrow their political agenda and call for the
protection of both Israeli and Palestinian children alike.

We would urge responsible Member States not to
indulge in such politicization of the work of the United
Nations, especially with respect to an issue as
important and urgent as our children. When we allow
the issue of human rights to be used as a political
weapon we cast doubt on our very commitment to
human rights and we damage the credibility of this
institution and its ability to work effectively on issues
of common concern.

Israel yearns for the day when peace is the
prevailing global condition, and when there is no
longer any need to deal with the specific impact of
armed conflict on children. But until that day, the
international community must continue to act with
resolve in extending protection to those who are most
vulnerable. Israel is a full partner in this endeavour and
will act through all means to ensure that all the world's
children enjoy their fundamental right to grow up free
from fear, free from suffering and free from the horrors
of war and terrorism.

