Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): I
should like to tell you once again, Sir, how pleased I
am to see you presiding over the work of the Security
Council.

I believe that the Guinean presidency was right to
keep this workshop on the "Proliferation of small arms
and light weapons and mercenary activities: threats to
peace and security in West Africa" in this month's
programme of work. It not only concerns an important
problem for the subregion, but also, in my delegation's
view, is a way of emphasizing the importance that the
Council attaches to African issues at a time when all
eyes are, of course, turned towards Iraq.
Congratulations, therefore, on such tenacity.

I should also like to say how much my delegation
appreciates the presence of eminent personalities of the
subregion and of regional and subregional
organizations, and how useful this discussion is for the
future of the subregion. The Secretary-General's
participation also represented an important
contribution.

Before addressing specific subjects, I should like
to say that my delegation appreciates the extremely
positive role played by the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) on behalf of peace and
stability in the subregion. Once again, we should like
to express our support for the efforts of ECOWAS to
promote peace, particularly in Cote d'Ivoire. In that
regard, I should like to thank the current Chairman of
ECOWAS, Ghanaian President John Kufuor, and the
ECOWAS force in Cote d'Ivoire, who should be fully
supported in their efforts by the international
community.

It is logical for the Security Council to devote
special attention to the problems related to the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons in the region of
West Africa, because that is one of the world's regions
that suffers most from the destabilizing accumulation
of such weapons. Bulgaria expresses its grave concern
at the excessive accumulation, illicit and uncontrolled
proliferation, circulation and trafficking of small arms
and light weapons, which continue to be a major
challenge to stability and development in West Africa.
The uncontrolled proliferation of small arms and light
weapons intensifies existing ethnic and political
tensions, causes considerable loss of human life and
weakens the international community's efforts to
provide humanitarian assistance to civilian populations.

My country welcomes the integrated approach of
the United Nations and of the Security Council aimed
at reducing and preventing the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons as it relates to West Africa.

Bulgaria commends the more active cooperation
among the region's countries, which represents an
important element in the global strategy aimed at
combating the illicit and uncontrolled proliferation of
small arms and light weapons. Those countries already
possess a tool to combat the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons: the ECOWAS Moratorium on the
Importation, Exportation and Manufacture of Light
Weapons in West Africa, adopted in 1998. The
effectiveness and performance of that monitoring
mechanism must be improved. My country encourages
the countries of the region to implement the
recommendations contained in the reports of the groups
of experts on Liberia and Sierra Leone and to
strengthen the implementation mechanisms, with a
view to putting an end to the trafficking of small arms
and light weapons.

The international community must lend consistent
support to the efforts of the States of the region. It
would be useful if the chairmanship of ECOWAS
briefed the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1343 (2001) concerning Liberia
on the actions that ECOWAS is undertaking to
implement the Moratorium on light weapons. That
occasion should contribute to the creation of conditions
for more effective implementation of the Moratorium.
Finally, I should like to say that Bulgaria supports and
respects the ECOWAS Moratorium on the Importation,
Exportation and Manufacture of Light Weapons in
West Africa.

The implementation of embargoes in force are
also an important element of the global strategy to
combat the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons
in West Africa. We must say that the reports of the
groups of experts on Sierra Leone and Liberia reveal
similar violation schemes, often orchestrated by the
same arms traffickers. As the Council is aware, the
destabilizing activities of such individuals are not
limited to the region of West Africa but extend far
beyond it. My country believes that the Security
Council must consider what the best way to tackle this
reprehensible phenomenon would be. We believe that a
structural change along the lines of the French-British
idea of a semi-permanent mechanism is desirable,
because that would better contribute to monitoring the
implementation of sanctions imposed by the United
Nations.

The second element of our discussion today -
the use of mercenaries in armed conflicts - is
undeniably a threat to peace in the subregion.
Mercenaries play a particularly nefarious role in
conflicts in the subregion. We are all fully aware of the
harmfulness of the activities of mercenaries in Cote
d'Ivoire. The international community must examine
and assess recent concentrations of mercenaries in
Africa, particularly in the West African region. It is
clear that the settlement of conflicts depends on the
immediate demobilization of mercenaries.

In conclusion, I should like to say that my
delegation fully supports the draft presidential
statement that should be adopted following this debate,
which is a useful contribution to efforts aimed at
eradicating these threats.

