Mr. O'Brien: I shall be brief and simply seek to
address some of the questions that were raised and then
leave it at that.

In particular, I was asked by the representative of
Spain to give a little bit more detail on the Castello road
issue, and, as I said in my statement, eastern Aleppo
City is currently at serious risk of besiegement, and a
besieged eastern Aleppo would add at least a quarter
of a million people to the current number of besieged
civilians, bringing this to somewhere near 1 million
people. In order to prevent this from happening,
since 7 July, civilian, humanitarian and commercial
movements in or out of the eastern part of Aleppo City
have, as the Council is aware, come to a halt, and we
need to reposition food stocks that would be sufficient
for at least one month for the 150,000 people in need of
food assistance in eastern Aleppo.

Basic health supplies, excluding anaesthetics and
surgical items, will be sufficient for about four to
five months, so long as water continues to be pumped
through the water-pumping stations. The entire Aleppo
City is located in eastern Aleppo, so we have tried to
establish an access route across the conflict lines via
our United Nations hub in the Government-controlled
western Aleppo City. There is, as was referred to by
another representative, some movement between east
and west. A request was included in the July convoy
plan and has been approved by the Syrian authorities.
We have, however, not yet been able to go because of
the security situation. So the question about the Castello
road is an absolutely key moment, as will be clear from
the point of view of why we are asking for a 48-hour
humanitarian pause. Because the Castello road is now
so damaged, it cannot take large lorries, only very
small lorries; so in order to get the necessary quantities,
we need a longer period of time for the added number
of trucks to be able to proceed and, indeed, to return
once they have delivered. So that is why the Castello
road issue and the clarification that was sought is so
absolutely vital and therefore a crunch point.

I was also asked by the United Kingdom
representative about the continuing United Nations
plan on airdrops to access besieged areas and, as
is well known, the United Nations is using various
logistical methods to bring assistance to people in need
throughout Syria by every means possible, land, sea
and air. The World Food Programme, as has been noted
already, has developed concrete plans for airdrops and
air bridges to other locations, so International Syria
Support Group members are aware of what is needed to
make this a reality.

The World Food Programme has indicated that
the consent of the Government of Syria and security
guarantees from all parties would be a precondition; in
any event, it is a precondition of the civilian operators
ofthose proposed air operations. So we continue to plan
for airdrops and air bridges, as we have said all along,
but land access remains the priority. It is the safest; it
is able to get much more value by far for the financial
resources made available to support the provision offood
and non-food items to those in humanitarian need and
is therefore the most effective. It takes approximately
six weeks of daily helicopter rotations to transport the
equivalent amount of food that was delivered by road
from Damascus to Al-Dameer on 1 June in one convoy,
which was for 22,500 people. Therefore, until we have
land access to reach all besieged locations, all options
remain on the table. Of course, that is part of the
discussion we are having with Member States to help
us get the most effective and efficient access routes
available. But the air plan remains.

I think the representative of the Russian Federation
asked a question about safety and security in night
deployment. On 29 June, we deployed a convoy to
Arbin and Zamalka. Due to the process of receiving
facilitation letters, the loading of the convoy could be
done only in the afternoon. Therefore, while we have to
look after the safety and security of our personnel, and
look to all the parties to provide it, that has to apply to
both night and day. I would, however, like to reiterate
my call that the priority has to be for daylight movement.
I repeat my thanks to the Russian Federation for its
facilitation in the most recent cases in that regard. It
certainly allows not only for needs assessments, but for
safer and more secure delivery.

I was also asked - or at least concern was
expressed - by the representative of the Russian
Federation about the possibility of bias in terms of
whether the United Nations was providing assistance
to all the millions of people who have needs on a
completely neutral and impartial basis. I would just
like to reiterate my assurances that, through all the
modalities that we deploy each month, our assistance
is purely judged on humanitarian principles, which I
think he has acknowledged. It is assessed and delivered
exclusively on a needs basis. Our staff are, clearly,
not only very conscious; it is part of their professional
approach as the United Nations - and indeed our
partners - to be impartial, neutral and independent.
That is a deep principle that we as humanitarians very
much know we must adopt and adhere to, as it is the
licence by which we can most likely gain access in all
circumstances, both now and in future.

I would repeat to the Council that we would ask all
members to help us get access on that needs basis, as it
has been shown that there is no equivalence - although
there are many more numbers at the moment in
besieged areas - with regard to areas besieged by
the Government of Syria and areas besieged by other
parties to the conflict. We are seeking equally to
address those who are besieged in Fo'ah and Kafraya,
as part of the four towns agreement, as much as we
are in Deir ez-Zor, where 110,000 people besieged by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant continue to be
in severe humanitarian need. As I say, each and every
one who has humanitarian needs is not an equivalence
in terms of numbers; each and every person is being
assessed irrespective of the overall quantum. Again,
our assessment is always based on need.

The final point I would like to conclude with, ifI
may, is to welcome the fact that the broad, emerging
sense that calls for a 48-hour humanitarian pause,
in particular into eastern Aleppo city, seems to have
caught a sense of appropriateness, proportionality,
immediacy and urgency. I sense there is an amber-to-
green light, ifI can put it that way, within the Security
Council. I would like to say how significant that would
be. It would be a genuine point of progress, it would
help us, through humanitarian pauses in those active
areas of fighting where there is imminent besiegement
affecting, as we have heard, many more hundreds of
thousands of people than we have already been dealing
with, to reach those civilians trapped behind the front
lines, and they could reach life-saving services, which
they simply cannot access at the moment.

That is why, realistically, we need at least 72 hours'
notice for a 48-hour window of calm to deliver in
those locations. My team on the ground has developed
a proposal, which was presented to the International
Syria Support Group humanitarian task force last
week, to ensure safe, periodic, facilitated humanitarian
access into eastern Aleppo: a proposed 48-hour pause
every mid-week, that is, eight days per month, so that
cross-border actors could deliver aid for about 250,000
people, including the 150,000 already in need of food
aid, and to prevent others from becoming equally
vulnerable. Such a pause would rely on the United
Nations monitoring mechanism that already exists
with regard to access from Turkey. As I said earlier in
my response to the representative of Spain, 48 hours
is necessary to allow sufficient time for the smaller
trucks, which we now need to use along the Castello
road given its current state of damage, as well as the
number of returning empty trucks to give us sufficient
supplies on a regular basis. The proposed pause - and
I think this is an important point to mention - would
also entail a medical evacuation component, so that we
not only have goods in but we have evacuations out.
That was a central point of my initial remarks.

For the cross-line operation, as opposed to the
cross-border, a convoy targeting 60,000 civilians, out
of the 120,000 that we have requested as the United
Nations, in eastern Aleppo for July has been approved
by the Government of Syria. That was done prior to
the escalation to Aleppo. A request for increased
assistance, I suspect, will be presented as required in
the coming months.

Ijust wanted to give that detail so that the Council
is fully aware of what that would entail if that is an
emerging point of consensus.

