Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. Mladenov for his informative
briefing on events in the Middle East and the situation
in the occupied Palestinian territories.

Today, as violent conflicts - in Syria, Yemen and
Libya - have continued to break out in the Middle East
and North Africa, the lack of progress in resolving the
Palestinian issue is seriously worrying. We have always
said that the existing status quo is not viable. It only
reinforces the negative trends that render the prospect
of achieving peace in the heart of the Middle East ever
more distant. But today what we are seeing is not even
the status quo. As Mr. Mladenov rightly noted, we are
witnessing a dangerous deterioration in the situation.
As a result, and as the regular report of the Special
Coordinator confirms, the parties are intensifying their
unilateral activity, which only exacerbates the existing
problems. Israel's settlement activity is picking up
speed. The inflammatory rhetoric continues on both
sides. Reports of violent incidents are more and more
frequent. We urge both Palestinians and Israelis to
refrain from acts of aggression and we firmly condemn
terrorist attacks. We emphasize the unacceptability
of any indiscriminate use of force and of purposeful
attacks on civilian targets.

The only way out of the situation is by relaunching
the political process with a view to resuming direct
Palestinian-Israeli negotiations as soon as possible on
a generally accepted international legal basis, which
includes the relevant Security Council resolutions, the
Madrid principles, the Arab Peace Initiative and the
road map of the Quartet of mediators for a settlement
in the Middle East. Only the implementation of the
formula for a two-State solution, whereby the two
States of Palestine and Israel coexist in peace and
security, will enable the crisis to be overcome and
create the conditions necessary for sustainable progress
towards a durable peace. We should point out that an
overwhelming majority of Member States will not
accept attempts to revise that basis for a Middle East
settlement. That was confirmed once again during
the vote in the General Assembly in December (see A/73/PV.47). We believe firmly that any actions and
proposals that do not result from Palestinian-Israeli
negotiations are doomed to failure. Nor will it be
possible to resolve the so-called final status issues for
the Palestinians and Israelis themselves, just as it has
not been possible to achieve a lasting stabilization of
the Middle East without ajust and long-term resolution
of the Palestinian question.

Russia will continue taking steps to restore positive
momentum to the Palestinian-Israeli dossier. Our
proposal for providing a platform in Russia for a personal
meeting between the Palestinian and Israeli leaders is
still on the table. We are certain that the Quartet still has
its potential as the only mediation format approved by
Security Council resolutions. We support reactivating
it in its regular and close cooperation with the League
of Arab States and all regional and world stakeholders
who can contribute to overcoming the dangerous
stalemate in the Palestinian-Israeli settlement. We will
continue our efforts to help reunify the Palestinians. In
the past few weeks the leadership ofthe Russian Foreign
Ministry has conducted a series of intensive contacts
with representatives of the various Palestinian factions.
We hope that the Palestinians will be able to achieve a
new rapprochement among themselves in order to put
an end to the schism and reunite the West Bank and the
Gaza Strip. We have noted and appreciate the efforts of
Cairo and Amman in that regard.

We cannot ignore the dedicated efforts of
humanitarian personnel in Palestine. We note the
important work being done by the United Nations,
particularly the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), in the occupied Palestinian territories and
in refugee camps. Russia is also helping our Palestinian
friends by making contributions both to the UNRWA
budget and on a bilateral basis. We cannot permit a
situation in which Palestinians find themselves in
a position where they basically have nothing to lose.
That fuels radicalism and is capable of blowing up the
situation in the Palestinian territories and far beyond
their borders.

We already have quite enough radicalism in the
Middle East. Ifwe are to combat that threat, we especially
need the coordinated efforts of the entire international
community on a daily basis. Once again, in accordance
with the position that Russia's representatives have
repeatedly expressed, including at the Security Council
meeting held on 25 June last year that comprehensively
reviewed the situation in the Middle East and North
Africa (see S/PV.8293), we call for genuinely collective
measures for integrated efforts to improve the situation
in the region. It is essential to unite our efforts on the
Palestinian-Israeli question, as well as in other areas,
including Syria, Yemen and Libya. It is important
not to cut back our support to the authorities in Iraq
in their efforts to further stabilize their situation. The
violations of Syria's sovereignty must end and we must
all engage in the collective work of achieving a political
settlement and reintegrating Syria into the Arab family.
We have to support that process, not create obstacles to
it from outside. We want to once again draw attention
to our concept for developing confidence-building
measures in the Persian Gulf, which is aimed at creating
a region-wide security architecture.

Today in this Chamber we heard some delegations
assert that the upcoming ministerial meeting in Warsaw
has no specific national aspects. While I would very
much like to believe that, I have to ask why Iran, one of
the biggest and most important countries of the region,
was not invited to it. Attempts to cobble together
military and political alliances in the region, holding
various conferences designed to paint a one-sided,
simplistic picture of the problems in the Middle East,
which are apparently all connected to Iran and Iran
alone, are counterproductive and merely render the
prospect of establishing a genuine, inclusive and
comprehensive security architecture in the region ever
more distant, just as there can be no truly inclusive and
comprehensive regional security architecture without a
just solution to the Palestinian question.

Ultimately, security is the fundamental and natural
policy priority for every State in the region. We believe
that devising rules of conduct that are acceptable to all
can only be done within the framework of a negotiation
process, perhaps one similar to Helsinki, as Secretary-
General Guterres has said more than once. We fully
support his efforts to develop that initiative.

