Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to extend my
warmest welcome to His Excellency President Morales
Ayma and to thank him for convening this meeting
on the important subject of preventive diplomacy and
transboundary waters and for presiding over it himself
personally. This is an excellent opportunity to build on
the open debate, held under the Senegalese presidency,
on water, peace and security last year (see S/PV.7818).
I would also like to thank Secretary-General Guterres
for his insightful remarks.

Sound and peaceful water resource development
and management are crucial to achieving peace and
prosperity. That was true in Japan throughout its
history of nation-building and economic development.
The same must have been the case in most countries.
When several countries share rivers, lakes or aquifers,
water management becomes a bigger challenge. Often,
vying for scarce water resources has led to conflicts
or perpetuated existing ones among different States,
ethnic groups or communities. External factors
such as climate change, population increases and
environmental pollution may put further pressure
on water resources, thereby exacerbating tension.
However, in many instances, sharing water resources,
with due respect for the needs of others, has brought
adversaries together to achieve peace and prosperity.
That is where we see opportunity for cooperation and
preventive diplomacy. Cooperation among stakeholders
in the area of water resources management can
constitute a part of confidence-building measures and
can prevent conflicts.

The international community can contribute
to confidence-building by facilitating dialogue on
transboundary water issues and by providing assistance
to water-management projects. Japan has long supported
countries in improving access to water, developing
water management and governance capabilities and
in dealing with water-related challenges to promote
stability and de-escalate underlying tensions. Japan has
been a proud partner of the Central Asian nations in
promoting regional cooperation.

Water is one of the many areas of our cooperation.
When Prime Minister Abe visited the region in 2015,
he agreed with every leader of the five Central Asian
States bilaterally that the issue of the efficient use
of natural resources was essential for sustainable
development. Prime Minister Abe expressed the
intention of Japan to cooperate with regional countries
for effective management and sustainable use of water
resources in the region. For example, in Tajikistan, an
upstream country, which depends heavily on water-
sourced power generation, Japan has promoted a
project to improve the efficiency of hydroelectricity
utilization. In central Uzbekistan, a downstream
country, Japan provides assistance for improving
irrigation systems so that water can be supplied in a
more stable manner for agriculture, while at the same
time cutting electricity consumption used for pumps.
Japan believes that improving water management in
both upstream and downstream countries benefits both
groups of countries, thereby contributing not only to
sustainable water use in the region but also to regional
confidence-building.

Turning to Africa, in the Sudan, Japan provides
assistance to improving the water supply in the eastern
region and to developing policy recommendations on
integrated water resource management so that water-
related challenges can be dealt with in a more systematic
manner, based on data.

Japan also takes a multisectoral approach based on
water provision and capacity-building in agriculture,
health and rural governance. Considering that water
has been one of the sources of conflict in Darfur and
other regions, we believe that assistance in the areas of
water resource development and management increases
confidence in post-conflict reconstruction efforts and
leads to stability within a society.

Conflict can be prevented by developing areas of
practical cooperation and building confidence. I have
touched upon just a few examples of such cooperation
by my country. When transboundary water management
becomes a diplomatic issue between nations, it goes
without saying that seeking peaceful solutions is
important. Interested countries may learn from the
success stories of others that are being shared today.
Japan will continue to support countries in improving
water management and access as building block for
sustainable peace and security.

