Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Let
me begin by congratulating you, Sir, and your team
on having conducted the work of the Security Council
so efficiently during this month. At the same time, we
predict a successful presidency for Ethiopia for the
month of September and express our full support in
its endeavour.

Moreover, we thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this formal wrap-up session following a
month of very intensive work. Uruguay appreciates
and recognizes the importance of these formal wrap-up
meetings, which allow for the positions of all Council
members to be officially recorded and promote the
transparency and accountability of this organ. As
everyone knows, Uruguay also encourages the holding
of informal and interactive meetings of the Security
Council with States that are not members of this organ,
thereby allowing us to enrich our work with their
contributions and improve our work. Concerning the
Council meetings held this past month, I would like
to focus my attention on those in which humanitarian
concerns were the priority issue and to which Uruguay
attaches exceptional importance.

One such issue of special significance was
addressed at the Council meeting of 10 August, on
peace and security in Africa (see S/PV.8022). At that
meeting, Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed
briefed the Council on her recent visit to Nigeria and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, during which
she was joined by the Executive Director of UN-Women
and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict. That high-level mission
focused exclusively on women and peace and security,
and development, while according particular attention
to the women and girls most affected by conflict.

Uruguay considers it essential to promote the
equality, the empowerment and the well-being of
women if peace is to be established and sustained
in areas of conflict, in accordance with resolution
1325 (2000) and, more recently, with resolution 2242
(2015). It is crucial to emphasize the importance
and symbolism of this type of visit, which besides
signifying the paramount importance of the women
and peace and security agenda, encourages the visited
countries to move forward in the protection of women,
who in conflict situations are exceptionally vulnerable,
as well as to include them in Government bodies and
allow for their participation in post-conflict situations
and peace processes. Supporting them has proved to
be fundamental. Uruguay would also like to point out
that briefings should be held more frequently to provide
information on the situation of women in connection
with the main conflicts on our agenda, including
inviting representatives of civil society so that they can
familiarize us with their point of View.

Another agenda item that I would like to bring
up involves Syria. Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs Stephen O'Brien briefed the
Council this morning on the current situation in Syria
(see S/PV.8036). Once again, we are facing a gloomy
humanitarian landscape affecting the Syrian people
with unprecedented cruelty. Although violence in
the country has been significantly reduced thanks to
the Astana agreements and the most recent ceasefire
agreements in the south-west of the country, the
humanitarian situation has not improved. That tragic
truth demands our effective action. We continue to
impassively watch the destruction of a people - the
interminable losses of valuable human lives, millions
of people deprived of food and the most essential
services, hundreds of thousands of orphans and hungry
children, women suffering from sexual violence,
chemical attacks on the civilian population, hospitals
and schools destroyed by constant shelling and the lack
of humanitarian access to besieged and hard-to-reach
areas where millions of people live.

Concerning children, we reiterate that the violence
and deprivation they have been facing will seriously
affect their physical and psychological development. It
is unfortunate that the Council has not found a more or
less durable way to alleviate that difficult situation. We
are reminded that we must not abandon our efforts to
find optiond for resolving that humanitarian tragedy.

With respect to Yemen, which has been

characterized as the greatest humanitarian crisis in the
world, we thank this month's presidency for convening
an informational briefing (see S/PV.8027), followed by
consultations on the situation in that country, which in
most cases is addressed only under the latter format.
On that occasion, it was emphasized that millions of
Yemenis today face a triple tragedy: the spectre of
famine, the greatest outbreak of cholera in a year, and
the failures and injustice generated by a brutal conflict
that the world has allowed to continue but which is
completely avoidable. Added to that are the blockades
of sea, land and air ports to civilian traffic, preventing
access into the country of essential imports, including
food, fuel and medical supplies and their distribution
throughout the territory. Civilians continue to pay
the price of a long conflict and military clashes are
spreading across several provinces of the country.
We are also grateful to the Senegalese delegation for
organizing, on 21 August, an Arria Formula meeting on
the humanitarian situation in Yemen. We know that this
type ofinformal meeting also enhances the visibility of
the issue.

In conclusion, Uruguay believes that the Council
has another fundamental responsibility, which is
to not allow grievous crimes committed against a
defenceless civilian population to remain unpunished.
It is inadmissible to promote a climate of impunity. The
Security Council must continue to refer cases to the
International Criminal Court, as appropriate, to ensure
that perpetrators are held accountable for their crimes.

Finally, I wish to express my appreciation and to
congratulate the representative of Japan for having
lucidly led the negotiations on presidential note
S/2010/507, in order to improve our working methods.
