Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation welcomes the convening of this meeting
and thanks Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix for the valuable
information he has provided.

(spoke in French)

I would also like to welcome the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of Mali,
Mr. Tieman Hubert Coulibaly, to New York.

(spoke in Spanish)

Peru notes with concern the deterioration of the
humanitarian situation in Mali, particularly in the centre
and north of the country. Terrorist group activities,
clashes among armed groups, attacks perpetrated
against the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) personnel
and the limited presence of the State in various areas of
the country persist. However, we look forward to the new
road map for the implementation of the 2015 Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali and the role played
by the Agreement Monitoring Committee, the Carter
Center and the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2374 (2017) concerning Mali, as well as the
establishment of the mixed units of the Operational
Coordination Mechanism in Kidal and Timbuktu.

On this occasion, I will broach three specific
issues: first, the political process; secondly, the
security situation; and thirdly, the renewal of
MINUSMA's mandate.

On my first point, after three years of waiting, it
is necessary to accelerate the implementation of the
peace agreement. The expectations generated by the
new road map must not lead to further frustration. To
that end, we deem it essential that Malian citizens take
full ownership of the process and that the international
community redouble its support. We wish to underline
that holding free and fair presidential elections is crucial
for the future of the country. It is important that the
process be conducted in a stable political context, with
regional and international backing, so as to guarantee
the mass participation of the population and engage
more women and young people in politics.

On the security situation, we commend the efforts of
the Malian Government in implementing the programme
for the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
of ex-combatants, as well as the reforms that it has been
promoting to strengthen its security services. However,
much remains to be done in that area. We believe that
it is necessary to pay special attention to the activities
of violent extremist groups, particularly in the centre
of the country, which exploit the limited presence of
the State to expand their influence and establish their
own administration. That reinforces the vicious circle
of intercommunal violence.

We also note with concern that law enforcement
agencies share equal responsibility for increasing
human rights violations, although they are the very
entities called upon to protect the population and the
rule of law required to guarantee a sustainable peace.
In response, it is necessary to strengthen the judiciary
and guarantee access to justice. In that regard, we
believe that it is important to work on the prevention
and resolution of conflicts at the local level and to
address their root causes. That implies promoting
dialogue with communities and developing inclusive,
transparent and accountable institutions that are
capable of recognizing and addressing the legitimate
demands of the population.

Thirdly, Peru believes that the support needed by
the authorities and the Malian population to advance
the country's political process and improve the security
situation is bolstered by the strategic review on the
activities of MINUSMA, which seeks to improve
the Mission's performance and results in response to
the current situation on the ground. To that end, we
underscore the need to strengthen its support for the
achievement of the peace agreement, as well as the
political and security reforms that the country needs.
We agree with the recommendation presented by the
Secretary-General to the Council to renew the mandate
of the Mission for one year.

Peru recognizes and supports the work that
MINUSMA carries out in a particularly adverse
environment and in complicated operational situations.
We believe that its deployment on the ground is crucial to
promoting stability in Mali. In addition, it is important
that MINUSMA strengthen its coordination with the
United Nations country team, because responding to
the conflict and crisis and, ultimately, the building ofa
sustainable peace, require a multidimensional, coherent
and integrated approach that includes all actors involved
in the development of the country.

