Mrs. Patterson (United States of America): With
today's presidential statement, the members of the
Security Council will demonstrate a renewed
commitment to an improved post-conflict
peacebuilding process. The United States welcomes
this commitment with energy and enthusiasm. As
Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice said in February
of this year, the United States is working to strengthen
international capacities to address conditions in failed,
failing and post-conflict States. At the same time,
President Bush has charged us with strengthening our
national capacity in this area through better
coordination of our nation's post-conflict and
stabilization efforts. Today's presidential statement will
be an important first step towards improving the focus
and organization of our peacebuilding efforts, and we
appreciate the presence of the Danish Foreign Minister
and the efforts of the Danish delegation in raising this
significant issue during Denmark's presidency of the
Security Council.

Failing or failed States and those emerging from
conflict pose great challenges to international security.
Without coordinated internal and international
peacebuilding efforts, such States can become breeding
grounds for terrorism, crime, trafficking in persons and
other human catastrophes. The problems in such
countries are infectious. They spread to neighbouring
regions like a virulent disease, bringing chaos, misery
and despair to the lives of millions of innocent
civilians.

The United States has demonstrated its
commitment to the post-conflict peacebuilding process,
and we are working to further strengthen our capacity
to contribute to international efforts in this area. A new
Office of the State Department will lead, coordinate
and institutionalize the United States Government's
civilian capacity to prevent and respond to conflict.

The United Nations has long endeavoured to
reduce the risk that nations emerging from conflict will
fall back into a state of conflict. But, like all
Governments and international organizations, the
United Nations has enjoyed only limited success. There
has been a distinct and counterproductive lack of
coordination among United Nations peacekeeping
operations, development initiatives, financing
initiatives and other key elements of long-term peace
and prosperity. For that reason, we welcome the
Secretary-General's proposal to create a Peacebuilding
Commission to improve the coordination of United
Nations systems, policies and country-specific
operations from the start of peacekeeping efforts
through stabilization and reconstruction to
development activities.

There has been a significant amount of discussion
about where within the United Nations system the
Peacebuilding Commission should reside and how it
should function. We see the Peacebuilding Commission
as an advisory body that operates on a consensus basis
to provide both expertise and a coordination capacity
to the principal United Nations bodies. It is vital that
such a commission include in its membership both
those with the most at stake and those with the most to
contribute. Therefore, while the security of a country is
on the agenda of the Security Council, the Security
Council should be the United Nations body that
invokes the Commission's structure, wisdom and
capacity. We recognize, however, that the
Peacebuilding Commission must extend beyond the
Security Council. We agree with the Secretary-General
that, once the Council determines that a post-conflict
situation no longer requires its oversight, the
Commission could so inform other United Nations
organs and agencies - which will have participated in
the Commission's work from the beginning.

There has also been a significant amount of
discussion of how to fund peacebuilding and
reconstruction efforts. The United States does not
accept the overly simplistic solution of merely
increasing assessed contributions to the United
Nations. Such an approach is at odds with the
budgeting process in the United States and elsewhere.
For example, the expenses of demobilization efforts
and the expenses of reintegration are funded from
different parts of the United States national budget and
therefore require a more refined approach to funding
than that of simply increasing assessed contributions.
The various aspects of peacebuilding are subject to
different laws and different regulatory requirements,
and their funding requirements must be analysed on a
case-by-case basis. The challenge is for donor
countries to make their funding mechanisms more
flexible and responsive to the needs of post-conflict
countries. As a major donor, my Government is
currently working on means to increase the flexibility
of our funding response mechanism.

While the United States looks forward to
improving its own peacebuilding activities and is
encouraged by the Secretary-General's proposal for a
United Nations Peacebuilding Commission, we also
recognize the critical role that hundreds of non-
governmental organizations (NGOs) and their
dedicated staffs have had - and will continue to
have - in the peacebuilding process. We will continue
to establish strong partnerships with NGOs, including
groups that advocate the rights of women, as well as
think-tanks, private foundations, academics and
operational experts, so that their collective capacity
and knowledge can assist us in improving the lives of
those living in regions emerging from conflict.

Finally, peaceful transition cannot succeed
without local stakeholders. We at the United Nations
should never View our role as paternalistic or didactic.
We cannot allow key local groups to be sidelined or
marginalized in post-conflict regions. While we on the
outside can and must assist, we must remember that the
impetus for development must come from within the
country or region at issue. Democracy and freedom
must come from within. Peace comes from within the
spirit of a people seeking to put a dark past behind
them.

The United States is the largest contributor to the
assessed budget of the United Nations and the largest
donor of development assistance, and it has the most
generous private donors in the world, supported by a
national tax system that encourages philanthropy. We
remain committed to providing resources, in a
monitored and coordinated manner, to all aspects of the
peacebuilding process. We look forward to working
with the United Nations, its Member States, regional
organizations and local authorities in countries
emerging from crisis, to further our mutual goal of
seeking stable, democratic Governments in regions that
have too long been ruled by oppression and conflict.

