Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to thank you, Madam President, for
holding this important meeting and express to you our
sincere appreciation for the important role played by
Argentina in chairing the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions. Iwould
also like to extend my thanks to the Ombudsperson,
Ms. Kimberly Prost, and the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for
their comprehensive briefings.

We welcome the adoption of the sixth note by
the President (8/2010/507) on improving the working
methods of the Council and increasing cooperation and
coordination with the General Assembly in a manner
that serves transparency and accountability. However,
in spite of the progress achieved, the international
community continues to look to the Security Council,
in view of the successive challenges the world is facing,
and expects a more competent Council that is able to
take immediate measures to face those challenges in a
manner that is commensurate with its Charter mandate
to preserve international peace and security.

I do not intend to delve into the details of the items
before us, but I will speak briefly on issues related to
our region.

A look at the Middle East reveals that the Security
Council has thus far not been able to find a just and
lasting solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict or to settle
the Syrian crisis. Those are examples of situations in
which people and countries have suffered for a very
long time and the Security Council has not been able
to deal with the situation on an equal footing, leading
to the application of double standards that threaten the
credibility of the Council.

We believe that the promotion of the central role
of the Council in preserving international peace and
security must reflect reality and meet the expectations
of the States Members of the Organization. The issues
it tackles in its discussions on its methods of work are
not confined to internal issues concerning Council
members alone, but have an impact on the entire
Organization.

We therefore believe there is a need to increase
transparency and coordination between the Security
Council andthe General Assembly. This shouldbe carried
out in the following ways. First, the Council should take
into consideration the Assembly's recommendations
on issues that have to do with international peace and
security, including peacekeeping operations. Regular
meetings should be organized between the Presidents
of the Council and the Assembly on the work of both
organs. Certain working methods of the Council, in
particular open briefings by the Chairs of Sanctions
Committees, should become the norm, instead ofclosed
consultations.

The importance of sanctions lies in their application,
including in cases of travel bans, assets freezes and
arms embargoes. That requires further cooperation
at the national level and additional efforts to update
sanctions lists with a view to implementing United
Nations sanctions. The Council should also show more
firmness and continue to exert pressure on the different
parties to comply with the sanctions with a View to
avoiding any further exacerbation of a given situation.

Proceeding from that, our delegation has worked
on raising awareness among all Member States of the
importance ofproviding assistance to countries affected
by sanctions and the need for countries' commitment in
fulfilling their duties in accordance with the sanctions
regime.

The Office of the Ombudsperson has also
contributed to enhancing transparency and justice in
the implementation of sanctions regimes, in particular
those against Al-Qaida, and that has enhanced
credibility. My delegation believes that expanding the
mandate of the Office of the Ombudsperson to include
other Sanctions Committees is a worthwhile proposal
that should be seriously considered. However, in
tackling the expansion of that mandate, we should first
remove all obstacles that face the work of the Office
and review the contractual status of the Ombudsperson
and administrative measures that have to do with the
work and autonomy of her Office.

In that regard, we believe that the Security Council's
efforts and those of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) are aimed at preserving international peace and
security - hence the importance of continuing close
cooperation between the two entities. The ICC can
contribute to efforts to prevent the exacerbation of
conflicts through the prosecution of perpetrators of mass
atrocities, war crimes, crimes against humanity and
the most serious crimes that threaten the international
community as a whole as well as international peace
and security. We believe the proposals to establish a
follow-up mechanism on the referrals by the Security
Council to the ICC also merits consideration and should
be taken into account with a view to ending impunity
and ensuring that all parties concerned are prepared to
cooperate with the ICC. The termination of the mandate
of the International Criminal Tribunals for the Former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda leaves the ICC as the only legal
entity for prosecuting international crimes. We believe
that it is in the interests of the Council to enhance its
cooperation with the ICC to preserve international
peace and security and achieve the goal of ending
impunity for crimes committed during conflicts.

