Mrs. Ashipala-Musavyi (Namibia): When you, Sir,
welcomed the new Permanent Representative of France,
Ambassador Levitte, to the United Nations, I know that you
did so on our behalf. However, Ambassador Levitte having
served on the Contact Group for Namibia during those
years which many members remember - a Group which
has worked very hard for the implementation of resolution
435 (1978) - and today being the tenth anniversary of
Namibia's independence, I just thought that I should take
a moment to welcome Ambassador Levitte wholeheartedly
to the United Nations and to say that we in the Namibian
delegation look forward to continuing to work with him and
his entire delegation at this level.

Let me also take this opportunity to thank Mr. Annabi
for the update he has given us on the situation in East
Timor, and to commend Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello and his
team for the good work they are doing.
We are satisfied with the progress in the deployment
of the United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET), although, as previous speakers have
noted, there clearly remain certain areas of concern, such as
the availability of civilian police. In this regard, we call for
generous contributions to the Trust Fund, and would like to
take this opportunity to thank all those that have already
contributed. The slow pace at which funds for
reconstruction and development are becoming available is
also of concern to our delegation. We trust that these
matters will gradually be addressed soon so as to ensure
that the socio-economic situation in East Timor does not
deteriorate further.

We welcome the recent visit of President Wahid to
East Timor. We believe that his visit as well as the
apology to East Timor for the violence during Indonesia's
occupation are significant acts to enhance reconciliation
between the two countries. In our view, this remains one
of the most crucial elements for good future cooperation
between the two States. Similarly, the continuing
meetings between East Timorese and militia leaders serve
as a vital mechanism for confidence-building and
reconciliation among East Timorese themselves.

We remain concerned about the rising incidence of
cross-border attacks by militias against East Timorese and
against United Nations personnel. These acts seriously
compromise the security of East Timor and we think that
they need to be addressed soon. We welcome, however,
the undertaking by the Indonesian Government to clamp
down on militia activities in West Timor, and we urge
them to continue to do so.

Finally, my delegation notes that the repatriation of
refugees from camps in West Timor continues, and we
hope that the pace of repatriation will pick up further.

