Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): We thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this important debate and for your able
stewardship of the Council this month. We welcome
His Excellency the Foreign Minister of Guatemala to
the Council. We thank the Secretary-General and the
other briefers for their statements.

It has been over a decade since the Security Council
started addressing themes such as the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, children and armed conflict
and women, peace and security. The objective behind
addressing such cross-cutting themes was indeed
noble and we fully support it. However, there was also
some apprehension among the wider United Nations
membership. Questions were raised about the Security
Council's role and mandate, its ability to objectively
deliver on such themes and its known inability to deliver
on issues that have been on its agenda for decades.

Notwithstanding reservations, the compelling need
to protect civilians in armed conflict has led to a broad
consensus that such protection be pursued objectively
and without politicization. Regrettably, however, we
are witnessing a trend of out-of-context and selective
reporting on that and other issues. The prior two
reports of the Secretary-General on the protection of
civilians (see S/2007/643 and S/2009/277), as well as
the one under consideration (S/2012/376), extend to
situations that cannot be described as armed conflict,
and therefore lie outside the mandate of the report.
On the other hand, the reports do not do justice to the
situations on the Council's agenda, including situations
of foreign occupation.

The Secretary-General's report has unwarranted
references to Pakistan, which we plainly reject.
Pakistan has suffered immensely from the menace
of terrorism, with thousands of lives lost among its
security and law enforcement bodies and civilians.
Pakistan's law enforcement operation against terrorists
cannot be termed as armed conflict. Therefore, we are
disappointed that the authors of the report have clearly
violated the mandate by mentioning Pakistan. That
anomaly must be resolved.

The challenge of protecting civilians in armed
conflict is exacerbated by inequity in international
response. In some situations there is a quick and even
robust response, and in others perpetrators enjoy virtual
immunity. Many a time there has been sufficient public
concern, but the political will to act was missing. The
Security Council, in accordance with its mandate,
should take impartial and non-politicized action in all
situations, in particular those that have been collecting
dust on its agenda for decades.

For example, the Council has failed to respond
to the crisis and unacceptable situation in the Gaza
Strip, where over 1 million people remain in virtual
incarceration and suffer from collective punishment.
Such unequal attention to various situations is also
evident in the priorities and activities of certain
international humanitarian organizations and actors, as
is clear from today's debate.

The protection of civilians is part of many United
Nations peacekeeping mandates. Pakistan is the top
troop-contributor to such missions and has made
important contributions to carrying out their mandates.
At the same time, we emphasize the need to respect
host-country primacy in ensuring civilian protection.
National authorities alone can maintain long-term peace
and security. A peacekeeping mission protects civilians
in coordination with host authorities. Its ability to do
so effectively is inherently linked to resources - as
indicated by the Secretary-General - as well as other
elements such as training, intelligence capabilities and
the configurations of various components within the
mission, hence the need for realistic expectations from
peacekeeping missions.

In a display of such misplaced expectations, a recent
mandate revision asked peacekeepers to pre-empt
threats to the civilian population. Similarly, the notion
of the use of force in peacekeeping under the garb of
civilian protection is not helpful. We also need careful
evaluation of all legal aspects of civilian protection in
peacekeeping operations.

It is important to resist the urge to use Secretariat
reports to advance notions that have failed to gain any
traction in intergovernmental processes. A case in point
is the advocacy of a potential arms trade treaty that we
have heard today. The process that may or may not lead
to an arms trade treaty is still a work in progress. We
should not try to prejudge its outcome.

The annex to the Secretary-General's report, on
constraints on humanitarian access, deals with the
issue of access in a partial manner. It overlooks the
possibility that there could be legitimate reasons
for restricting access. It also disregards the fact that,
regrettably, not all humanitarian actors perform
in accordance with the humanitarian principles of
humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence.
Any debate on humanitarian access would be fruitless
without complete cognizance of current realities. In
that context, we would also like to recall the annex to
General Assembly resolution 46/182, which requires
that humanitarian assistance be provided with full
respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
national unity of States. Humanitarian actors must
conform to, and work strictly within, the framework of
host country agreements.

This debate affords us an opportunity to renew
our commitment to protect civilians in times of armed
conflict while framing the debate in the proper context.
We hope that future reports on the subject will be
apolitical, objective and in strict compliance with the
mandate.

