Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening today's
meeting to assess the progress achieved in the
implementation of the strategy of standards for
Kosovo. We also thank Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno,
Under-Secretary-General, for his briefing on the
implementation of the Plan. We commend the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) for their efforts to implement the
standards for Kosovo and for their firm commitment to
assist Kosovo in the achievement of such fundamental
goals for the territory and for the whole region.

Peace in the Balkans is intrinsically dependant on
the success of the Plan. Despite the remarkable process
achieved in Kosovo since the adoption of resolution
1244 (1999), significant challenges remain. The recent
wave of violence is clear testimony of the challenge we
face. We deplore the loss of lives resulting from the
events of last month, and we applaud the decision to
rapidly deploy the international forces to guarantee the
security and more stability in the territory.

Lack of security continues to be an issue of grave
concern, taking into account the vital importance of
this sector in insuring a lasting peace, as indicated by
the Kosovo Standards Implementation Plan. The
different areas of the Kosovo Standards, namely the
rule of law, freedom of movement, sustainable returns,
community rights, the Kosovo Protection Corps,
economic reconstruction and the protection of property
rights are interdependent and their implementation is
mutually reinforcing. Their implementation, however,
must be fully supported by the normal functioning of
the Provisional Institutions. This must work in an
efficient, transparent and accountable manner to
expand their influence at the local level. UNMIK has a
long-term commitment to assist in the normal
functioning of the Provisional Institutions based on
principles of democracy, the rule of law and universal
standards of human rights, including women's rights
and freedom from inter-ethnic discrimination. The rule
of law remains a key important goal to the peace
process in Kosovo. This implies the effective
functioning of the police and the judicial system and
ensuring that their impartiality functions with respect
for human rights.

The establishment of a multi-ethnic Kosovo
Police Service and a justice sector, with the capacity to
exercise their responsibilities effectively and
impartially, are fundamental benchmarks to be met as
soon as possible, as are equality and justice for all and
the end of impunity for violators. In that regard, it is
important to establish a multi-ethnic Kosovo Police
Service and address decisively the issue of ethnically-
motivated crimes. The steps detailed in the Kosovo
Standards Implementation Plan constitute an important
contribution for the attainment of such goals.

The sustainability of returns and the fulfilment of
rights by the different communities require the
commitment of all parties involved in this process.
Creating a safe environment for the return of refugees
and displaced persons must, therefore, be a priority and
the guarantee that the objective set by the international
community for Kosovo must become a reality. The
political leaders at all levels and the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government must engage in a
systematic effort to build inter-ethnic tolerance to
promote reconciliation and to ensure freedom of
movement for all citizens of Kosovo. It is absolutely
necessary to guarantee conditions for the sustainable
return of refugees and displaced persons and for the
well-being of the entire population of Kosovo through
the creation of jobs and economic development of the
region.

My delegation, therefore, calls upon all the
parties to develop and intensify a constructive dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina in order to achieve
concrete and tangible results aimed at overcoming the
great challenges faced by Kosovo, thus allowing each
inhabitant of Kosovo conditions for living in a
homeland in peace and dignity.

In conclusion, we would like to urge all
concerned in Kosovo and in the region to cooperate in
a constructive manner with the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General in the full implementation of
the standards-for-Kosovo strategy in order to achieve
stability, prosperity and a multi-ethnic, multicultural
democratic society in Kosovo.

