Mr. Park (Republic of Korea): Allow me first to
thank the President of the Security Council for convening
the first open debate on Somalia in over a year. We
believe that today's meeting provides an important
opportunity to refocus the attention of the international
community on Somalia and to deliver a clear message to
the Somali people that their plight is not forgotten, but is
being actively addressed by the international community.

Since the last open debate in March 1996, there have
been some positive developments in the Somali peace
process: the leaders of three major factions were brought
together in Nairobi last year; the two faction leaders in
the Mogadishu area have met several times since last
January to discuss the restoration of peace to the capital
city; and most importantly, the leaders of 26 factions
gathered at Sodere, Ethiopia, and took an important step
towards the creation of a broad-based national
government last January.

In this regard, we would like to pay tribute to the
various concerned Governments and organizations that
continue to contribute their invaluable energy and effort
to furthering the peace process. Our special thanks go to
the Governments of Kenya, Ethiopia, Egypt and Italy, the
Organization of African Unity, the European Union, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
League of Arab States.

Despite this progress, the remainder of the journey
to reconciliation and peace in Somalia is likely to be as
unpredictable and arduous as it has been so far. Although
the Sodere meeting was a significant step forward, it was
overshadowed by the conspicuous non-participation of
Mr. Aidid and Mr. Egal, who continue to disagree with
the goals of the meeting and the process of reconciliation
which it has launched.

Another cause for concern is the exclusion of
Mr. Osman Atto from the meeting of the faction leaders
in Mogadishu. All things considered, the main stumbling

 

block in the peace process remains unchanged: the
intransigence of the major faction leaders.

We believe, therefore, that if further progress is to be
made in the Somali peace process, the international
community, and the regional peacemakers in particular,
should focus on achieving two tasks: first, Aidid and Egal
need to be brought on board in the Sodere peace process;
and secondly, the three Mogadishu leaders need to be
brought together to reach agreement on the restoration of
stability to the capital and its vicinity. In this context, my
delegation urges Mr. Aidid and Mr. Egal, in unambiguous
terms, to put aside their parochial ambitions and join the
National Reconciliation Conference at Bossaso, scheduled
for 10 June.
In our view, the Security Council should play a
proactive role in the Somali peace process in close
coordination with regional efforts. It was in this context that
my delegation welcomed the Secretary-General's proposals
for action by the Council, as contained in his report of
February 1997. Those proposals, we believe, must be
continuously followed up and put into action in accordance
with the evolving situation in Somalia. In this connection,
we recognize and support the important role that the United
Nations Political Office for Somalia (UNPOS) has played
in monitoring the situation and facilitating dialogue among
the parties concerned. We therefore welcome the Secretary-
General's decision to extend the mandate of UNPOS.

On the humanitarian front, the international
community should be mindful of the ever present threat of
a deterioration in conditions and stand ready to respond to
emergencies. However, relief activities can only be
effectively carried out by the international community if
they enjoy the full cooperation of the Somali factions. In
this regard, my delegation is deeply concerned at the
continuation of acts of violence against humanitarian
personnel of the United Nations and non-governmental
organizations. We strongly condemn such acts of violence
and urge the Somali factions to guarantee the safety and
freedom of movement of all aid workers.

Finally, we would like to emphasize the responsibility
of the international community to ensure the
implementation of the arms embargo on Somalia, as
established by resolution 733 (1992). We are certain that all
of us present in this Chamber share the View that the illegal
flow of arms is clearly a serious destabilizing factor in the
Somali situation and that the easy availability of arms
undermines the chances of political settlement. As
Chairman of the Sanctions Committee for Somalia, I regret
to note that, despite the best efforts of the Committee, this
problem could not be addressed in an effective manner,
as desired by the international community.

My delegation would like to suggest that at an
appropriate moment the Security Council seriously
re-examine how to improve the effectiveness of the arms
embargo regime as a whole. Otherwise, allowing embargo
violations to continue unchecked might not only damage
the Council's credibility, but also render meaningless all
the efforts to achieve peace. We believe that the Security
Council, beyond merely urging compliance, should now
explore further concrete measures to enhance the
embargo's effectiveness.

In closing, we would like to reiterate the consistent
view of the Republic of Korea that the ultimate
responsibility for realizing peace and reconciliation lies
with the Somali people themselves, and that there is little
that the international community can do unless the Somali
leaders show the political will and commitment necessary
to achieve a negotiated settlement of the conflict.

My delegation hopes that today's debate will bring
forth many constructive views and suggestions on the
situation in Somalia and that the conclusions we reach
will be duly followed up by the Security Council and the
Secretariat.

