Ms. Sison (United States of America): I would like
to thank Special Representative Shearer for his briefing
today. It is always good to hear from him, although his
report is indeed sobering.

Two thousand eight hundred - that is the average
number of South Sudanese fleeing to neighbouring
countries each day; 90 - that is the number of incidents
and restrictions related to the delivery of humanitarian
assistance reported for the month of April, and it is the
highest for any month this year so far; 100 - that is
the number of aid workers forced to relocate in April
as a result of active hostilities; 84 - that is the total
number of aid workers killed in South Sudan since the
beginning of the conflict, including 17 this year alone,
making South Sudan the most dangerous place in the
world to be a humanitarian worker; unknown - that
is the number of women and girls who have been raped
this year as part of this senseless war or as a so-called
tax, as they say, for leaving the country to seek refuge.

The Government announced a unilateral ceasefire
on 22 May, two months after it had promised the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development that
it would do so, and only after pursuing offensives in
multiple locations in South Sudan before the onset
of the rainy season. Nor have we seen an end to the
obstacles and threats the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS) has to face when carrying out
its mandate. Most recently, they included violence on
the west bank of the Nile River as UNMISS was trying
to access vulnerable populations and, as Mr. Shearer
just informed us, an attack on the UNMISS base in Leer
this month. As he underscored, UNMISS needs access
when civilians are in need of protection, not just once
the fighting has stopped and all the civilians have fled.

We can only conclude from this that the parties still
have no intention of taking seriously the steps outlined
in the Security Council's 23 March presidential
statement (S/PRST/2017/4). We condemn the recent
military campaigns by South Sudanese Government
forces, designed to disproportionately retaliate along
ethnic lines and seize territory to gain a strategic
advantage. We also deplore the violence instigated
by those in opposition, which only exacerbates the
situation and perpetuates this vicious cycle. Once again,
we call on all parties to stop the violence, return to the
negotiating table and give UNMISS and humanitarian
aid organizations unhindered access. We commend
UNMISS's tenacity in carrying out its mandate to
protect civilians, enable the delivery of urgently needed
humanitarian assistance and deploy the initial elements
of the Regional Protection Force.

The only way to achieve a lasting solution to the
conflict in South Sudan and put an end to the suffering
it has caused is through an inclusive political process
led by the South Sudanese themselves. We call on
the United Nations, the African Union and their
regional partners to closely coordinate their efforts to
reinvigorate the process and chart a clear plan for the
way forward. Last month (see S/PV.7930), we urged the
Council to move forward with the tools at our disposal,
such as further sanctions and an arms embargo. Since
then, more people have suffered, more women and
children have been raped and tens of thousands more
have been displaced because of the fighting.
Today, we voted to extend the existing sanctions
measures on South Sudan with our adoption of
resolution 2353 (2017). Now we must back up our
words with concrete action We will continue to conduct
dialogue with Council members and regional and
international partners in order to build support for
additional measures to halt the violence, including
sexual violence, in South Sudan, and to get the parties
to return to the negotiating table. The terrible cost of
our failure to act will continue to be born by the South
Sudanese people and will only increase over time. I
urge Council members to use the tools at our disposal
as soon as possible and take action to stop the suffering.

