Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French): I
would like first to thank you, Mr. President, and the
delegation of Argentina for having organized this
debate on Haiti. I would also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Sandra
Honore, for her briefing and to assure her of Canada's
continued support to her and the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).

Canada has shared a partnership with Haiti for
decades and is one ofthe most generous donors to Haiti.
Since 2006, Canada has provided Haiti with more than
$1 billion in support to Haitian development priorities,
in particular with respect to economic growth, food
security and maternal and child health, through
Canada's commitments undertaken in the framework
of the Group of Eight's Muskoka initiative. Canada
has also provided substantial humanitarian assistance
to meet the immediate needs of the Haitian population
after the 2010 earthquake. In March of this year, we
responded to the 2013 consolidated appeal to help
provide life-saving humanitarian assistance, addressing
immediate needs in emergency food assistance, health
services, water provision, sanitation and cholera
prevention. Meanwhile, our development assistance
continues to help women and children gain access to
health facilities and enjoy a better quality of life. Their
well-being is essential to the successful development of
key Haitian institutions. Those are the kinds of results
we want to continue seeing in Haiti.

Through our stabilization and reconstruction task
force, the Government of Canada has contributed to
Haiti's ongoing security sector reform by focusing on
increasing the capacity of the Haitian National Police
(HNP). We have done so by rebuilding or refurbishing
police commissariats and by providing equipment and
training to HNP officers. Those contributions help
empower Haitians to provide for their own needs in
security.

For Canada, Haiti remains a priority in the
Americas and worldwide. That is why Canada's new
Minister of International Development, Mr. Christian
Paradis, chose Haiti for his first official Visit, thus
demonstrating Canada's commitment to Haiti. Minister
Paradis arrived on Monday in Port-au-Prince and
leaves today, having had a number of successful and
informative meetings and discussions in the country.
He met with Haitian Prime Minister Laurent Lamothe
and other Government officials, as well as some of
the Haitian people who are benefitting from Canada's
development assistance. He witnessed the impacts that
natural disasters have had and the humanitarian needs
that continue to challenge Haiti. He also witnessed
the strength of the Haitian people and the resolve of
their Government to move towards greater stability
and long-term development. During his Visit, Minister
Paradis reiterated his wish that Haiti assume strong
leadership and accountability for its own development.
He also announced that Canada stood ready to support
the Government of Haiti in better coordinating the
non-governmental organizations, donors and partners
currently operating in the country through Haiti's new
development coordination mechanism.

(spoke in English)

Minister Paradis" visit, as well as the visit of our
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. John Baird, earlier
this year, reflects our interest in the future of Haiti.
Those visits have also helped to inform the review we
are presently conducting of our long-term engagement
in Haiti. We are looking forward to completing that
review so that we can maximize our investments to
support accountable and sustainable results for the
Haitian people, especially those most in need.

Haiti has made broad-based economic development,
including through trade and investment, a top priority.
Canada welcomes the spirit of those efforts and
strongly encourages actions that lead to further gains
in transparent governance, economic development
and sustainable job creation. Initiatives in the Haitian
tourism sector have shown what can be achieved
when the Government and the private sector work
together. Accountability, economic competitiveness
and diversification are essential to achieving poverty
reduction and increased revenue generation for the
Government. We encourage continued action in
improving the business environment, which can
transform Haiti's economic potential into concrete
outcomes for the Haitian people.

For Haiti to succeed on the path of development
in accordance with its own objectives and plans, it is
necessary to have a supportive environment and, in
particular, institutional and political stability. In that
context, we note with concern that the long overdue
senatorial, municipal and local elections prescribed
by the Constitution still have not taken place, despite
repeated calls by Haitian political actors and members
of the Security Council that they be held this year.
Moreover, such delays significantly disrupt the normal
operations of Haiti's Parliament, and therefore the
country's governing institutions. It is critical for
all political actors to spare no effort to carry out the
elections in a free and transparent manner as soon as
possible.

Entering yet another phase of political and
institutional instability would undermine the
development and security gains made by Haiti thus
far and compromise further progress. Canada urges
all political actors to work together to find the path
towards a transparent and continued operation of key
institutions of democratic governance and to ensure
political stability. In that context, the submission by
the President of the draft electoral law to Parliament
yesterday is a welcome development.

(spoke in French)

Canada continues to support the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti and thanks MINUSTAH
for its contribution and all its efforts to bring stability to
Haiti. With respect to the evolution of the MINUSTAH
force, it is important not to sacrifice the security
gains made thus far on the security front and that the
decisions taken in this area be based on the situation
on the ground and the capacity of the Haitian State to
guarantee security for its population.

Canada was pleased to note the progress made by
the Haitian National Police in recent years as it assumes
increasing responsibility for security for the Haitian
people. We thank MINUSTAH for its support to Haiti's
security institutions and encourage the Mission to build
upon the progress achieved thus far. We also appreciate
the relevant efforts of the Haitian Government and
strongly urge it to continue to implement the police
development plan. The rule of law and a professional
and capable police force are critical for Haiti's security
and its future. I can assure you, Mr. President, that
Canada will continue to support Haiti in that regard.

