Mr. Skraeie (Croatia): The Security Council has
now adopted resolution 1828 (2008) authorizing the
extension of the mandate of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) for
another year. That is an outcome reached through
extensive dialogue and consultations by members of
the Security Council and the result of Council
members' wishes to seek common ground, which
unfortunately did not result in a much-desired
consensus.

Croatia wanted the resolution to provide a swift
and unambiguous extension to the mandate of
UNAMID with the goal of achieving its planned 80 per
cent deployment by year's end. UNAMID is currently
the largest and most expensive United Nations
operation and, as such, should command the
unanimous support of the Council and requires clear
guidance in order to make its logistics and deployment
possible. Croatia strongly believes that that is crucial
for the safety, security and well-being of the people of
Darfur - the same people who have been suffering in
the most horrific ways for simply far too long. The
protection of those people is the main objective of the
deployment of UNAMID and that is the primary reason
that we voted for the adoption of the resolution,
notwithstanding its being burdened by some important
but unrelated additional elements.

That brings me to my main point, the cooperation
of the Government of the Sudan with the International
Criminal Court, which has been the source of some
controversy and contention, even more so as references
to it have been included in the resolution in question.

On behalf of my delegation, allow me to make
the following observation. Croatia itself was the victim
of brutal aggression in the early 1990s. If the recent
history of our region has taught us anything, we can
say with some certainty that impunity for war crimes
does not bring stability to any conflict, but rather
prolongs the realization of political settlements. If

anything, we have learned that the best foundation for
real and sustainable peace based on reconciliation is
justice andjustice alone.

Another lesson learned that should be reiterated
here is that war crimes are an individual responsibility
and that people, not nations or ethnic groups, commit
them. For that reason, Croatia has supported and
continues to offer its full support for the work of the
International Criminal Court and its Prosecutor. We see
the Court as an independent body and do not wish to
see any impediment to its free and independent work.
We also understand that resolution 1828 (2008)
reaffirms the text of the presidential statement of
16 June 2008, which clearly states that the Government
of the Sudan should cooperate fully with the
International Criminal Court in order to put an end to
impunity for the crimes committed in Darfur.

On a final note, when considering the complexity
of the problem in Darfur, in the Sudan and in the
subregion, Croatia has also advocated a regional
approach to the region's problems. For that reason, we
have always welcomed and encouraged cooperation
between the United Nations and African Union-led
mission in the Sudan and neighbouring countries, and
we would have liked to have seen the final text of the
resolution make reference to those efforts.

