Mr. Okamura (Japan): I would like to thank you,
Madam President, for convening this open debate on
small arms and light weapons. Iwelcome the Secretary-
General's report (S/2015/289). I would also like to
express my sincere gratitude to Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon, United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights Prince Zeid Ra'ad Al Hussein and
Mr. Karamoko Diakite, President of the Cote d'Ivoire
chapter of the West Africa Action Network on Small
Arms, for their briefings.

Japan has been the lead country working on small
arms and light weapons since the 19905. As is widely
known, Japan has been submitting draft resolutions on
small arms and light weapons to the First Committee
almost every year since 1995; every year since 2000,
they have been adopted by consensus.

After 20 years, we have witnessed the entry into
force of the Arms Trade Treaty, whose scope includes
small arms and light weapons. We congratulate all
those who worked towards that achievement and we
commend the continuous efforts of the Office for
Disarmament Affairs to reach that goal.

Japan will continue its steady efforts. Japan
submitted a working paper at the fifth Biennial
Meeting of States to Consider Implementation of the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects. Next month, the second Meeting of
Governmental Experts of the Programme of Action will
provide us with an important opportunity to implement
recommendations made at the fifth Biennial Meeting,
as well as to further efforts on small arms and light
weapons at the United Nations. We have submitted
a working paper and are determined to contribute
to the success of the second Meeting, in support of
Ambassador Vlad Lupan, its Chair-designate.

I would like to take this opportunity to emphasize
the importance of preventing the illegal transfer or
diversion of small arms and light weapons. We have
been making great efforts with respect to tracing and
collecting such weapons. I am sure those efforts are our
priority. However, at the same time, preventing small
arms and light weapons from crossing national borders
and stopping the flow of such weapons is even more
important. I would like to give some examples that
demonstrate why.

In the 1990s, the world witnessed one ethnic
conflict after another on the Balkan Peninsula. The
flow of small arms and light weapons in the background
was massive. Small arms were sold in one post-conflict
area and flowed into the next. There ensued a sequence
of conflicts on the peninsula, from Slovenia to Croatia,
to Bosnia and Herzegovina and, finally, to Kosovo. The
transfer of small arms and light weapons turned existing
ethnic conflicts into armed and bloody ones, inflaming
feelings of hatred and vengeance among people. I was
appointed chief political officer of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
in 1999. Under the leadership of Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Bernard Kouchner, UNMIK
cooperated with the NATO-led International Security
Force in Kosovo (KFOR) in the collection, and above
all, the border control of small arms and light weapons.
If the ethnic conflict in Kosovo did not produce
repercussions on neighbouring countries at that time,
it is because of the efforts made by UNMIK and KFOR
to prevent the flow of small arms and light weapons
from Kosovo.

Mali is another example. After the bloody civil
war ended there in the late 19905 and early 2000s, the
Government of Mali was very focused on the issue of
small arms and light weapons and cooperated with
the United Nations Development Programme on the
collection and destruction of such weapons. Those
efforts minimized the risk of the escalation of local
conflicts at that time. Unfortunately, however, the
collapse of the Al-Qadhafi regime in Libya in 2011
resulted in a tremendous outflow - we can even call it a
tsunami - of small arms and light weapons from Libya
to countries in the Sahel region, including Mali, and
worsened the conflict there. Affected by that tsunami
from Libya, Mali experienced a large-scale conflict that
risked dividing the whole nation. That situation was
also noted this morning in the briefing by Mr. Diakite.
We recognize the difficulty of controlling national
borders in areas such as the Sahel. Nevertheless, the
tragic experience of Mali shows the importance of
carefully monitoring the flow of small arms and light
weapons and of regulating the international trade in
such weapons.

Finally, I would like to underline the importance
of implementing on the ground the decisions taken
here in New York. We must strengthen efforts in the
field. In that regard, the role and capacity-building of
peacekeeping operations is essential. Japan has been
providing support to countries affected by the diversion
of small arms and light weapons through concrete
programmes, such as its support for the Kofi Annan
International Peacekeeping Training Centre in Ghana.
Japan also provided financial support for the collection
of small arms and light weapons and a capacity-building
programme in Cote d'Ivoire. We hope other countries
will follow suit.

In conclusion, let me reiterate that Japan has led
international efforts on small arms and light weapons
and is determined to continue doing so.

