Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): The
delegation of the United Republic of Tanzania wishes
to thank you, Mr. President, and to congratulate you
and your country, Austria, for organizing this debate on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict during
your presidency of the Security Council. This is an
important event, as it highlights one of the major
current challenges to United Nations peacekeeping
missions. It is also a milestone event, as it coincides
with the tenth anniversary of the first Security Council
resolution on this subject, resolution 1265 (1999), and
the sixtieth anniversary of the Geneva Conventions on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict.

After 60 years, the legal framework of the
Conventions remains valid and useful, but the reality of
warfare on the ground has evolved and become more
complex. Civilians have increasingly become the
targets and victims of combatants and have suffered
intensely from the collateral consequences of
sophisticated weapons of warfare and ideologies of
hatred against innocent civilian populations.

Beginning in 1999, in the midst of the gruesome
civil war in Sierra Leone, the Security Council has
strived to issue mandates for peacekeeping missions to
protect civilians from such atrocities. That comes in the
wake of earlier instances of genocide, crimes against
humanity, crimes of war and ethnic cleansing in
Rwanda, Bosnia and Herzegovina in the mid-19905.
Ten years later, notwithstanding the continuing
attention and response of the Security Council, the
Secretariat and peacekeepers, the protection of
civilians in conflict situations remains a daunting and a
recurring challenge.

We should remind ourselves that the protection of
civilians is the primary responsibility of States and that
parties to armed conflicts also bear primary
responsibility to ensure the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. However, experience in situations of
armed conflict or immediately after the cessation of
hostilities shows that those primary responsibilities are
not fully met and observed because of the exigencies
and disruption imposed by violent conflicts on law,
order and judicial mechanisms. Therefore,
peacekeepers are obliged to offer the needed protection
to civilians in such situations.
My country, Tanzania, has been at the forefront of
protecting refugees from neighbouring countries, but
that is only one aspect of protecting civilian victims of
armed conflicts. The challenge in situ of protecting
civilians where conflict is taking place remains
enormous.

It was against that background that the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
commissioned an independent study to look into ways
of enhancing the protection of civilians in United
Nations peacekeeping missions. I was requested last
year to chair that study, whose report has just been
released. I would like to share some of the highlights
of the findings and recommendations of the study.

The study shows that the entire protection of
civilians chain, from the Security Council to the
peacekeeper on the ground, needs to be addressed.
There are significant gaps at all levels, requiring a
major and concerted effort form the Council, troop and
police contributors, the Secretariat and peacekeeping
operations to fill them in order to strengthen the
protection of civilians.

Some of the gaps will need to be addressed by
other Member States. The measures to be undertaken
will require political strategy and unwavering support
from the Security Council. The operation measures
include ensuring that critical equipment fundamental to
fulfilling the mandate is made available to the
missions, that contingents on the ground are properly
trained and equipped before arriving at the mission
area, and that they are led by commanders with the
necessary resolve. Equally important is the need for
troop- and police-contributors to be aware of and
prepared for the difficult and dangerous environment in
which they will be working. Systemic changes will
have to be made, and all actors will have to meet the
challenges that this entails. This will be a difficult and
challenging endeavour, but a worthwhile one, as the
beneficiaries of our efforts will be those who need our
attention most.

I should now like to highlight for the Council
some key points with regard to some parameters on the
specific recommendations of the report. With regard to
the language of Security Council resolutions and
protection of civilian mandates, the study looked at the
first usage of the "imminent threat of physical
violence" language, in resolution 1270 (1999) of

October 1999 relating to the United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone, and at the evolution of that language to
date. The study found that this physical protection
language, with its three caveats, has now become
standard. This seems, in part, to be due to the fact that
Security Council members continue to value
precedents in writing mandates. The team assessed that
the physical protection language remains confusing for
those in the field while it also raises expectations. The
intent of the Security Council with regard to a
mission's efforts to protect civilians is often not fully
understood by the Secretariat or by peacekeeping
missions on the ground. It is important that members of
the Security Council not only focus on getting the
language of mission mandates right, but also back up
peacekeeping operations with the necessary political
and material support.

In addition, it has become evident that the
planning that informs Security Council deliberations
does not consider consistently the nature of threats to
civilians. As a result, the spectrum of threats to
civilians does not help to shape mission mandates,
strategies, structures or resources. It may also be useful
for troop- and police-contributing countries and other
relevant stakeholders to provide input to the Council
on a regular basis in order to inform its crafting of
mandates.

I now turn to peacekeeping mission planning and
Secretariat policies. The study looked at the planning
process that links Council resolutions to peacekeeping
deployment. In particular, it examined the guidance,
preparation and planning mechanisms used to build
peacekeeping operations. The study concluded that the
lack of an operational concept of what the protection of
civilians means for United Nations peacekeepers has
hampered the implementation of this mandated task.

The study also found that troop and police
contributors often have difficulty understanding how to
train and equip their contingents to carry out their
protection role. Even nations with well developed
peacekeeping doctrines and which train others in
peacekeeping often do not address the question of the
protection of civilians beyond respect for international
humanitarian law, support to the rule of law and human
rights. As such, the Secretariat cannot rely on deriving
guidance on the protection of civilians from the
existing doctrine of Member States, but will have to
base it on the lessons derived from the field. I believe
the engagement of the Secretariat with troop- and
police-contributing countries will be of vital
importance.

With regard to field implementation, the findings
from the field were based on mission visits in 2008 and
2009. Mission-specific cases reveal that, without the
basic prerequisites in place, such as a peace to keep,
sufficient political backing from the Security Council
and adequate resources, the Security Council cannot
expect a mission to successfully implement a
protection of civilians mandate. We also found that the
role of both uniformed and civilian United Nations
police units is a key area where new thinking is needed
when it comes to considering their role in the
protection of civilians. In general, there seems to be
confusion regarding appropriate roles for uniformed
police units.

Furthermore, we found that the protection of
civilians has to be a holistic and multidimensional
endeavour that goes beyond physical protection to
include aspects such as humanitarian access, protection
from gender-based violence, protection of refugees and
returnees, as well as the protection of human rights.

In conclusion, I wish to thank all the Council
members and the other Member States that have
mentioned the report of the study in this debate today
and expressed interest in reflecting upon it further. I
invite all Member States, especially members of the
Council, troop- and police-contributing countries and
the Secretariat to give the report extended
consideration. I look forward to continuing dialogue on
this subject with a view to implementing the
recommendations contained in the report. Finally, we
welcome the draft resolution prepared by the mission
of Austria. It is comprehensive and balanced and it sets
out a clear path by which the international community
can continue to respond to the challenge of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.

