Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
I have the honour to address the Security Council
on behalf of the 14 member States of the Caribbean
Community (CARICOM).

CARICOM. welcomes and appreciates the
comprehensive briefing of Ambassador Sandra Honore.
We note with interest her comments on developments in
Haiti, especially as they relate to the electoral process.
We also thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2016/225).

CARICOM. is very concerned that the current
political uncertainty in Haiti is such that the completion
of the electoral process may not take place as outlined
in the 5 February agreement. Recognizing that the
people of Haiti must be in the forefront and at the
centre of arriving at homegrown solutions, we urge
the international community to provide support in
identifying Haitian-owned consensual solutions to
the stalled process. In our View, all that can be done
must be done to ensure that the electoral process is
completed in a timely fashion and in a manner that is
transparent, free and fair, and free from fear. Elections
are important for a democracy, and therefore a condition
for the sustainable development of democratic States.

Haiti is already vulnerable to humanitarian crises
compounded by drought, insufficient water, health and
sanitation infrastructure and the presence of cholera,
to name a few. Thereofre, the country cannot afford
political instability. In that regard, CARICOM. is
pleased that, during recently concluded thirty-fourth
session of the United Nations Food and Agriculture
Organization Regional Conference for Latin America
and the Caribbean, held in Mexico City, the CARICOM
Ministers of Agriculture made a commitment to work
together in addressing the issue of chronic hunger,
poverty, food and nutrition security of the people of
Haiti. In addition, CARICOM. continues to express
its gratitude to all States that have made financial
contributions to the fund administered by the United
Nations Development Programme to aid the electoral
process in Haiti, including the contribution of the
Government of Trinidad and Tobago of $1 million to
the project.

MINUSTAH, under the leadership of
Ambassador Honore, must be commended for its
continued stewardship in Haiti, where it has assisted
the Haitian authorities not only with matters relating to
the conduct of elections, but also the strengthening of
the rule of law, the promotion of justice and the training
of the Haitian National Police in order to ensure that
it would be in a position to assume total control of
policing activities in that State in the very near future.

As we continue to commend the Haitian authorities
and MINUSTAH for their efforts at stabilizing
Haiti during this transformative period, we are also
mindful that the members of the Council need to act
with prudence in doing all that it can to ensure that
the electoral process is completed as stipulated in the
agreement of 5 February. Any further erosion of that
process will curtail progress and cause a reversal of the
gains that Haiti has made thus far.

