Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank the Chairs of the Al-Qaida Sanctions
Committee, the Counter-Terrorism Committee and
the Non-Proliferation Committee for their respective
briefings.

Since the lastjoint briefing (see S/PV.7184) ofthose
Committees to the Council in May 2014, the emergence
of the terrorist group calling itself the Islamic State of
Iraq and the Levant, the expansion of the Al-Nusra Front
and the challenge posed by foreign terrorist fighters
forced the Council to resolutely react to those threats.
We welcome the Council meeting (see S/PV.7272) held
on 24 September 2014, which led to the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2178 (2014), which provides
for the implementation of a series of measures to deal
with foreign terrorist fighters. The success or failure of
the international community against this scourge will
depend on the efficient and effective cooperation of all
stakeholders. In that regard, we fully support the work
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee and its Executive
Directorate, and we are committed to the forthcoming
high-level conference in Madrid to stop the recruitment
and flow of foreign terrorist fighters.

The effective fight against terrorism requires trust
at all levels, which must be cultivated by sharing best
practices and information to detect and dismantle
terrorist-financing sources, such as the trafficking and
illegal sale of oil and other natural resources, as well
as the destruction and trafficking in cultural property,
among others.

In this task we should not lose sight of respect for
human rights and the rule of law. We emphasize the
role played by the Office of the Ombudsperson in
incorporating due process in the sanctions regime of
the Al-Qaida Committee, as well as the independence
of the Ombudsperson's work. Chile has reiterated
that the post of the Ombudsperson should exist in all
sanctions committees.

We must continue to respond quickly to new
challenges while maintaining what we have done well,
for example, in the Non-Proliferation Committee with
regard to non-State actors.

The comprehensive review to be held next year
on the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) will
be key to determine its progress. We see room for
improvement in the dialogue with Member States. It is
therefore important to identify deficiencies and areas
requiring further attention.

Before concluding, I will make a few comments.

First, we are concerned about the excessive
workload of the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team of the Al-Qaida Committee. As the
product of different resolutions, the Team must invest
enormous human resources and work hours to respond
to an increased demand for documentation, diverting
its attention from the task originally entrusted to it.

Secondly, greater synergy in the work ofthese three
Committees is required, as well as greater dialogue
with Member States to facilitate cooperation and the
necessary assistance to enhance national capacities.

Moreover, we are also concerned about the possible
effect of the widespread use of the term "terrorism" and
the fact that some international actors label opponents
or the political opposition as terrorists.

Finally, terrorism and violence will not be defeated
by military means alone. As noted by President Michelle
Bachelet to the Security Council (see S/PV.7272), we
must address its root causes. Undoubtedly, that is a
long-term preventive task that we must undertake
without delay.

