Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): I would like to
thank the South African delegation for organizing
today's open debate. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(S/2011/634*) on justice and the rule of law in conflict
and post-conflict countries, as well as for his valuable
statement.
12-2096]

As the world's largest democracy and, arguably,
one of its most diverse countries, India firmly believes
that the rule of law is a necessary precondition for
sustainable peace and development in any society.
Indeed, justice and the rule of law are preconditions for
the maintenance of peace and security at the
international level as well.

In the World Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/1), which was adopted on 16
September 2005, our leaders acknowledged that good
governance and the rule of law at the national and
international levels were essential for sustained
economic growth, sustainable development and the
eradication of poverty and hunger. To achieve that
objective at the national level, world leaders also
recommitted themselves to actively protect and
promote all human rights, the rule of law and
democracy. They also recognized that those were not
only interlinked and mutually reinforcing, but also
belonged to the universal and indivisible core values
and principles of the United Nations. To achieve that
objective at the international level, the Outcome called
upon all parts of the United Nations to promote human
rights and fundamental freedoms in accordance with
their respective mandates.

Strengthening the rule of law at the national level
necessitates that States fulfil their obligations to
observe and protect human rights and fundamental
freedoms for all in accordance with their domestic
legislation, international law, the Charter of the United
Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
and other related instruments. It is also necessary to
eliminate policies and practices that discriminate
against women and to adopt laws and promote
practices that protect the rights of women and other
vulnerable sectors of society and promote gender
equality.

Compliance with rule of law standards not only
facilitates the resolution of conflicts and the
achievement of peace, stability and development in
post-conflict situations, it also helps underprivileged
people and other vulnerable sectors of society to secure
justice, dignity and empowerment. Accordingly, we
also support activities of United Nations agencies in
assisting countries in conflict and post-conflict
situations to build their capacity to ensure justice and
the rule of law for all sectors of their societies. We are
happy to note that the Secretariat's Rule of Law
Assistance Unit is actively engaged in strengthening

12-2096]

United Nations activities in promoting the rule of law,
including through technical assistance and capacity-
building for countries in conflict and post-conflict
situations.

Such assistance should be based on the
fundamental principles of the United Nations Charter,
namely, respect for national sovereignty, territorial
integrity and non-interference. The objective should be
to build national institutions that are capable of
meeting the legitimate aspirations of the population
and addressing their grievances. There is no one model
to fit all conflict and post-conflict situations. United
Nations assistance must therefore have flexibility to
adapt assistance to specific situations. The value
systems and sensibilities of the societies concerned
should invariably be taken into account while planning
for United Nations involvement and assistance.

The rule of law is a principle and does not
necessarily mean precepts of one particular kind. It is
important to ensure national ownership while assisting
countries in capacity- and institution-building,
including in the area of the rule of law. Adequate
resources should be made available to United Nations
missions, and there need be no hurry to withdraw them
so long as national authorities request their continued
presence.

To ensure transparency, fairness and adherence to
the rule of law in the United Nations system, it is
necessary that the mandate of one organ of the United
Nations should not be infringed upon or be duplicated
by its other organs. It is also necessary to support and
further encourage those institutional policies and
processes that ensure a just and effective international
order based on the rule of law. There are some basic
principles accepted universally, but beyond that it is
clear that there is no one single approach to the rule of
law. In that context, it is important to note that, to
address the diversity prevailing in rule of law
approaches in different countries around the world, the
Statute of the International Court of Justice emphasizes
the representation of major civilizations and principal
legal systems of the world when it comes to the
composition of the Court.

In conflict and post-conflict situations, it is
important that United Nations officials on the ground
realize that their role is to assist the country concerned;
it is not a matter of leadership. United Nations officials
must also adhere to their mandates and not take unto
themselves the task of propagating one or another line
of thinking on what and how laws should be framed
and implemented at the national level. That is a matter
that is outside the United Nations domain and lies
squarely with national authorities.

It is necessary that the mandates for United
Nations missions generated by the Council be focused
and duly prioritized. There have been instances where
Council mandates are interpreted in a broad manner
and, at times, without consultations with the host
Government. For the effective functioning of the
United Nations missions, particularly given the limited
resources they have, it is essential that those aspects be
given due consideration at the time that mandates are
generated, as well as during their implementation.

The synergies across the board in the United
Nations system are important and need to be reflected
in the implementation of mandates. In that connection,
the onus is essentially on the Council to ensure that it
respects the mandates of other United Nations bodies,
rather than encroaching on them. The Council should
also resist the temptation to have recourse to its
Chapter VII powers and, instead, promote justice and
the rule of law in countries on its agenda through
peaceful means under Chapter VI of the Charter.

In conclusion, let me state that my delegation
sees an urgent need to move towards approaches that
are nationally driven and sustainable and that can
garner the requisite political and popular support in
conflict and post-conflict countries for United Nations
assistance in justice and the rule-of-law fields to be
fruitful and enduring. There is also a need for a more
comprehensive and joint approach among United
Nations entities to support the rule of law in line with
national priorities and plans. At the same time, a
reformed Security Council that conforms to the
contemporary geopolitical realities is essential if
efforts at global norm-making - in the case of justice
and rule-of-law challenges in post-conflict
situations - are to succeed.

