Mr. Fonseca (Brazil): Brazil welcomes your initiative,
Mr. President, to convene this formal meeting of the
Security Council to discuss the question of international
terrorism and the threat it may represent to international
peace and security. We are also thankful to your delegation
for having proposed the draft resolution on which the
Council is about to take action.

Since the issue of international terrorism was first
brought before the General Assembly, in 1972, the
international community has continuously worked on
measures to combat this global scourge. In the 1994
Declaration on Measures to Eliminate International
Terrorism (General Assembly resolution 49/60) and in the
1996 Declaration to Supplement that Declaration (General Assembly resolution 51/210) all terrorist acts, methods and
practices were categorically condemned irrespective of
political, philosophical, ideological, ethnic or religious
considerations.

Yet terrorism is a persistent phenomenon which
requires the vigilant attention of the United Nations. Over
the years we have created a network of interlocking
conventions, nine in all, which seek to deal with the
different facets of this wide-ranging problem. Brazil
considers it extremely important that the General Assembly
is continue to move ahead in forging further links in this
network.

In this respect, Brazil supports the initiative on nuclear
terrorism and welcomes the conclusion of negotiations on
a convention for the suppression of the financing of
terrorism. This draft convention is especially welcome as it
deals with the complex and intricate transnational
financial operations supporting terrorist activities, and
paves the way for concerted action and close cooperation
between law enforcement and financial authorities around
the world.

Combating terrorism calls for coordinated initiatives
and comprehensive strategies. This is especially true since
terrorism tends increasingly to be accompanied by other
scourges with grave consequences. Many of these issues
have recently come under the scrutiny of the Security
Council. The issue of small arms is one of them. There
can be no doubt that so long as these weapons are freely
traded, terrorists will find no difficulty in arming
themselves.

The protection of civilians is another such issue. Just
as we repudiate acts of violence against civilians in time
of war, all the more must we roundly and strongly
condemn terrorist attacks against the innocent and the
defenceless.

Terrorist crimes related to drug trafficking, perhaps
more than any others, underline the fact that terrorism is
often difficult to distinguish from other forms of criminal
activity. These groups benefit from powerful economic
and financial resources with considerable potential for
corrupting; they therefore offer a new and even more
serious challenge to enforcement.

Terrorism is the antithesis of democracy. It abhors
dialogue and has no respect for the opinions and lives of
others. It thrives on fear and hatred, and preys on
ignorance and prejudice. Terrorism must be resisted at all
costs. Terrorists and their proxies must be given no
quarter. Terrorism must be fought with skill,
determination and effective legal means.

The roots of terrorism are a complex matter. No
country in any part of the world has a guarantee that it
will be free of the scourge of terrorist activities. One
cannot ignore that terrorism often finds fertile ground
amid civil strife and deprivation. So, while reaffirming
our resolve to resist it, let us recognize that terrorism
feeds also on despair and frustration, manipulating the
anguish and sense of hopelessness of those left behind.
These issues present challenges that go beyond
interdiction and repression, no matter how crucial these
may be. Our endeavours in the United Nations should
therefore be guided by a broader, more comprehensive
discussion on the root causes of terrorism.

 

We believe that the General Assembly should now
begin consideration of a comprehensive convention on
international terrorism, as called for in its resolution 53/108.
This would not only provide a sound juridical framework
for the application of existing conventions, but would also
help us come to grips with a phenomenon that still eludes
definition. We therefore welcome the proposal by India that
discussion of such a convention be taken up shortly, as well
as the Egyptian proposal that a high-level conference be
convened in 2000 or immediately after.

We are aware that the central responsibility for
addressing this issue lies with the General Assembly. We
are keen that this should continue to be so. The Security
Council may nevertheless bring an important contribution
to our collective efforts to reinforce international
cooperation in combating terrorism. The thrust and purpose
of the draft resolution on which we are about to vote is
precisely to support the work done by the General
Assembly and other relevant bodies, and to issue an
unequivocal condemnation of all acts of terrorism in all
forms and manifestations and regardless of their motivation.
The draft resolution also expresses the readiness of the
Council to contribute its share to those international efforts,
particularly with respect to international terrorist activities
that may pose a threat to international peace and security.

This meeting of the Security Council is intended to
send a powerful message that terrorism must be fought with
determination, and also with hope: hope in the
empowerment of civil society all over the world; hope in
the establishment of a culture of human rights and tolerance
for all; and hope in our collective will to bring about justice
and prosperity for all.

