Sir John Weston (United Kingdom): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union. The
Central and Eastern European countries associated with the
European Union - Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Lithuania, Poland, Romania and Slovakia - and
the associated country Cyprus, as well as the European Free
Trade Association (EFTA) country members of the
European Economic Area - Iceland and Norway - align
themselves with this statement.

The European Union is encouraged by the recent
progress which has been achieved in the implementation of
peace process commitments in Angola since this Council
last considered the situation there. We welcome the
announcement of a special status for Mr. Savimbi, the
appointment of UNITA governors and vice-governors and
the nomination of ambassadors. We welcome also the
termination of broadcasts by Radio Vorgan and commend
those UNITA officials who have returned to Luanda. We
hope, too, for Mr. Savimbi's own early return to Luanda so
that he can exercise fully his duties as leader of the largest
opposition party.

We are concerned, however, at the continuing slow
progress in extending State administration. The onus
remains on UNITA to cooperate fully and to avoid further
delays. In particular, UNITA must remove the obstacles to
the extension of State administration in Bailundo and
Andulo, as well as to other key localities.

We are concerned also at reports that UNITA has not
declared and demobilized all of its forces. National
reconciliation cannot be possible unless UNITA forsakes
the military option. Only then will UNITA achieve
complete transition to a political party, participating, as it
should, fully and constructively in a transparent democratic
process and in the future development of Angola.

The Secretary-General's report points to a growing
gap between progress on Lusaka Protocol commitments and
setbacks in the security situation. In this context, UNITA's
persistent attempts to frustrate the work of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA) through
intimidation and harassment must cease. At the same time,
the Government must continue to exercise patience and to
resist the temptation to respond to provocation with heavy-
handed reprisals or military adventures. Clearly, peace in
Angola depends not only on the willingness of both
parties to meet their commitments, but also on the
absence of armed conflict there. We condemn the armed
attacks against MONUA and humanitarian or other
international personnel, against the Angolan authorities
and, not least, against civilians. We look to UNITA to
cooperate with MONUA in identifying those responsible.

The European Union is actively engaged in helping
the Angolan authorities remove the scourge of mines from
their country. We therefore deplore the recent reports of
renewed mine-laying and call for this activity immediately
to stop.

The European Union would like to encourage the
long-delayed meeting between President Dos Santos and
Mr. Savimbi to take place in Angola as soon as possible.
There is probably no more visible a sign of national
reconciliation than a firm and unequivocal commitment at
the highest political level.

The European Union supports the Secretary-
General's recommendation to extend MONUA's mandate
for a further two months and his proposals to draw down
the military component. We agree also with the intention
of the Security Council to review the mandate, size and
organizational structure of MONUA, or a follow-on
United Nations presence, by 30 June 1998. We endorse
the Secretary-General's recommendation to strengthen the
civilian police component of the mission. Their work is
increasingly important to promoting respect for human
rights and to building a climate of trust in Angola.

For the future, the people and the Government of
Angola must continue to bear the primary responsibility
for their own well-being. We agree with the Secretary-
General that the international community, including the
United Nations system, has a key role to play in helping
them do so after MONUA's peacekeepers have left. As
the leading contributor to Angola's rehabilitation, the
European Union will continue to play a full part in
assisting Angolans to consolidate national reconciliation
and to revitalize their society and economy.

I hope it is clear from these remarks that the
European Union's commitment to helping the people of
Angola is undimmed. While there are grounds for
cautious optimism, the peace process is not yet complete.
Given the recent setbacks in the security situation we
should remain very much alive to the real risks of a
reversal during these final critical months.

 

