Mr. Do Rego (Benin) (spoke in French): I have the
honour to speak on behalfofthe Group ofAfrican States.

At the outset, allow me to welcome to you to New
York again, Mr. Foreign Minister, and to thank the
presidency of Equatorial Guinea for organizing this
important open debate on the Silencing the Guns by 2020
initiative. The Group thanks Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo and Mr. Vasu Gounden for their
briefings on that extremely important subject. I would
especially like to commend Mr. Ramtane Lamamra,
African Union High Representative for Silencing the
Guns in Africa by 2020, for his tireless efforts in the
service of peace and stability on our continent.

The African Group deeply appreciates the efforts
made by the three African members of the Security
Council, under the coordination of the President of
the Republic of Equatorial Guinea, to carry forward
the initiative to hold this open debate of the Security
Council to consider resolution 2457 (2019) on silencing
the guns in Africa. This debate demonstrates the United
Nations commitment to the promotion of peace on our
continent. In that regard, I would like to congratulate
all the members on the unanimous adoption of today's
resolution, which gives new impetus to the strategic
partnership between the United Nations and the African
Union in the area of peace and security.

The Group remains deeply concerned about the
illicit trade, transfer and circulation of small arms and
light weapons, as well as their excessive accumulation
and uncontrolled proliferation in many parts of the
world, particularly in Africa, due to their humanitarian
and socioeconomic consequences. Africa continues
to be at the forefront of the regions most affected by
the illicit trade and transfer of small arms and light
weapons, which are mainly manufactured outside the
continent but acquired and used by unauthorized actors
and illegal armed groups on the continent.
The African Group therefore sees the present
meeting as a renewed opportunity for the international
community to redouble its efforts to curb the
phenomenon of the illicit flows of small arms during
conflicts in order to create an environment that is
conducive to peace, security and socioeconomic
development. It is important to note that promoting
the free and inclusive participation of States in global
efforts to combat the illicit flow ofweapons, particularly
in Africa, will facilitate the effective implementation of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
African Union's Agenda 2063.

In that context, the Group welcomes the Secretary-
General's agenda for disarmament, reaffirms
the validity and relevance of the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects, and underlines the importance of its
full and effective implementation. We also stress that
international assistance and cooperation are an essential
aspect of its implementation. In that regard, the African
Group welcomes the efforts of Member States and
regional organizations to implement the Programme of
Action and also calls for the full implementation of the
International Instrument to Enable States to Identify
and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit
Small Arms and Light Weapons in order to enable
States to identify in a timely manner and reliably trace
small arms and light weapons, thereby preventing their
illicit flow.

The African Union's commitment to silencing the
guns by 2020 has taken an important step forward in
recent months. The Horn of Africa, which is one of
the regions of our continent that has unfortunately
been home to many conflicts, is delighted today with
the rapprochement between Ethiopia and Eritrea 4 a
new impetus that allows us to look to the future with
optimism. As a concrete example of the successful
exercise to peacefully end crises, I would also like to
mention the recent peace agreements reached in South
Sudan and the Central African Republic, as well as the
peaceful elections held in both Madagascar and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Africa has the most to gain from international law
and multilateral institutions. In the 16 years since the
establishment of the African Union, we have seen the
considerable benefits of our multilateral approach,
which has led to the decline in conflicts and the
increase in the number of democratic Governments
across the continent. In an international context marked
by a tendency to question multilateralism and the
international order based on the rule oflaw, it seems to
me important to emphasize that point.

The African Group therefore wishes to highlight
the significant work and progress made in the fight
against the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons
since the adoption of the Bamako Declaration on Small
Arms Proliferation in 2000, as well as the Constitutive
Act of the African Union; the Protocol relating to the
Establishment of the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union in 2002; the Solemn Declaration on a
Common African Defence and Security Policy, adopted
in Sirte, Libya in 2004; the Nairobi Protocol for the
Prevention, Control and Reduction of Small Arms
and Light Weapons in the Great Lakes Region and the
Horn of Africa; the Southern African Development
Community Protocol of 2004; the 2006 Economic
Community of West African States Convention on
Small Arms and Light Weapons, Their Ammunition
and Other Related Materials; and the efforts undertaken
within the framework of the Community of Sahelo-
Saharan States and the Arab Maghreb Union.

With the African Union's Agenda 2063 in mind,
our Heads of State and Government launched the
Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative in 2013, alongside
other relevant subregional initiatives to address that
challenge on the continent. Although some believe that
this initiative is too ambitious, we are convinced that
the objective set remains achievable with the political
will and commitment of all.

The African Group recognizes that the current
regional pattern of conflicts on the continent presents
new challenges, particularly in the Sahel-Saharan
region, the Great Lakes region and a few outbreaks in
the Horn of Africa, where the phenomenon of terrorism
and cross-border crime threatens to undermine all
gains achieved. Moreover, despite the progress made in
recent years, the African Group continues to stress that
international assistance and cooperation, on a larger
scale, remain an essential element in permanently
silencing the guns in Africa.

In that regard, the African Group calls on all
Member States to strengthen their technical and
financial cooperation with developing countries in
order to achieve the overall objectives of eradicating
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons. The
Group believes that those efforts will promote national
and regional initiatives and contribute to global efforts.

The African Group welcomes the efforts made
by States parties to the Arms Trade Treaty since its
entry into force, as well as the holding of the third
Conference of States Parties to the Treaty in Tokyo
in August 2018. The Group urges the States parties to
the Treaty to implement it in a balanced and objective
manner, ensuring that the interests of all States, and not
only those of the main producing and exporting States,
are protected, while avoiding any infringement of the
legitimate right of States to meet their defence and
security needs, in accordance with the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations.

The full implementation of the Treaty remains
achievable with the cooperation of all its parties.
The African Group recognizes that arms transfers to
unauthorized recipients and illegal armed groups fuel
the illicit trade and it urges all States to refrain from
such transfers and to prohibit them to any recipient not
authorized by a competent national authority of the
importing State.

The African Group reaffirms the sovereign right
of States to acquire, manufacture, export, import and
retain conventional weapons, their components and
parts necessary for their legitimate security and defence
needs, in accordance with the provisions of the Charter
of the United Nations.

The African Group appreciates the efforts of
the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and
Disarmament in Africa, its contribution to disarmament
efforts and its assistance to African States in achieving
disarmament, peace and security objectives. The
African Group stresses the need to strengthen all
United Nations regional centres so that they can fully
carry out their mandates.

In conclusion, the African Group wishes to
reaffirm the crucial importance of political will and
transparency in addressing international disarmament
and security issues. The Group calls on all stakeholders
to work together to strengthen the cause of peace and
prosperity in the world.

