Mrs. Sulimani (Sierra Leone): I wish to thank you,
Madam President, for your initiative in convening this
open debate of the Security Council on children and
armed conflict. I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2019/509). At the same time,
my delegation is saddened by the report's findings
on the extent to which in 2018, children in more than
20 countries around the world suffered as a result of
conflict and related violence.
I am honoured to participate in this debate from
the perspective of Sierra Leone and its experience of
the horrendous impact of a prolonged - ll-year, to be
exact 4 armed conflict on our children.

This morning the Security Council heard from
Ms. Mariatu Kamara, an innocent victim of that
bitter and senseless rebel war. Her appearance and
contribution here today could be described as a chapter
in the record of atrocities perpetrated against innocent
civilians, including children.

Coincidentally, three weeks ago marked the
twentieth anniversary of the signing of the historic
Lome Peace Agreement between the Government of
Sierra Leone and the Revolutionary United Front. At
the signing ceremony, the late President Ahmad Tejan
Kabbah brought a young child named Memunatu, lifted
her high up and dedicated the Agreement to the children
of Sierra Leone. This underlines the importance of
peace and reconciliation as a prerequisite for addressing
the needs of children in armed conflict.

Thankfully, that sad chapter in my country's
history was closed some 17 years ago. Given our
experience with conflict and its horrendous impact on
children, we were quick to appreciate our responsibility
to protect our children and to come to the realization
that sustainable development cannot be achieved in
post-conflict settings if prompt action is not taken to
prevent such heinous crimes.

As we commemorate the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1882 (2009), we would like to share some of
our experiences on this issue, including the challenges
we had to surmount to ensure that our traumatized
children could enjoy their inalienable right to live
in a peaceful, congenial environment, their right to
education and to adequate food and shelter, as well as
their right to be heard and be protected from all forms
of violence and abuse, be it in time of war or in time of
peace.

On the measures taken to prevent, reintegrate and
stop the cycles of violence, the Government of Sierra
Leone, in its bid to end the hostilities, signed the
aforementioned Lome Peace Agreement, which laid out
a path to peace and provided for the protection of children
affected by the conflict. Disarmament, demobilization
and the reintegration of all ex-combatants, including all
children associated with the war, into their communities
through a National Committee on Disarmament,
Demobilization and Reintegration programme soon
followed. To combat impunity and enhance transitional
justice, a Truth and Reconciliation Commission was
established to look into, among other things, allegations
of sexual violence.

Additionally, a hybrid international court, the
Special Court for Sierra Leone, was established to bring
to book all those who bore the greatest responsibility
for war crimes, crimes against humanity and other
serious violations. The Special Court rendered the
first conviction by an international tribunal for the
recruitment and use of child soldiers in armed conflict,
and the Court's landmark decision on sexual slavery
and forced marriage was an acknowledgement of the
proscribed conduct as new crimes in international
criminal jurisprudence.

On social reintegration, we enacted an Education
Act that led to the reform of the education sector
and are currently implementing a policy of free
quality education for all children in Government
and Government-assisted primary and secondary
schools nationwide.

As we seek ways to improve efforts to protect and
support children in armed conflict, we should note that
the ongoing reforms at the United Nations, including
budget cuts to peacekeeping and efforts to incorporate
protection mandates, threaten the Organization's ability
to deliver on the Security Council's children and armed
conflict mandate, particularly as a result of diminished
child-protection capacity in peacekeeping missions as a
result of those budget cuts.

As we commemorate the thirtieth anniversary of
the adoption of the Convention on the Rights of the
Child in November this year, my delegation wishes
to remind and urge Member States to treat children
associated with armed conflict as victims entitled to
the full protection of their rights, and, where they may
have allegedly committed illegal acts, to treat them in
accordance withjuvenilejustice standards as prescribed
by international law.

Sierra Leone believes that Member States and
the Security Council can do better by strengthening
accountability for perpetrators and holding them
accountable for child-rights violations, including those
who attack schools and hospitals, deny humanitarian
access and perpetrate sexual violence against children
in situations of armed conflict.

We further believe that Member States can also
better support actions by the United Nations in support
of child victims and survivors by providing adequate
and predictable funding for reintegration programmes
in order to enable such victims and survivors, as well
as children recruited and used by parties to conflict, to
benefit from the support necessary to resume their lives
and to be smoothly reintegrated into their respective
communities. While we agree that children can become
positive agents of change, those affected by conflict
should access the reintegration programmes required to
recover their lives in order to enable them to contribute
to achieving the Sustainable Development Goals.

Sierra Leone cannot choose to remain silent simply
because the war ended in my country 17 years ago. Here
we wish to pay tribute to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, UNICEF and the many dedicated child-
protection activists around the world for their support
through the mobilization of international cooperation
and the provision of financial resources to enhance
national efforts to protect children affected by war. We
stand ready to share our views on this issue whenever
the need arises.

