Mr. Elnour (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
allow me to express my condolences to the delegation
and the people of the United States on the passing away
of former President George Herbert Walker Bush.

I would also like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
and your sisterly country on presiding over the Security
Council during December. I congratulate China as well
on its able leadership of the Council in November. I
would like to thank you, Sir, for convening today's open
debate on the role of States, regional arrangements and
the United Nations in the prevention and resolution
of conflicts, and for the concept note that you have
prepared in that regard (see S/2018/1064, annex). I
also thank the Secretary-General and Mr. Moussa
Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, as well as Mr. Jean-Claude Kassi Brou,
for their valuable briefings this morning.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries.

We would like to add the following comments in
our national capacity and highlight the role of the Sudan
and members of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) in peace processes in our region.

Today's open debate comes at a critical time for
my country. The Sudan has made great efforts to settle
conflicts in neighbouring countries - the Republic
of South Sudan, the Central African Republic and
Libya - because we believe in the importance of
peace and the relationship between peace and security
in the Sudan and peace and security in neighbouring
countries. Today's meeting is also being held as IGAD
members, including the Sudan, have stepped up their
efforts to achieve peace in the Republic of South Sudan.
The phase of implementing the revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan has begun. That Agreement was signed on
12 September in Addis Ababa, after considerable efforts
by IGAD, led by the Sudan, and intensive negotiations
that took place in Khartoum. We hope that the Security
Council will support our efforts and those of IGAD and
the African Union to achieve peace in those sisterly
States - the Republic of South Sudan, Libya and the
Central African Republic.

We stress the importance of strengthening
coordinating regional and national efforts, on one
hand, and international efforts, on the other, to achieve
peace, stability and development, and we stress the
importance of avoiding any negative repercussions
in neighbouring countries. There was a divergence of
views in 2011 between the African Union and certain
permanent members of the Security Council with
regard to the situation in one of the African countries.
That divergence of views had dangerous repercussions
in that country, which continue to this day. Over the
past few months, and as the peace process in South
Sudan reached an advanced stage, there was another
divergence of Views between IGAD members, on one
hand, and certain Security Council members, on the
other, with respect to the usefulness of sanctions and
their impact on the peace process in South Sudan.
Sanctions were imposed by the Council. My country
hopes that, in the coming weeks, the Security Council
will support the requests made by IGAD to review and
expand the mandate of the Regional Protection Force in
South Sudan, in order for it to play its role in supporting
the implementation of the revitalized Agreement in
South Sudan.

There is an urgent need to strengthen coordination
and cooperation among the Security Council, the
African Union Peace and Security Council and IGAD
to support the peace process in South Sudan. The two
Councils and IGAD must organize joint field visits
to South Sudan and the countries of the region and
strengthen trilateral cooperation among the United
Nations, the African Union and IGAD during the
upcoming period. We also stress the need to promote the
presence of Security Council members in South Sudan
and in the region so as to closely follow developments
on the ground and cooperate with national and regional
partners in support of the implementation of the
revitalized Agreement.

The signing of the revitalized Agreement is just
the first step towards achieving peace and stability
in the sisterly Republic of South Sudan. Many steps
and challenges remain ahead, which will require
strengthened coordination and cooperation among all
national and regional partners on a number of issues.
They include national reconciliation, social cohesion
and transitional justice; the return of refugees and
internally displaced persons; reconstruction and
development; building the capacity of State institutions;
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, as well
as building the capacity of security institutions; and
providing job opportunities for young people.

With regard to the special relations between the
Sudan and the Republic of South Sudan, in addition to
the many ties between the peoples of the two countries,
as well as the link between their peace processes, there
is a need for the international community, especially
the United Nations and the Security Council, to
support the efforts of the two countries in order to
strengthen their cross-border cooperation and to build
and rehabilitate the basic infrastructure linking the
two countries. That includes roads, railways, riverine
transport and electricity, in addition to supporting the
efforts made by the two countries to complete the peace
process in Southern Kordofan, Blue Nile and Darfur
states by putting pressure on the rebel movements that
continue to obstruct the peace process, and by actively
participating in the high-level event on transition from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding and development in
Darfur.

In conclusion, we have a historic opportunity to
make significant progress in the Republic of South
Sudan, strengthen regional cooperation and build
a better future for IGAD countries, especially in the
wake of the ongoing positive developments in the
Horn of Africa region. My country's delegation hopes
that the Security Council will send a message to the
international community in support of the countries of
the region in that regard. The existing grave challenges
require concerted regional and international efforts in
order to achieve our desired objective. Let us therefore
work together to create a new success story in East
Africa to be added to the other success stories in Cote
d'Ivoire and its neighbours Liberia and Sierra Leone.
