Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Colombia values the convening of this open meeting,
because it provides an opportunity for Members of the
United Nations to express our views on the relationship
between peacekeeping operations and the Rome
Statute. Colombia associates itself with the statement
made by Costa Rica on behalf of the Rio Group. We
wish to make some additional comments of national
interest.

The informal consultations and the various
meetings that we have held on this question have been
a positive exercise because they have enabled the
Council to understand the International Criminal Court
better and more fully. In that sense, as the
representative of Canada stated at the beginning of the
meeting, discussion of this issue in the Security
Council, rather than being a cause for concern, is
useful for the Council and for the future of the Court.

Colombia supports and will continue to support
the creation, implementation and operation of the
International Criminal Court. We are a signatory of the
Statute, and we hope to ratify it shortly, once the
constitutional review of the law of ratification issued
by the Congress of the Republic is completed. We are
acting in a manner consistent with that situation, with
respect for our constitution, which recognizes the
international commitments that we have undertaken
and, in general, the norms of international law.

Colombia has taken part in recent discussions
concerning the United States proposal in a constructive
spirit. We are seeking to find a solution that will be
good for the United Nations, the international
community and each and every member of the Council.
But in doing this, we have the political and legal
responsibility to respect the Rome Statute in its
entirety. We have stated our understanding of the
insistent position taken and the concerns voiced by the
United States delegation at each stage of the evolution
of the Court. We repeat our understanding, bearing in
mind the need to adopt positions compatible with the
Statute.

The negotiations that will follow this debate
should consider not only the opinions of all of those
Member States that participate in this debate, but also
the note of the Secretary-General addressed to the
Secretary of State of the United States, which was
circulated to members of the Security Council on 3
July. This timely statement of the Secretary-General
has legal and political importance that we recognize.
This is the only opinion of an international nature thus
far on this issue, and it is a vital point of reference for
those of us who have signed the Statute and are at the
same time members of the Security Council.

A Security Council resolution issued under
Chapter VII cannot ignore the content of the provisions
of the Rome Statute. Moreover, a resolution of this
kind cannot interpret the mandates of the Statute above
and beyond their content, or contradict the purpose of
their provisions. To act otherwise would lead us to
absurd conclusions. On the one hand, from the political
standpoint, we would have a Security Council having
competence to affect the authority and effectiveness of
the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court. On
the other hand, from the legal standpoint, one would be
expecting the Court to act on the basis of the Council's
resolution and not in accordance with the Statute that
brought it into being.

Concurring with the views expressed by many in
this debate, Colombia would like to express its
profound concern at the circumstances that have
hampered the renewal of the mandate of the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH). More generally speaking, we have
expressed concern about the very future of
peacekeeping operations.

For this reason, we insist on the validity of the
principle of complementarity. Likewise, we take the
view that the Rome Statute itself provides for valid and
effective options to protect the interests of States that
are not party to the Statute. Neither of these provisions
can ever lead to an acceptance of conduct that
constitutes a grave violation of human life and dignity
and that would ultimately fall under the jurisdiction of
the ICC. Therefore, in our view, the Security Council
should be able to find a solution that would make full
validity for the Rome Statute compatible with the need
to preserve peacekeeping operations.

We conclude our statement by affirming the
importance of perfecting the ICC, seeking to make it
more efficient in order to prevent the crimes over
which it has jurisdiction from being committed, but
especially with a view to building it up as a subsidiary
instrument to the action of national courts - courts
that, given the validity of the Court, are obliged to be
more active and vigilant in the face of crimes of
extreme gravity that have universal impact.

The international community, through the
Assembly of States Parties to the Statute or through the
Security Council itself, would be obliged to discharge a
monitoring function if the conclusion were reached that
there was evidence of biased action or transgressions
by the ICC. Abuses of justice are a real possibility in
any judicial organ. Such deficiencies will not be
resolved through less justice but by means of
subsequent monitoring measures taken by
intergovernmental organs enjoying broad-ranging
international legitimacy to exercise such control.

