Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We wish to congratulate you, Sir, the Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Home Affairs of
Malaysia, for having convened this important debate,
and we also thank your delegation. We also very
much appreciate the concept note (S/2016/712, annex)
that was submitted to guide delegations with regard
to addressing this issue. We also want to welcome
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and thank him for his
relevant contributions to discussions on this matter. We
would like to thank Mr. Emmanuel Roux of INTERPOL,
Mr. Gregory Koblentz of George Mason University
and Mr. Kim Won-soo, High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, for their important contributions
in addressing this issue, which is particularly important
to my country.

Weapons of mass destruction pose a serious threat
to international peace and security, and are therefore
among today's greatest and most urgent challenges. The
actions perpetrated by terrorist groups and non-State
actors show their intentions to use weapons of mass
destruction as a means to achieve their criminal goals.
The use of such weapons is no longer a hypothetical
construct, but a reality, as evidenced by the recent
allegations concerning the use of improvised chemical
weapons in the Middle East. In that regard, terrorists
groups, such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham,
participate in illegal commercial activities that ensure
them a wide range of resources, and they have shown
the ability to recruit individuals with the skills to
develop a programme for the development of weapons
of mass destruction.

The need to contain the risk of the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction to non-State actors
has increased considerably with the evolving nature
of terrorism - and has become even more acute with
the advances in science, technology and international
trade. Those advances have altered the traditional
patterns of proliferation. Over the past 12 years,
scientists have made discoveries in the fields of
artificial intelligence, robotics, the Internet, self-
driving vehicles, 3D printing, meta-data, virtual reality,
virtual currency, nanotechnology, genetic engineering
and biotechnology. All of those technologies have a
dual use: they can be used for peaceful purposes but
also can be used as agents of destabilization.

The Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) was set up to address the illegal markets
for the exchange of goods and knowledge that could be
used by non-State actors to develop weapons of mass
destruction, and as such, it has a very relevant role to
play in preventing the use of new technologies that run
contrary to the purposes of peace and development.
However, the Committee's resources, capacities and
engagements are limited. Because of that, it must find
an area of concrete and realistic action. Otherwise, it
risks seeing its effective functioning compromised.
In the nuclear and chemical areas, the work of the
Committee is redundant, given the mechanisms of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW). In the area of customs control, the World
Customs Organization (WCO) is better suited to offer
assistance. The work ofUnited Nations agencies such as
the Office on Drugs and Crime and non-governmental
organizations such as the Verification Research,
Training and Information Centre sometimes exceed
the potential contributions of the Committee. The
limited availability of resources, which are allocated
by donors, also seriously hampers its ability to provide
international assistance efficiently that takes into
account the needs and priorities of the receiving State.

Through its qualified Group of Experts, the
Committee can play an important role in helping States
develop a comprehensive national plan to prevent
non-State actors from gaining access to weapons
of mass destruction. Each agency and organization
provides assistance only in its respective area of
expertise: the IAEA in the nuclear area, the OPCW in
the chemical area and the WCO in the area of customs.
But States do not have the necessary assistance at the
international level to design and implement a coherent
strategy to prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction to non-State actors.

The 1540 Committee has been active for some
years. It is therefore time for it to make that task its main
function. The Committee could also make significant
contributions in the biological area and in providing
advice on the implementation of export controls, where
there are no organizations or agencies responsible for
that function or where those that do exist are very
weak. But we need to assess whether or not it has the
capacities necessary to carry out that role efficiently,
or if it needs to be reinforced. Similarly, in order to
maximize its effectiveness, the Committee must take
into account the context in which the resolution is
implemented. For example, a significant number of
countries throughout the world do not produce or export
materials that could be used to create a weapon of mass
destruction. Accordingly, the work of the Committee
should focus on the implementation of those aspects of
the resolution that are related more specifically to each
individual country.

The development, production, stockpiling and use
of chemical and biological weapons have been banned,
as manifested by the existence of the conventions that
regulate such materials. However, to date we do not have
a similar convention in the nuclear area. Therefore, if
we want to prevent such weapons from being acquired
by non-State actors, it is imperative that we have the
commitment of the nuclear and the non-nuclear-weapon
States and those that have not acceded to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)
to fulfil basic nuclear-weapons-control and nuclear
disarmament agreements.

Above all, we believe that a road map for
nuclear disarmament should be developed and that it
should be verifiable and irreversible, according to
a pre-established timetable. We are concerned that
almost 50 years after the signing of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and thirty years
after the end of the Cold War, there are more than
20,000 nuclear warheads that are at risk of being used.
It is regrettable that the two measures that are perceived
as the steps essential for nuclear disarmament and have
been the focus of the attention of the international
community for years, namely, the entry into force of
the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and the
negotiation of an internationally verifiable treaty
banning the production of fissile material for use in
nuclear weapons, are stalled.

In July 1996, the International Court of Justice
unanimously declared in an advisory opinion the
obligation of States possessing nuclear weapons,
under Article VI of the NPT, to conduct negotiations
on nuclear disarmament in good faith. However, the
security doctrines of the major nuclear-weapon States
continue to give such weapons top priority, not by
advocating their elimination but by arranging for their
modernization. Making progress in the full elimination
of nuclear weapons requires the commitment of
everyone, including those countries that are not parties
to the NPT.

Just as we were able to make progress in areas
of particular interest to the international community
for the purposes of peace, security, development and
human rights, we must also be able to achieve nuclear
disarmament. Only then will we be able to genuinely
confront the use of weapons of mass destruction by
non-State actors.

