Mr. Wolff (United States of America): I would
also like to extend my thanks to Mr. Pascoe and Mr.
Mulet for their briefings, and to welcome Ambassador
Alasania to the Council.

The United States remains deeply concerned by
the situation in Georgia. We deplore the loss of life,
civilian casualties and extensive damage to civilian
facilities throughout the country.

We support the call for an emergency meeting
today because of continuing Russian military
operations against Georgia despite agreement by the
parties, specifically Russia and Georgia, to a ceasefire.

As of today, Russia's occupying forces reportedly
remain throughout Georgia, including in Poti, Senaki

and Gori. These Russian forces continue to destroy
civilian infrastructure, block Georgian highways and
impede the functioning of a humanitarian corridor.

We continue to receive reports that international
humanitarian organizations, including the International
Committee of the Red Cross and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), continue to be denied access by Russia to
South Ossetia, the region hardest hit by this conflict.
By denying access, Russia is preventing what UNHCR
estimates to be 128,000 internally displaced persons
and thousands of other civilians from receiving
assistance, despite repeated appeals by humanitarian
groups.

We have disturbing reports from areas of Georgia
under Russian control. Russian forces have looted
Georgian facilities, destroyed essential infrastructure
and allowed paramilitary bands to do the same.
Georgia's main rail bridge near Kaspi was blown up on
16 August. Russian naval vessels are destroying
Georgian ships and disrupting civilian shipping. This
situation cannot continue.

We are gravely alarmed by the humanitarian
situation, particularly in those parts of Georgia under
the de facto control of Russian forces and their
irregulars, where international human rights groups
have reported serious human rights abuses. We demand
that Russian forces fulfil their responsibility to prevent
such human rights violations and call for an immediate
investigation into the atrocities that are alleged to have
occurred behind Russian lines.

Statements by the so-called South Ossetian
president Kokoity and other de facto officials regarding
their intentions to displace ethnic Georgians
completely from South Ossetia are reprehensible and
should be condemned by the international community.
Such gratuitous incitement of ethnic hatred has no
place in the twenty-first century.

Finally, we express our readiness to engage in
international discussions on the modalities for security
and stability in Abkhazia and South Ossetia. Whatever
the final outcome of these discussions, one thing is
clear now: South Ossetia and Abkhazia lie within
Georgia's internationally recognized borders. There is
no room for debate on this point.

The United Nations Security Council has adopted
numerous resolutions concerning Georgia. These
resolutions are based on the premise that South Ossetia
and Abkhazia remain within the borders of Georgia and
that their underlying conflicts will be resolved through
international negotiations. Russia itself has endorsed
these resolutions. The international community is clear
that South Ossetia and Abkhazia are part of Georgia,
and the United States fully recognizes this reality.

We will continue to stand behind Georgia's
democracy. We will continue to insist that Georgia's
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity be
respected.

When this armed conflict erupted, we heard from
the Russian representative that his Government was
acting to defend its peacekeepers and civilians in the
South Ossetia region of Georgia. Yet the military
actions Russia has undertaken continue to belie that
claim.

Even in its early stages, Russia's military
offensive and political objectives went far beyond any
reasonable or credible limit consistent with its claims.
Russia has expanded its operations far beyond the
conflict zone into areas that have nothing to do with
South Ossetia. We have seen a deepening and widening
Russian offensive that includes the opening of a second
front in Abkhazia and the occupation of Georgian
territory.

The objectives of this offensive suggest Russian
intentions to weaken and subjugate Georgia, a
sovereign country with a democratically elected
Government that poses no threat to Russia.

Last week, French President Sarkozy, acting on
behalf of the European Union, launched a diplomatic
effort to attain a ceasefire. The United States strongly
supported that effort. After Russian President
Medvedev agreed to the proposed terms of a ceasefire,
Secretary of State Rice travelled to Tbilisi to obtain
Georgia's agreement. Georgian President Saakashvili
approved the ceasefire terms on the understanding that
his Government's agreement would lead immediately
to a cessation of hostilities and withdrawal of Russian
forces to the status quo ante of 6 August. This did not
happen. Despite the Georgian agreement, the Russian
military offensive continued.
On 17 August, two days after the Georgian
President signed the ceasefire agreement, Russian
President Medvedev undertook to begin Russia's
withdrawal on 18 August. This did not happen. Russian

operations continued in an effort to consolidate the
occupation and continue to destroy Georgia's
infrastructure.

We meet today on 19 August, seven days after
President Medvedev agreed with French President
Sarkozy's plan, four days after Georgia's President
Saakashvili signed it, three days after Russian
President Medvedev signed it, two days after President
Medvedev promised to begin the withdrawal, and more
than 24 hours after that last promise was supposed to
take effect.

Against this backdrop of Russia's continued
military offensive and diplomatic delaying tactics, we
support the French delegation's draft resolution calling
for immediate compliance with the terms of the
agreement, to which Russia, Georgia and other parties
subscribed, and particularly for the immediate
withdrawal of Russian forces from Georgia in
accordance with that agreement.

