Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation is grateful for the
briefing delivered by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), Mr. Jan Kubis.
We wish to echo what has already been expressed by
other members of the Security Council in thanking him
for his work and efforts on dialogue and coordination
that have been carried out on everyone's behalf. Much
of what we recognize as a triumph for the Iraqi people
is due in large part to the efforts by him and his team.

We commend the convening of the parliamentary
elections held on 12 May, which were carried out in
an orderly manner and in an environment free from
violence. We wish to highlight the certification of
those election results on 19 August by the Federal
Supreme Court and the subsequent vote on 20 October
of the Council of Representatives, which resulted in
Mr. Barham Salih being elected as President of Iraq,
who in turn appointed Mr. Adil Abdul-Mahdi as
Prime Minister-designate. We emphasize the spirit
of democracy and participation demonstrated by the
Iraqi people throughout that process and we call on the
elected representatives and all of the political actors
involved to enter into dialogue and negotiations that
will allow them to build a solid institutional framework
and stable governance to the benefit of the Iraqi people.

The newly elected authorities have a long road
ahead, including confronting the challenges that have
arisen in the south of the country, where it is now
urgent to implement actions in order to guarantee
access to basic services for the population and prevent
the emergence of violence, which would derail the
reconstruction and reconciliation efforts that must
prevail in this new phase. This is also an opportunity
that should be used to strengthen the dialogue and good
relations between Erbil and Baghdad.

Despite the progress made, we note with deep
concern that the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/975) shows that attacks are still being
perpetrated by Da'esh, and that that terrorist group
remains capable of coordinating and carrying out
attacks against the civilian population, civil and
diplomatic infrastructure, as well as against the forces
of law and order, such as those that have been reported
in Baghdad, Ninawa and Kirkuk, among others.

We are horrified by the 202 mass graves that have
been identified, which, according to the report by
UNAMI and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, contain the bodies
of approximately 12,000 Da'esh victims - mainly
women, children, people with disabilities and members
of the Iraqi forces. That high number of victims, which
could yet increase considerably, highlights the brutality
and criminality of that terrorist organization and the
urgent need to identify the perpetrators so that they can
be held accountable for their actions.

In that regard, we encourage the Government of
Iraq to make every effort to preserve the integrity of
those mass graves, not only to identify the victims and
return the bodies to the families, but also to collect and
preserve as much evidence as possible to ensure that the
violations of human dignity do not go unpunished, For
that reason, it is important to promote capacity-building
in Iraqi institutions in order to implement plans for
the establishment of genetic databases that will allow
for the exhumation, identification and preservation
of the bodies of victims, which will strengthen the
investigative work. The involvement of the Investigative
Team established pursuant to resolution 2379 (2017) is
essential to strengthening that work. It is also important
to set up and implement, in the short and medium term,
mechanisms for reparations to victims, which should
include policies to promote memory, among others.

To achieve that goal, the cooperation of the various
offices and agencies of the United Nations, as well
as the wider international community, is essential to
developing the technical capabilities of the Iraqi State.
In that regard, we hope that the recommendations
issued by UNAMI and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights in their report
from 6 November will be reviewed and implemented.

We also wish to highlight the work of the
United Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS) in
the identification of improvised explosive devices,
anti-personnel mines and explosive remnants of war
on Iraqi territory. We note in particular the removal of
explosives that were submerged below the Fallujah iron
bridge, as well as the launching of training workshops
on the safe elimination of explosive devices for police
officers from the Ninawa, Al-Anbar and Kirkuk
governorates, among others, in order to tackle the
possible threats posed by the existence of those devices
in the liberated areas. We also stress the essential
role played by UNMAS in the clearing of improvised
explosive devices that could be contaminating the mass
graves found in the territories previously controlled
by Da'esh.

We commend the efforts made by Iraq in
identifying the areas where other mass graves might
exist, as well as the work carried out on the recovery
and return of assets of Kuwaiti heritage. We also take
note of the data, maps and satellite images shared
with the International Committee of the Red Cross to
facilitate that process. However, we regret that there
has been no progress made in the returning of Kuwaiti
property that has been found so far, given that they have
already gone through a process of cataloguing in Iraq.
We stress the importance of the return of those assets
for the reconciliation process and the strengthening
of relations between Iraq and Kuwait. We note the
willingness of UNAMI to facilitate that transfer and
provide logistical assistance to those efforts.

To conclude, I wish to once again express, through
the representative of Iraq, the recognition of my people
and my Government to the people and the Government
of Iraq for having overcome such difficult years, which
has been and will continue to be an example for all of
humankind. We appreciate the sacrifices that they have
made on everyone's behalf.

