I would like to thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, and Ambassador Olof Skoog, Head of the Delegation of the European Union, for their comprehensive briefings. I also commend Ambassador Philippe Kridelka for his able leadership, and his team for its efforts in facilitating the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). [also welcome Ambassador Majid Takht Ravanchi, Permanent Representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran, to this meeting. It is Viet Nam's conviction that the people in the Middle East, like people everywhere, deserve to live in peace, harmony, friendship and cooperation. That is why Viet Nam always stresses the importance of upholding international law, including the Charter of the United Nations and its purposes and principles, especially the principles of the settlement of disputes by peaceful means and of the fulfilment, in good faith, of obligations under international law. That was our consistent policy during Viet Nam's term as Chair and member of the Board of Governors of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) from 2013 to 2014, and from 2013 to 2015, respectively. We always stressed the utmost importance of implementing non-proliferation obligations. We did it by example, joining all treaties, and were among the first to adhere to the International Atomic Energy Agency's highest standards in this field. We also called for the settlement of differences by peaceful means through dialogue and negotiation. That is why we were sincerely glad when the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) was reached, and actively engaged with other members in discussing its implementation with earnest optimism. In that regard, we share the assessment of the Secretary-General that the JCPOA is the best way to ensure a comprehensive, long-term and proper solution to the Iranian nuclear issue, as well as to contribute to regional and international peace and security. We take note of the tenth report of Secretary-General (S/2020/1177) on the implementation of the resolution 2231 (2015). We commend the efforts of JCPOA participants in implementing and preserving the agreement. Viet Nam has consistently supported the full implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) and the JCPOA. We call on all the relevant parties to continue dialogue and negotiations to resolve differences, including by utilizing existing processes and procedures under resolution 2231 (2015) and the JCPOA, and to exercise restraint and refrain from actions that could exacerbate the situation, erode trust and escalate tension. We reaffirm our strong support for the three pillars of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons - disarmament, the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and the peaceful use of nuclear energy. We believe that this is a joint effort and responsibility. It is incumbent on us all to maintain peace and stability and to honour our obligations under international law with a view to ensuring a safe and prosperous world for all of our peoples, including the people in the Middle East. Conflicts and wars need to be stopped, not fuelled. Friendly relations need to be established and nurtured. International law, including treaties, needs to be upheld and implemented. Viet Nam remains strongly committed to making meaningful contributions to fostering an environment conducive to dialogue and cooperation in the name of peace, stability and prosperity in this region and the world at large. As this is the last meeting this month and year in the programme of work in which we are allowed to speak, we would like to warmly congratulate the five outgoing members - Belgium, the Dominican Republic, Germany, Indonesia and South Africa - for a successful tenure. We thank them for their tireless efforts and their important contributions to the work of the Security Council in the service of humankind everywhere. As an elected member, it is a personal privilege and a privilege as a representative of Viet Nam to serve together again with Belgium, Indonesia and South Africa, as we did 12 years ago. Now they are leaving us in the very good hands of the current and incoming members, just as they did 12 years ago. We thank all the outgoing members for their cooperation, support and friendship. Last but absolutely not least, I would like to pay tribute to Ambassador Jerry Matthews Matjila, Permanent Representative of South Africa, and his team for a successful presidency, with many important activities and outcomes.
