Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): We thank Under-
Secretary-General Guehenno for what I thought was an
outstandingly thoughtful briefing this morning and one
that we found very useful indeed.

As others have said, the representative of Sweden
will speak later on this morning on behalf of the
European Union, so I will keep my statement very brief
and make only a few points that I would like to
highlight.

The first is that the United Kingdom strongly
endorses the findings of the Security Council following
its mission to Kosovo. I think the mission's report is a
very useful contribution and I hope it will be helpful to
the wider membership as well.

Secondly, I should like to endorse the point that
Under-Secretary-General Guehenno made about the
need for a clear message from the authorities in
Belgrade to the Serb community about the importance
of participation. It is in the interest of all communities
in Kosovo to participate in the elections and in the
structures being put together by the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
in order to secure their place in the shaping of
Kosovo's future. I therefore think it vital that this
message of encouragement should get across from
Belgrade, particularly now that some progress is being
made on the return of refugees.

A similar consideration applies to Mitrovica,
where normalization would clearly be in the interest of
all the people of the city. This, too, is an area where we
would look to Belgrade to use its influence positively
to help resolve the situation. I noted what Under-
Secretary-General Guehenno had to say about the
importance of confidence-building measures and I take
his point.

Finally, extremism and organized crime are at the
heart of the problems in Kosovo and in the wider
region. We fully support the work being carried out by
UNMIK and the Kosovo Force to tackle these issues. It
would be helpful to have a progress report from the
Secretariat on funding for the new Pillar I, including
funding for additional judges and prosecutors. It is
crucial that sufficient resources be made available
quickly and, as we have said before, the United
Kingdom stands ready to provide candidates for the
posts of international judges and prosecutors.

