Ms. Anstey: I thank you very much, Mr. President,
for inviting me to discuss how the international
community can support fragile countries reliant on
natural resources. The issue is critical for fragile
countries seeking to escape the ravages of war. As
our research, the 2011 World Development Report on
conflict, security and development, said,

"slow-developing low-income economies largely
dependent on natural resources are 10 times more
likely than others to experience civil war".

Natural resources have the potential to finance
transformative development in fragile States. Take
Guinea, for example. The Government recently
reviewed mining contracts and identified a licence
given free in 2008 for Simandou, the country's huge
iron-ore mine. Two years later, the investor, who was
given that license free of charge, sold 51 per cent ofthat
investment at a price of $2.5 billion. Guinea's entire
Government budget in 2010 was just $1.2 billion.

Managed well, natural resources have the potential
to transform countries and get them out of the cycle
of violence and fragility and aid dependency. But
managed poorly, unfairly or secretly, they can lead to
a missed opportunity of tragic proportions. The World
Bank Group is committed to helping fragile countries
transparently and sustainably manage natural resources
and ensure that the benefits are shared equitably. That
ambition is in line with our goal to eradicate extreme
poverty and promote shared prosperity.
Importantly, we need to work with countries
through the entire extractive industries value chain.
Why? For the simple reason that there is no point in
fixing the royalty-collection system if contracts are
poorly negotiated or revenues are wasted. We know
the importance of a level playing field to negotiate
contracts and regulate industries, so that countries are
not at a disadvantage in negotiating with the legions of
lawyers employed by international companies. We are
helping Governments to negotiate contracts through the
new Extractive Industries Technical Assistance Facility
and our new Africa Extractive Industries Facility.

We know the importance of the proper collection
of revenues. We support countries in implementing
the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
(EITI) in 40 countries. The new EITI standard has
raised the bar on transparency - this is important and
needed - requiring public disclosure of auction results
and licences. We are committed to supporting countries
in meeting this new standard.

We also know the importance of managing
expenditures financed through natural resources, so
we are helping countries to transparently manage the
wealth from their natural resources, deal with issues
of volatility, set up transparent savings regimes and
strengthen the management of public finances and
public contracts.

We also need to pay attention to the environment
and to the local communities directly affected
by those investments. Such work needs to go
beyond Governments. Civil society organizations,
parliamentarians and the media have a key role to play
so as to enable better policy debates, better contractual
negotiations and a better ability to enforce contracts
and track contractual obligations. We are working with
those groups in such countries as Afghanistan, Liberia
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We recently
also signed a memorandum of understanding with the
World Wildlife Fund to ensure that African extractive
industries pay greater attention to local communities.
The role of the private sector is, of course, crucial.
Our private-sector arm, the International Finance
Corporation, and our risk insurance arm, the Multilateral
Investment Guarantee Agency, support investment,
engendering best practices in environmental and social
standards and the transparency of payments to host
Governments.

We know much more needs to be done to ensure that
resources are a blessing, not a curse. The Group ofEight
Summit just concluded yesterday. As I emphasized on
Saturday at the Trade, Tax and Transparency conference,
hosted by the British Government in London, sunlight
is not only the best disinfectant, as a United States
Supreme Court Justice once said; sunlight can also be a
critical accelerator for development.

Transparency enables a level playing field, which is
good for private-sector-led growth. Transparency gives
citizens the tools to hold their Governments to account.
Transparency enables investigators to track the flow of
funds. Transparency offers us a way to accelerate the
transformation of underground and secret wealth into
poverty eradication and shared prosperity done in the
full sunlight of results and accountability.

I want to commend the United Kingdom and the
countries of the Group of Eight for putting tax and
transparency at the centre of their agenda this week, and
for the commitments made to increase transparency,
address tax evasion and tackle illicit financial transfers.
But much more can and should be done by all partners,
and we will be looking to all forums available to support
progress in this area.

Let me briefly outline where we at the World Bank
are committed to doing more and three initiatives we
announced this week. First, much progress has been
made on revenue transparency, and the next challenge
is to ensure transparency around contracts, licences and
concessions and their beneficial owners. That is why we
have just launched the Open Contracting Partnership
to ensure effective disclosure and participation in all
public contracting. That is particularly relevant for the
extractive industries sectors.

Secondly, we are working to create a trillion-dollar
map ofAfrica to put these resources literally on the map.
The map will address the lack of modern geological
data and overall knowledge of mineral potential. That
is one of the key barriers to improving the quality of
resource deals in Africa.

Finally, we have just announced the Open and
Collaborative Private Sector Initiative. There is a
range of tools involved in this initiative, but let me
focus on just one. With our partners, we have launched
the pilot of the Open Company Data Index. This new
data index looks at the state of play of how countries
enable transparency of information about registered
corporations, but it goes further by aggregating open
registry information. The tool generates open-source,
transnational data sets. For instance, if one searches
for a particular company on this website, one can
see not only corporate registration information for
that company, but also - and this, we believe, is
revolutionary - generate a visual representation of the
corporate network to which that company belongs and
the registry information for all the companies in the
network. For extractive industries, the tool could be
transformational.

To conclude, I would offer a word on the importance
of partnerships. We should not shy away from the fact
that translating natural resource wealth into investments
that createjobs and lift people out ofpoverty is complex,
with critical political dimensions. It requires close
collaboration across partners and particularly with the
United Nations system. Our commitment to enhancing
that partnership, particularly in fragile and conflict-
affected countries, was shown in the recent historic
visit to the Great Lakes region by Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon, the World Bank Group President Jim
Yong Kim and United Nations Special Envoy Mary
Robinson. There, they saw first-hand how the drive for
control over resource wealth can bring instability to an
entire region. Their visit highlighted an idea we know
well but still have a long way to go to put into practice,
namely, that peace and development are inextricably
intertwined and must go hand in hand. We are
committed to further deepening our partnership with
the United Nations system to support fragile countries
in their quest for peace and sustainable development.
We are committed to continuing to push the critical
extractive industries agenda.

