Mr. Laher (South Africa): We also wish to
express our delegation's appreciation to Mr. Yury
Fedotov, Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), for his briefing.
At the outset, I would also like to offer our delegation's
deep condolences to the families of the four members
of UNODC who lost their lives last month while on
duty in Bolivia.

The world drug and crime problem continues to
be an immediate and continuing threat to people in
many parts of the world. It has a negative impact on
socio-economic development, since it affects the public
health, security and well-being of all humanity.
Tackling the problem requires support and more
cooperation on the part of the international community.
Drugs and crime threaten development, create
instability and jeopardize the achievement of the
Millennium Development Goals.

We strongly support the four areas of UNODC's
response, as identified by the Executive Director in his
statement, that is, strengthened international
collaboration, building regional capacity, reinforcing
the criminal justice system and, finally, adopting a
comprehensive cross-disciplinary strategy. Those four
areas present a realistic, action-oriented response to the
increasing challenge of transnational organized crime
and drug trafficking. Drug trafficking and transnational
crime are growing concerns that can threaten countries'
security. We have seen how in cases such as
Afghanistan and the West African region the drug trade
is used to fuel conflicts. Likewise, we have seen how
piracy along the coast of Somalia has become a
continuing factor in fuelling instability on land.

In the response to the scourge of piracy, we have
seen the benefits of an international collaborative
response. Such collaboration in our collective fight
against piracy must be replicated in addressing other
forms of transnational crime, and in our fight against
drug trafficking. The success of the Kimberley Process
in stopping the flow of blood diamonds illustrates how
strategic measures, through our collective collaboration
at the international level, can reverse the negative
impact of such crimes.

The production of, and trafficking in, illicit drugs
has the potential to fuel violence, fear and insecurity,
thereby undermining the authority of the State. My
delegation shares the views expressed by the Secretary-
General, speaking at the African Union Summit in
January 2010, in which he noted that criminal networks
are very skilled at taking advantage of institutional
weaknesses on the ground. In that regard, we strongly
support UNODC's appeal for the reinforcement of the
criminal justice institutions of weak States.

As most transnational trafficking is regional and
intercontinental, planning integrated drug control
strategies at all levels is essential. South Africa
welcomes the role played by UNODC in creating
regional programmes. Such programmes are important
because they assist countries with technical support in
their fight against the world drug problem and
strengthen partnerships between UNODC, regional
bodies and Member States. We welcome the
collaborative efforts of UNODC, the African Union
and the Economic Community of West African States
to address this problem in West Africa. Similarly, my
delegation hopes that the regional programme for
southern Africa can further enhance our region's ability
to fight the scourge of drug trafficking and abuse. We
also hope that consultations, as well as the
implementation of that programme, will be finalized
soon.

South Africa is in full agreement with UNODC's
recommendation to adopt a comprehensive and cross-
disciplinary approach and strategy in dealing with the
challenge of organized crime and illicit trafficking. In
that regard, in 2010 the South African Government
established an inter-ministerial committee for
combating substance abuse. The committee will guide
high-level integrated strategies nationally to prevent
substance abuse.

In conclusion, international cooperation,
including bilateral and regional treaties on extradition
and mutual assistance in criminal matters, is a key tool
to fighting organized crime. In that regard, we need a
comprehensive, integrated approach that strengthens
coordination among the countries of origin, transit and
destination, as well as taking into account the principle
of common and shared responsibility.
