Ms. Wensley (Australia): Australia is pleased to be
able to participate in this extremely important open debate
in response to the recent series of nuclear tests by India
and Pakistan. Nuclear proliferation, with the attendant
horrifying risks of a nuclear war, constitutes the worst
possible threat to international peace and security. It is
therefore essential that the Security Council, with its
primary responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security under Article 24 of the Charter, take
action on this issue and remain seized of it until it is
resolved. It is true that the Security Council acts on
behalf of United Nations Member States, but we believe
it is vital when such serious threats to regional and global
security occur that the wider membership be given the
opportunity to present views directly to the Council and
thus to contribute to Security Council deliberations by
participating in formal meetings of this kind.

Australia has a direct security interest in preventing
the proliferation of nuclear weapons. We are therefore
deeply concerned at nuclear testing by India and Pakistan.
After years of calls from the international community, the
General Assembly's adoption in 1996, by an
overwhelming majority, of the Comprehensive Nuclear-
Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) established a powerful
international norm against the testing of nuclear weapons
and other nuclear explosive devices. The nuclear tests by
India and Pakistan less than two years after this historic
standard-setting action directly challenged the Treaty and
the international consensus against nuclear testing that it
represents.

These tests also challenge the international non-
proliferation regime, threaten the process of nuclear
disarmament and set back efforts to work towards the

 

goal of a nuclear-weapon-free world. They are totally
irreconcilable with claims by both countries that they are
committed to nuclear disarmament.
Beyond this grave threat to the maintenance of
international peace and security, the tests undertaken by
India and Pakistan's decision to respond with its own tests
heighten the tension between them, threaten the security of
South Asia and raise the alarming prospect of a nuclear
arms race in that region. The pursuit by both countries of
nuclear-capable ballistic-missile programmes is an
additional cause for alarm and tension.

Australia's response to the nuclear tests by India and
Pakistan has been firm and unequivocal. We condemn them
as we do all nuclear testing. We have instituted a number
of bilateral measures, including the suspension of bilateral
defence relations with both India and Pakistan, the
suspension of non-humanitarian aid and the suspension of
bilateral visits by ministers and senior officials. We have
called on both countries - and we reiterate that call today
in this Council - to announce immediately the cessation of
all further nuclear testing and renounce their nuclear-
weapons programmes. We call on them to sign and ratify
unconditionally the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty (CTBT) and to join 186 States by acceding to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT).
We call on them to engage in negotiations on a treaty to
ban the production of fissile material for weapons purposes.
We call, too, for both countries to take steps urgently to
resume constructive political dialogue and negotiations on
the issues that divide them, including, importantly, with
respect to Kashmir.

We have heard some refer, in connection with nuclear
tests in South Asia, to the slow pace of nuclear
disarmament by the nuclear-weapon States. Australia is
committed to the twin goals embodied in the NPT of
nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation. If fulfilment by
the nuclear-weapon States of their disarmament obligations
under article VI of the NPT was stalled during the cold
war, that is no longer the case. Dramatic cuts in the nuclear
arsenals of Russia and the United States have been made
under the Strategic Arms Reduction Talks (START)
process, which, when completed, will further reduce those
arsenals to some 80 per cent below cold-war peaks. Beyond
the START process, the international community will be
looking to a process of plurilateral and multilateral
disarmament, with the objective of the total elimination of
nuclear weapons. We want and we urge all the nuclear-
weapon States to accelerate these processes as much as
possible. And in this context we do welcome the
reaffirmation by the five nuclear-weapon States in the P-5
communique and in the resolution to fulfil their
commitment to nuclear disarmament under article VI of
the N PT.
But it defies logic and credibility to pretend that the
emergence of nuclear weapons in two new States, outside
the norms of the international nuclear non-proliferation
and disarmament regime, will assist, rather than retard
and complicate, the task of nuclear disarmament. The
international community has a clear responsibility to
respond to such proliferation by stating that we do not
want and we will not tolerate the development or
acquisition of nuclear weapons by additional States.

Australia, therefore, supports fully the Security
Council resolution just adopted.

I have already referred in this statement to many of
the key elements in the resolution, and I don't want to
repeat our support for them here. But the resolution does
deal with some other important issues that I have not yet
mentioned.

These include the reference to States' preventing the
export to India and Pakistan of equipment, materials or
technology that could be used to develop their nuclear-
weapons capacity. In this respect we would emphasize not
only the importance of national policies but also the
commitment made by all NPT parties to the principles
and objectives of nuclear non-proliferation and
disarmament. This states that new supply arrangements to
non-nuclear-weapon States - that is, to all countries but
the five nuclear-weapon States - should require
acceptance of the International Atomic Energy Agency
full-scope safeguards and internationally legally binding
commitments not to acquire nuclear weapons or other
nuclear explosive devices.

A further important element in the resolution is the
call on India and Pakistan to stop immediately their
nuclear-weapons development programmes, to refrain
from weaponization or deployment of nuclear weapons
and to cease development of nuclear-capable ballistic
missiles.

Finally, we also welcome the references to the
Secretary-General' s efforts to encourage dialogue between
India and Pakistan and endorse the request for him to
report back to the Council on the implementation of the
resolution.

 

Australia is known for its deep commitment to nuclear
non-proliferation and disarmament. We remain deeply
committed to these goals. And so do most Member States
of this Organization. Nuclear testing by India and Pakistan
is in flagrant disregard of the will of the international
community. It must not go unchallenged. We believe it is
very important to speak out clearly and strongly on this
matter. We believe also that the international community
has a shared responsibility to take action quickly,
effectively and without reservation to help reverse both the
trend towards proliferation and increased tension in South
Asia and the challenge presented to the global non-
proliferation and disarmament regimes. The adoption of this
resolution is an important initial step in this direction.

