Mr. J essen-Petersen: I thank you, Madam, for
your kind words and for inviting me once again to brief
the Security Council on developments in Kosovo.

Denmark was also, I recall, in the chair in May
2005 when this body decided to launch the
comprehensive review of the situation in Kosovo. It
was based on the findings of that review that, last
October, the Security Council endorsed the Secretary-
General's recommendation that a process should begin
to determine Kosovo's future status. It is that process,
now well under way under the leadership of Special
Envoy Martti Ahtisaari, that is at the centre of current
events in Kosovo.

Let me begin by saying that Kosovo today
presents a picture of a society making steady progress.
In saying that, I want to acknowledge the great
determination and energy which Prime Minister Ceku
has brought to Government since his appointment on
10 March. I am therefore delighted that the Prime
Minister is with us here today and also that he has
addressed a letter to the President of the Security
Council.

Standards implementation is the exemplar of that
progress. In my last report to the Council, covering
events up to 20 December 2005, I expressed regret that
the pace of standards implementation had slowed in the
second half of 2005. By February, I was able to report
here that the Government of Kosovo had begun to
respond to those criticisms and that the process was
06-39548
getting back on track. My latest technical review,
reflecting events up to 30 April 2006, shows an across-
the-board revitalization of the process. The Secretary-
General's report before the Council today echoes those
judgments and reinforces my observations that the
performance of the Kosovo authorities has become
dynamic and progressive as never before. There is, of
course, a need for still further progress, but if the
current momentum continues - and I am confident
that it will - we can expect further concrete
achievements over the coming months.

The pace of policy implementation has been
matched by a far greater willingness on the part of
Kosovo's new leadership to take the lead in reaching
out to minority communities, in particular to the
Kosovo Serbs. The most recent example of that is the
Prime Minister's initiative to establish a community
security council, which met for the first time last
Friday. The council brings together the Government of
Kosovo, the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), the Kosovo Force and
other key players in an effort to promote improvements
in the living conditions of Kosovo's most vulnerable
communities - at this moment, notably, the Kosovo
Serbs.

Despite those efforts, however, it remains a fact
that the situation for many Kosovo Serbs remains very
difficult. Many of them feel confused, exposed and
isolated, and do not know what to think about the
future. In the final analysis, Kosovo Serb communities
are concerned about the status process, although I have
detected in my many contacts with them all over
Kosovo a willingness to start considering what life
might be like after final status, including on the
outcomes they might not welcome. All too often, the
only message reaching Kosovo Serbs tells them not to
engage with the majority. That is not healthy for the
more open and integrated society we all want to see.

As an example, whenever there is any crime in
which the victim is a Kosovo Serb, an ethnic motive is
often proclaimed, usually without any evidence. Not
only is that unfair to Kosovo as a society - a society,
incidentally, in which violent crime is decreasing
overall; more worryingly, it also perpetuates a climate
of insecurity among Kosovo Serb communities. Of
course, violent crimes need to be solved and
prosecuted if citizens are to have faith in the justice
system. We would all like to see quick results
whenever harm is done to any citizen, but it is no
06-39548
service to the Kosovo Serbs themselves to present them
only as targets and victims. Despite isolated
incidents - and they really are isolated - the picture
as it is painted does not correspond to the reality of
Kosovo as it is now.

I therefore call again upon the Serbian authorities
to work with us and the Kosovo Government to
provide factual information about current events so that
we do not promote a climate of fear and further
isolation. I welcome the Contact Group's recent letter
to the Government in Belgrade making those same
points.

At this time of flux, as a new Kosovo is being
built around them, a growing number of Kosovo Serbs
would like to have a voice in the political process and
in Kosovo's governmental and parliamentary
institutions, but they feel that they cannot do so until
Belgrade gives its consent. That has been the case for
more than two years now. I do not see any merit in
Belgrade's isolationist policy from the point of view of
Kosovo Serbs. I do not see how the Kosovo Serbs can
make informed choices and decisions about their own
future within Kosovo if they are not even permitted to
take part in the democratic processes there, be it
centrally or locally.

At the grass-roots level, the Serbian
Government's directive, which has obliged Kosovo
Serbs working for certain Kosovo institutions to
choose between their Belgrade and Pristina salaries, is,
I am afraid, a divisive move and does a disservice to
Kosovo Serbs at this sensitive time. Needless to say, in
presenting those points to the Council, I take the
opportunity also to call on Belgrade, as the Contact
Group has done in recent days, to withdraw that
damaging directive and to give its consent to those
political actors in the Kosovo Serb communities who
want to work in the interests of their community, in
partnership with the institutions and Government of
Kosovo.

Amidst those difficult issues, there have been
some positive moves. In particular, I welcome the
signing on 6 June of a returns protocol between
UNMIK, Belgrade and Pristina, which should enable
returns to take place on an agreed basis. The numbers
of returns are steady, although still very low in absolute
terms. However, there are currently more people
wanting to return than there is available funding. We
need to see a significant increase in both numbers of
3
returns and resources to support returns in order for
those returns to be sustainable.

As I mentioned at the start of my presentation
today, the status process is of the highest importance in
Kosovo political life. Everything we do today is done
against the background of managing expectations about
and preparing for a settlement. It is the status process
above all that is behind the reinvigoration of the
political process in Kosovo. I would like in particular
to acknowledge the spirit of cooperation which has
characterized the Kosovo negotiators in the unity team
and political group. For this, credit is due not only to
President Sejdiu's leadership, but also to Prime
Minister Ceku, Assembly President Berisha and,
equally, to the opposition leader, Hachim Thaci and
Ventran Sorai.

UNMIK is not a player in the status process. Our
job is to fulfil our mandate as set forth in resolution
1244 (1999). But having said that, from the start it has
been important to me that the activities of UNMIK in
Kosovo should be consistent with and supportive of the
status process being conducted out of Vienna. With that
process gaining momentum, it is clear that we are
moving towards the end of the UNMIK mandate. Much
work has already been done on what will follow it. Of
course, this work cannot prejudge what this Council
might decide. Nevertheless, useful preparations are
being made. The preparation already undertaken and
the work that we will continue to do with partner
organizations should allow UNMIK to achieve an
orderly exit when the time comes so that Kosovo can
experience an orderly transition.

Naturally, the status process carries with it risks
as well as opportunities. Tensions may well rise as the
process moves towards its conclusion. I am deeply
concerned to see how violent crimes can quickly
become politicized and used to provoke tensions and
divisions, in particular, in the northern part of Kosovo.

In this context, it is important at this crucial
moment that no measures are taken by any political
actors in the region that may foment instability. We
will never be able to entirely eliminate the risk of
security incidents in a volatile environment such as
Kosovo. But we are alert to the dangers, and we have
been working more closely with the Kosovo Force
(KFOR) - whose commander and whose members I
would like to take this opportunity to salute - on
strategies to respond to any eventuality and to keep
down the risk of incidents that might escalate into
something worse.

Indeed, the rule of law, as a whole, remains an
issue of paramount importance for Kosovo. In some
areas, much has been achieved. For example, we are
proud of the development and performance of the
Kosovo Police Service and the progress it has made
since its establishment under UNMIK's aegis.

But there are areas where we will need to
improve, and more needs to be done in the field of
justice. I welcome the recent establishment in Pristina
of a European Union planning team that will work with
UNMIK to ensure that the rule of law sectors continue
to receive the attention they need up to and beyond the
end of our mandate. The future of Kosovo must be
built on the solid foundation of the rule of law.

The year 2006 is extraordinary for Kosovo. It is
vital for stability and economic and social progress in
Kosovo and the region that the status process be
brought to an early and successful conclusion. I am
aware, of course, of some voices that say that
everything is happening too quickly and that that
introduces unnecessary risks. I hold the opposite view.
I hold that after seven years of interim administration
in Kosovo, the society is ready - indeed impatient -
to move on. In fact, it would be a far greater risk to
keep Kosovo in limbo for much longer.

At the moment, there is a feeling in Kosovo that
progress is being made under a new, dynamic
leadership. This dynamism is based on a vision of a
transformed future, a future based on the Guiding
Principles that there be no return of Kosovo to the pre-
1999 situation, no partition of Kosovo and no union of
Kosovo with any country or part of another country,
and that the status outcome be acceptable to the
majority in Kosovo while the rights of minorities are
respected and protected.

UNMIK administration has extraordinary
achievements to its credit. UNMIK will of course
respect its mandate until the very end. However, there
are now diminishing returns from this mandate and
limits to what can be achieved by an international
administration in the absence of clarity on status.
Interim administration has been in place for seven
years without a clearly defined endpoint. It is time for
us, for Kosovo and for the region to move on.
06-39548

Madam President, as you said, this report will be
my last one to the Security Council before leaving my
post at the end of this month. It has been a fascinating,
at times difficult, but always rewarding post. I would
like to take this opportunity to thank the Security
Council for the unstinting support I have received since
taking up the appointment two years ago. I am
confident that the Council will, when the time comes,
take a decision that will allow Kosovo to build the
democratic, multi-ethnic society it envisions, and for
which, I am proud to say, the United Nations has
helped to lay the foundations.

I have served most of my United Nations career
in the humanitarian field, and I have seen too much
suffering in the Western Balkans over the last 15 years.
My biggest hope as I leave my post is that the coming
status agreement in Kosovo will finally allow the
victims of the conflict on all sides to become the
beneficiaries of a peaceful and lasting settlement,
leading to a better future that they so thoroughly
deserve.

