Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): I wish to join others in
welcoming Under-Secretary-General John Holmes to
his first meeting with the Security Council and to thank
him for his briefing on his recent visit to the Sudan,
Chad and the Central African Republic. We share the
view that the humanitarian situation in the region - in
Darfur, eastern Chad and north-eastern Central African
Republic - is a source of serious concern, especially
as the environment has become even more challenging.

My delegation supports the observation that,
unless there is a durable peaceful solution to the issue
of Darfur, the humanitarian crisis in the region will be
increasingly difficult to resolve. However, pending the
emergence of peace in Darfur, all parties need to do
their best to ensure that the humanitarian effort goes
forward unimpeded.

We therefore welcome the recent signing of the
joint communique between the Government of the
Sudan and the United Nations on the facilitation of
humanitarian activities in Darfur. We encourage the
Government of the Sudan and the United Nations, as
well as humanitarian organizations, to make the best
use of such facilitation and therefore to help alleviate
humanitarian suffering.

We believe that humanitarian needs must be
addressed as a matter of priority. But the most
imperative need is for a political settlement, which
must be achieved as a final resolution of the
humanitarian crisis in Darfur as well as a contribution
to the settlement of the crises in eastern Chad and
northern Central African Republic.

In that regard, we welcome the outcome of the
recent meeting in Riyadh between the Secretary-
General of the United Nations, the African Union (AU)
Chairpersons and the Secretary-General of the Arab
League, with President Al-Bashir, particularly with
regard to their commitment to redouble efforts to bring
all parties into the peace process and to accelerate
political reconciliation and their recognition of the
need for the United Nations, the AU and the Arab
League to work together to seek an early and
comprehensive settlement of the conflict and to end the
humanitarian suffering in Darfur.

With regard to the humanitarian situation in
eastern Chad, we would like to hear further views of
the Under-Secretary-General on how the United
Nations could improve that situation pending the
deployment of a United Nations monitoring and
protection mission in the area.

