Mr. Barbalie (Bosnia and Herzegovina):
Unfortunately, we have reached the point where time is
of the utmost importance. As we speak, the lives of
Libyan citizens are being threatened or even taken.
Therefore, we consider that the Security Council had to
react unanimously and urgently by imposing
appropriate measures to ensure the end of violence and
to prevent further escalation or spillover effects. We
consider that resolution 1970 (2011) will contribute to
strengthening international peace and security.

We have been closely following the enthusiasm
of the Libyan people, expressed through peaceful
demonstrations, and, in their aftermath, have heard
with compassion of the deaths of at least a thousand
people. We wish to express our sincere sympathy to the
families who have lost their loved ones in the past
turbulent days.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is appalled by the
unacceptable level of violence against Libyan civilians.
We condemn in the strongest possible terms the
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law. We stand by our position that the
perpetrators of such crimes must be held accountable.
Thus we fully support the decision to refer the situation
in Libya to the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court, and we urge the Libyan authorities to cooperate
with the Court and the Prosecutor.

Bosnia and Herzegovina calls for an immediate
stop to the violence. We urge the Libyan authorities to
refrain from any military or other violent attempt to
resolve the ongoing unrest but rather to seek through
Libyan-led dialogue ways to meet the aspirations and
demands of the people.

Another extremely urgent matter is the
humanitarian aspect of the crisis. Bosnia and
Herzegovina is worried by information about the flow
of refugees fleeing the violence in their country and
about a considerable number of internally displaced
persons. We call upon the authorities of Libya to
enable humanitarian organizations to address the food
scarcity and medical supply shortage and to provide for
basic needs and services to the citizens of Libya.

Finally, we reiterate our call on the Libyan
authorities to ensure that all measures have been taken
to fully protect citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as
well as other foreign nationals residing in Libya.

