Mr. Garcia (Colombia) (interpretation from Spanish): I should like, at the outset, to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of March. I should like also to
extend our congratulations to Ambassador Mahugu of
Kenya for the very able manner in which he conducted
the business of the Council last month.

My delegation has anxiously watched the
development of the Middle East peace process, especially
the most recent events. Despite undeniable strides made
in recent years, the fate of the process is still a source of
concern, as the road to full independence and self-
determination for the Palestinian people is at a critical
juncture. We saw the recent signing of the agreement on
Hebron as an important step towards the definition of a
conclusive peace settlement that would include the status
of Jerusalem, legal settlements and refugees. Today,
unfortunately, we are forced to acknowledge a different
situation that strains the atmosphere of the process and
constitutes a further obstacle to the consolidation of peace
in the region.

As the international community has stated, and as
has been made clear today, the policy of settlements in
the occupied territories constitutes a serious obstacle to
peace. Insistence upon the creation of fairs accomplis on
matters as esSential to the forthcoming permanent status
negotiations as Jerusalem. and the settlements can be
interpreted as a desire to prejudge the result of the
negotiations, and thus inevitably and seriously affect the
climate of trust so urgently needed for the peace process.

It is fitting to recall today what was said on the
subject of Jerusalem by the Heads of State or Government
of the 113 countries members of the Non-Aligned
Movement at the Cartagena Summit in 1995. They
Security Council 3745th meeting (Resumption 2)
Fifty-second year 6 March l997

 

expressed their unqualified support for the legitimate
struggle of the valiant Palestinian people to guarantee
respect for its inalienable right to self-determination and
independence and reiterated the demand that Israel
withdraw from all occupied Arab and Palestinian territories,
including Jerusalem.

The Heads of State and Government also expressed
regret at Israel's decision to confiscate Palestinian lands and
properties in Jerusalem and its attempts to alter the
religious and historical character of the Holy City. In that
regard, they endorsed all the Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions on Jerusalem and deemed null and
void all Israeli actions that run counter to those resolutions.
They also called for the complete and scrupulous
implementation of the agreements, in particular the
provisions contained in Security Council resolutions 242
(1967), 338 (1973), 465 (1980), 478 (1980), and
underscored the need for the mechanism dealing with the
question of Palestine established by the General Assembly
to continue to function effectively. They then expressed
their support for the appeal made by the Jerusalem
Committee at its meeting in Ifrane, Morocco, in January
1994 to the Security Council, and especially to the two
sponsors of the peace process to take the necessary
measures with a view to demanding that Israel refrain from
establishing settlements, Judaizing the Holy City of
Jerusalem and making any geographic or demographic
change to the city. Israel was also asked to comply with the
agreements and conventions on the preservation of
Palestinian institutions and the Islamic and Christian holy
places in the Holy City of Jerusalem, in keeping with the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council.

On 25 September 1996, in this city, the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of the member countries of the Non-
Aligned Movement met during the fifty-first session of the
General Assembly to commemorate the thirty-fifth
anniversary of the founding of the Non-Aligned Movement.
In their joint communique, the Ministers for Foreign Affairs
and Heads of delegations expressed their concern at the
deterioration of the situation in the region, and particularly
at the difficulties encountered by the peace process. They
expressed their unconditional support for the legitimate
struggle of the Palestinian people to secure their inalienable
rights to self-determination and independence and reiterated
their appeal that Israel withdraw completely from all the
Palestinian territories and other occupied Arab territories,
including Jerusalem.

To conclude, my delegation wishes to reiterate its
support for the peace process in the Middle East and to
urge the Security Council to adopt measures conducive to
respect for international law with a View to the
establishment of comprehensive peace and common
prosperity in the region.

