Mr. Cevik (Turkey): At the outset, allow me to
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this briefing,
which gives us an opportunity to draw the attention of
the international community once again to the gravity
of the humanitarian situation in Syria. We followed
with great concern the presentations made by the chiefs
of the key United Nations humanitarian agencies.

The Syrian people's quest for a democratic and
free Syria has completed its second year, while the
Syrian regime continues to indiscriminately target its
own people by every possible means, including the use
of ballistic missiles. The ongoing assault is not only
taking many lives but also destroying the historic and
cultural heritage and economic infrastructure of Syria.

The humanitarian situation in Syria is deteriorating
day by day. According to recent figures from the United
Nations, the number ofrefugees has reached 1.3 million,
with 4.5 million internally displaced persons and
6 million in need of urgent humanitarian assistance.
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees estimates that the number of refugees
could reach 3.5 million by the end of the year if the
international community fails to act urgently.

The international community has a moral
responsibility to support the Syrian people in their
struggle, and that has to be done urgently, collectively
and decisively in the face of a deteriorating humanitarian
situation, which continues to promote a serious threat
to regional peace and stability.

The joint appeal by the leaders of the United
Nations humanitarian agencies this week is a serious
wake-up call to the international community, and yet
another reminder of the need to revisit the strategies in
seeking to address the crisis. It was a call to everyone
to start thinking outside the box and to act immediately
for an effective strategy to save the Syrian people and
the region from a catastrophe.

We continue to believe that the best way to end this
bloodshed is through a political solution and transition,
while preserving the territorial integrity and political
unity of Syria. The international community, in
particular the United Nations, has a crucial role to play
in that. However, pending such a solution, we should
be realistic and results-oriented in addressing the
humanitarian dimension - the primary consequence
of the political crisis.

We in Turkey are devoting our utmost efforts to
responding to the ramifications of the Syrian crisis.
We are now hosting more than 190,000 Syrians in
17 camps, in addition to at least 100,000 people who
found their way to various Turkish cities and towns. We
are doing our best to meet their everyday needs in all
areas, including those related to health and education.
Furthermore, the Turkish Red Crescent is delivering
humanitarian relief at the zero point of the border
with Syria, with transparency in conformity with
international legitimacy and humanitarian principles.

The average number of refugees crossing into
neighbouring countries on a daily basis has reached
8,000, and up to 14,000 on days of intense fighting.
Until six months ago, that number was a couple of
thousand.

Cross-line assistance is becoming increasingly
complicated, while certain humanitarian goods, such
as surgical supplies, are extensively blocked by the
regime. That irresponsible policy will only lead to
further outflows of refugees. The Council needs to
consider alternative forms of aid delivery, including
cross-border operations.

Neighbouring countries cannot and should not
be asked to face the pressing challenges alone. The
situation is no longer sustainable, and the existing
methodology is not working to realize the principles
of full, unimpeded and safe humanitarian access.
The international community, from the perspective of
burden-sharing, must take collective action. Pledging
financial support is not sufficient in itself.

We are of the view that it is high time for the
international community to discuss unexplored
ways and means to address the problem of internally
displaced persons within Syrian territory and to find
alternative destinations for those who still choose to
leave because they feel insecure.
That call has been echoed by many eminent regional
leaders who feel the same pressure. It is high time that
those legitimate concerns were taken into consideration
by the international community, and certainly by the
United Nations. Otherwise, we may find ourselves in
a crisis scenario much larger that what we have been
struggling with to date.

Let me conclude by expressing once again our
support for the Syrian people's legitimate aspirations to
live in dignity, as well as our determination to continue
doing our utmost in responding to the humanitarian
crisis just across our border. We would also like to
remind the international community of its obligation to
act urgently, decisively and responsibly before it is too
late.

We regret to see the use of the Security Council
floor for the dissemination of inaccurate and misleading
information. The Council and, through the media, the
international community have surely heard the coherent
views of the participants regarding the policies of the
Syrian regime. The facts provided cannot be blurred by
one futile attempt to argue otherwise.

Turkey will continue to show solidarity with the
Syrian people, whose views cannot be heard at this
platform.

