Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank you, Sir, for convening today's meeting,
and Ms. Federica Mogherini, High Representative of
the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, for her very informative briefing.

We recall that, on a day like today in 1975, the first
meeting of the European Council was held in Dublin.
Although the general policies of the European Union
were already in the process of being defined, the
European Council did not become an official institution
until 2009. That is a reminder ofthe arduous and ongoing
process of building European unity and institutions, an
example of both integration and perseverance.

Peru attaches special importance to cooperation
between the Security Council and regional and
subregional organizations, pursuant to Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations. We believe that it is
essential to stress the potential of such dynamics given
the increasingly complex challenges to international
peace and security. In that regard, we underscore and
recognize the active participation and involvement
of the European Union in the various issues on the
Security Council's agenda, which has continued to
increase over time.

Particularly commendable is the European Union's
ongoing humanitarian response to provide immediate
relief for vulnerable populations and develop
mechanisms and processes for peacebuilding. Similarly,
we recognize its partnership in the shared objective of
sustaining peace, such as in Bosnia and Herzegovina
through the Multinational Stabilization Force EUFOR-
Althea, in Kosovo through its Rule of Law Mission and
by facilitating dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina.

In that respect, we welcome the adoption, in
September last year, of a new set of priorities to
strengthen the European Union-United Nations strategic
partnership on peace operations and crisis management
for the period 2019-2021, based on the various tools and
instruments being consolidated in various continents.
They range from participation in peacekeeping
operations to cooperation in the development of national
capacities and the implementation of mechanisms for
the peaceful settlement of disputes.

We welcome the European Union's firm support for
the Secretary-General's recent Action for peacekeeping
initiative. We would like to highlight in particular
the European Union's commitment to the prevention
agenda. We also highlight the so-called Copenhagen
criteria, which remind us of the importance of stable
institutions that guarantee democracy, the rule of
law, respect for human rights and the protection of
minorities. In that regard, we agree that the protection
and promotion of democracy, the rule of law and human
rights complement efforts relating to the maintenance
of international peace and security. Therefore, by
combating the root causes of conflict we reinforce
its prevention.

We would like to conclude by highlighting
that historic commitment, which has transcended
time, turned the European Union into a symbol
of multilateralism and granted it the legitimacy to
continue inspiring the values of diversity, cooperation
and dialogue in States around the world. We recall the
words uttered by Jean Monnet at the National Press
Club in Washington, DC, in April 1952:

(spoke in French)

"It is of universal importance that Europe live
by its own means and in security, that it is peaceful
and able to continue to make a great contribution
to civilization. The path to all of its goals passes
through its unification. A federal Europe is
indispensable to the security and peace of the
free world."

