Mr. Aisi (Papua New Guinea): As current Chair

of the Pacific Islands Forum, I have the honour to

make this statement on behalf of Australia, the

Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji, Kiribati, the

Republic of the Marshall Islands, Nauru, New Zealand,

Palau, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu,
Vanuatu and my own country, Papua New Guinea.

The members of the Pacific Islands Forum
welcome this opportunity to participate in this debate
on small arms and wish to thank you, Mr. President,
and your delegation for having convened this very
important meeting. We also acknowledge Ms. Hoppe's
excellent presentation.

Looking back over the past five years, we can see
that countries in our region have continued to struggle
with the uncontrolled flow and misuse of small arms
and light weapons, which can have devastating effects
on individuals and their communities.

However, we have taken practical steps at the
regional level to combat this problem and to create
sustainable solutions. We have continued to use the
2001 Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects as a guide to direct and
measure regional action.

The Regional Assistance Mission to Solomon
Islands (RAMSI) is an excellent example of regional
cooperation to combat the destabilizing results of small
arms proliferation. Deployed at the request of Solomon
Islands in July 2003, RAMSI partners - Australia,
New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, Fiji and Tonga -
helped restore law and order, in large part through the
collection and destruction of some 3,600 weapons and
over 300,000 rounds of ammunition. We are pleased to
report that the focus of the RAMSI mission has now
moved from conflict resolution to longer-term social
and economic stability activities.

In the case of Bougainville, following a civil war
that lasted 16 years, the island was recently declared
weapons-free. That was accomplished by a weapons
collection and disposal programme, monitored by a
United Nations Observer Mission which included
Australia, Fiji, New Zealand and Vanuatu. The first
elections in autonomous Bougainville were held
successfully in June last year.

Stockpile management and security also remains
a strong priority for the region, with the leakage of

weapons from official stocks a major source of illicit
guns and subsequent criminal activity. Working in
partnership with Australia and New Zealand, Pacific
Islands Forum countries have made real improvements
in this area. New armouries have been constructed in
Papua New Guinea, Cook Islands, Fiji, Nauru and
Samoa. Further capacity-building in this area will
remain the focus of work in the next review period.

With regard to implementing relevant laws, the
Pacific Islands Forum developed a common regional
approach to weapons control under the Nadi
Framework, which focused on the illicit manufacture
of, and trafficking in, firearms, ammunition, explosives
and other related materials. This is also an area for
continued work.

Pacific Islands Forum countries also continue to
pursue efforts at the national level which complement
regional work. My own country, Papua New Guinea,
held the Goroka Guns Summit in July 2005, following
cross-country consultations by the Papua New Guinea
Government's Gun Control Committee. The Summit
proposed more than 200 recommendations, which are
currently before the Papua New Guinea cabinet.

Much work has been done, but much, much more
remains if we are to reach our goal of eradicating the
problem of illicit small arms and light weapons. The
members of the Pacific Islands Forum look forward to
participating actively in the forthcoming Review
Conference and to setting priorities for the next five
years.

