Mr. Yel'chenko (Ukraine): I thank Mr. Annabi
for his briefing. Let me begin my comments with the
issue of elections.

The completion of the civil registration process
has been a key preparatory step towards holding the
municipal elections in Kosovo that are scheduled for
28 October. However, the low turn-out in this process
by representatives of certain national communities, in
particular the Serbian and the Turkish communities,
has indeed cast a shadow over the general success of
the campaign. Taking this into account, it is hard to
imagine how they will participate in October elections.
We believe that non-participation by any of the Kosovo
communities in the coming municipal elections will
undermine the inter-ethnic and democratic nature of
those elections and will hamper United Nations efforts
aimed at establishing a multi-ethnic, tolerant and
democratic society in Kosovo. In our view, the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) should formulate other ways of ensuring
adequate representation of the interests of all national
minorities in local municipal assemblies, even of those
whose members may abstain from participation in the
October vote.

In this context, I would like to ask Mr. Annabi
how UNMIK is going to conduct a vote in
municipalities in which the Serbs and Turks constitute
the majority, for example in northern Kosovo and in
the Prizren region.

We have repeatedly stated, and we remain
convinced, that any progress towards turning Kosovo
into a self-governing entity within the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia should be sought by ensuring adequate
security conditions and basic human rights for all
ethnic groups. Unfortunately, there is much ground for
deep concern at the ethnic violence that has been
growing in Kosovo over the past month, which
continues to claim the lives of innocent people,
including children.

My delegation is also concerned about the
increase in politically motivated crime in Kosovo in the
run-up to the local elections. We were shocked to learn
about the bomb attack in Pristina on 18 August against
the UNMIK building, which houses the offices of
several local political parties. My country supports the
statement of the European Union, made on 22 August,
that the international community should make every
effort to ensure that the October vote takes place in a
safe and peaceful atmosphere, free from pressure from
political extremists. Ukraine strongly condemns the
continuous outbursts of all kinds of violence in Kosovo
and calls on UNMIK and the Kosovo Force (KFOR) to
pursue their resolute efforts to stop this dangerous
trend. My country deems unacceptable all acts of
violence against UNMIK and KFOR personnel, whose
security should remain a top priority.

My country is also worried by the events
following the arrest by the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and the detention in Montenegro of a
number of international workers. We call on the
Yugoslav Government to settle this issue on the basis
of the provisions of international law as soon as
possible. At the same time, we believe that had an
agreement on the legal status of UNMIK and KFOR in
Kosovo been signed with the Belgrade authorities, the
current situation with the detainees, along with many
other problems, could have been avoided.

As regards the issue of the Trepca mine complex,
we endorse UNMIK's intention to preserve and
maintain the facilities of that industrial complex in
order to serve the public interest. Undoubtedly, the
sources of the environmental pollution caused by the
activities of the Trepca mining and metallurgical
complex should be eliminated. At the same time, we
are not convinced that it was really necessary for the
United Nations to take over the complex with the use
of force. It looks rather strange that this environmental
problem became so acute only after one full year of
UNMIK's presence in the province and on the eve of
the September elections in Yugoslavia. However good
the motivations of UNMIK in this case are, it is
important to ensure that all former workers at Trepca
get their jobs back as soon as the complex is reopened.

We are convinced that the disputed issue of the
ownership of the Trepca industrial complex can be
decided only before a competent court with the
participation of the current owners. In this respect,
another question arises: how does UNMIK intend to
solve the problem of unemployed Trepca workers in
view of a possible change in the ownership status of
Trepca?
My delegation applauds the recent decision of the
acting Executive Director of the United Nations Centre
for Human Settlements (Habitat) to launch a dispute-
resolution body in Kosovo to regularize property rights
in the province. We share the view that the resolution
of property issues in a fair and impartial manner is a
precondition for restoring the rule of law and the
protection of human rights.

My country is also satisfied with the first
organized return of a group of Serbs to Kosovo, which
took place in late July with the facilitation of the
UNMIK Joint Committee on Returns. Ukraine also
welcomes the signing into law of a regulation on the
self-government of municipalities, which lays the
foundation for the development of local democracy.

Recently, it has been reported that Kosovo's
Interim Administrative Council has discussed the broad
outlines of a pact for Kosovo society aimed at
determining the interim legal framework that would
define substantial autonomy and self-governance for
Kosovo. I recall that the idea of the pact was
mentioned by Mr. Kouchner during the Security
Council mission to Kosovo back in April. At that time I
got the impression that this idea had not yet been
conceptually finalized. Nor, as I understand it, has it
been finalized now. Taking into account the relevant
provisions of resolution 1244 (1999), we are convinced
that the concept and basic elements of any document
on the future status of Kosovo should be presented and
discussed first in the Security Council before its
consideration anywhere else. Therefore, we would like
to know when this document will be finalized and
brought to the attention of the Security Council.

Finally, let me thank Mr. Annabi for the prompt
and adequate reaction on the part of the Secretariat to
the issue raised by my delegation at our previous
briefing, relating to Ukraine's offer to provide UNMIK
with a special police unit. I am pleased to state that as a
result of the efficient measures undertaken by the
Secretariat, United Nations inspection of that unit was
recently successfully completed in Ukraine, and we
hope that the unit will join the UNMIK police
component shortly. It is also my pleasure to confirm
the completion of the deployment with KFOR of a joint
Polish-Ukrainian peacekeeping battalion a few weeks
ago.

