Mr. Al-Ashtal (Yemen) (interpretation from Arabic): As this is the last meeting to be held under your
presidency, Sir, I should like sincerely to congratulate you
on the remarkable manner in which you have presided
over the Council's work this month. At the outset, I also
wish to thank you for having convened this special
meeting to address the situation in Jerusalem, despite the
reluctance and opposition of some.

Jerusalem is the symbol of the Arab-Israeli conflict
and is at the heart of the Palestinian question. It will
remain so until comprehensive peace is reestablished in
the Middle East, including in the Holy City. On 21 June,
the Israeli Government, the occupying Power, took the

 
very serious decision to expand the municipal boundaries of
Jerusalem, to undertake new construction projects, to
include Israeli settlements and to annex significant
territories of the West Bank to Jerusalem. This is a clear
attempt to efface the character of the city, alter its
demography to create a Jewish majority, do away with its
Arab identity, and destroy the legal and natural status of
Jerusalem, a city that belongs to all three monotheistic
religions.

My Government strongly condemns this decision of
the Israeli Government, which blatantly violates the Madrid
peace framework, all relevant Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions and the Fourth Geneva Convention of
1949, and challenges international legitimacy. The Security
Council has adopted 16 resolutions on Jerusalem and
repeatedly affirmed that any legislative or administrative
measure taken by Israel to alter the legal status and the
demographic composition of the city is null and void. The
Council has also affirmed that the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949 is applicable to all territories occupied
by Israel since 1967, including Jerusalem.

My delegation invites the Security Council, the organ
responsible for maintaining international peace and security,
to fulfil its obligations and duties under the Charter by
adopting practical and tangible measures to prevent Israel
from repeatedly violating the Council's resolutions. The
Council should enact urgent and expeditious measures to
prevent the Israeli Government from implementing its
decision on Jerusalem and its settlement policy.

Ever since the extremist Government in Israel came to
power, it has relentlessly sought, in all seriousness and
enthusiasm, to distance itself from the Oslo accords and to
undermine and impede the peace process. All of this has
taken place at a time when opportunities to establish peace
have arisen. The Palestinian Authority has demonstrated its
adherence to the peace process by discharging its
responsibilities vis-a-vis that process. We urge this Council
to reassume its role in accordance with resolution 242
(1967), the essential basis for achieving a just and
comprehensive settlement in the Middle East.

