Mr. Dapkiunas (Belarus): Before today's meeting
I had my qualms about taking part in this discussion.
What is the chance of being heard if one is number 86
on the speakers list? The consideration that tipped the
scales of my reasoning was the Swedish ownership of
today's event. I personally owe it to the courage and
humanity of legendary Swedish diplomats - the names
of Raoul Wallenberg and Dag Hammarskjold come to
mind first - that I could expect today's meeting to be
more straightforward and less conventional than what
the Security Council setting might usually invite.

Call me alarmist or easily impressionable, but I
choose to believe that the creeping erosion over the
past couple of decades in the rules- and principles-
based environment of international engagement has
steadily increased the risk of an all-out global nuclear
annihilation conflict between the world's major Powers,
be it by intent, mistake or tragic coincidence. Barring
a meaningful accord between the world's major nuclear
Powers on their common primary responsibility for
preventing the final global war and for establishing the
collective framework for peace, all our attempts to find
lasting solutions to smaller-scale conflicts will most
likely prove to be futile.

The United Nations has been doing a lot of good in
the peace and security area, trying to micromanage a
system that is deregulated at the macro level. But it can
do better. We have to admit that reckless stress-testing
of the degree of endurance in the world's sustainability
has to stop. The world has to wake up to a sobering
realization of the true degree of the fragility of our
environment - physical, social, cultural and political.
That realization will not come about through a majority
vote in the General Assembly or the Security Council.
No amount of strength or collective goodwill can, by
itself, compensate for the lack of leadership on the part
ofleaders. Leaders have to lead.

A watershed in modern history may happen once
the world's militarily most powerful nations publicly
agree, with regard to global security, that, for them,
there is no fork in the road, that there is no alternative
to world peace - world peace based on a collective
legal framework jointly guarded by those Powers in
good faith and to the best of their abilities.

The world is anxiously waiting to see if the recently
reborn hope for better understanding between the
world's super-Powers can materialize. Does the premise
of the special responsibility of the leaders make other
members of the Council redundant? Not at all: elected
members of the Council do matter. But the true measure
of the value of a country's contribution to the work of the
Council is hardly the number of statements made, side
events held or votes cast. The true measure of success
of the work of the Council is the ability of individual
members - acting in the absence of publicity, probably
unreported to the world - to create within the Council
a sense of greater moral urgency that can move the big
Powers to connect and empathize.

All of us have perfected the art of imparting to our
interlocutors what we know is right. Some of us excel
in public shaming our opponents for their wrongdoings.
Very few of us can display the courage to step back,
give others the benefit of the doubt and tone down our
rhetoric for the sake of reaching better understanding.

The world does not need the Security Council to
be yet another political theatre. The world does not
even use the Security Council much as a forum for
public speaking. Yet the world badly needs the Security
Council, defined not so much by the turning wheels of
its political machinery as by the sincere interaction of
human beings who make the most commendable effort
of reaching out to a counterpart and can master the art
of talking to and not at each other.

At the risk of inviting the wrath of the President for
breaching the sacred time limit for statements, I would
like to end with a most precious prompt for the use of
the best instrument available to humans for ending and
preventing wars and conflicts.

"Forgiveness breaks the chain of causality
because he who 'forgives' you - out of
love - takes upon himself the consequences of
what you have done. Forgiveness therefore always
entails a sacrifice. The price you must pay for your
own liberation through another's sacrifice is that
you in turn must be willing to liberate in the same
way, irrespective of the consequences to yourself."

Those words of wisdom belong to a great Swede,
the second Secretary-General of the United Nations,
Dag Hammarskjold.

