Mr. Maurer (Switzerland) (interpretation from French): The Permanent Observer of Switzerland would
like to thank the President of the Security Council for
taking the initiative for this meeting, one which enables
States which so desire to express in this prestigious

 

Chamber their determination to combat the scourge of land-
mines.
At the end of the twentieth century, thousands of
human lives continue to be threatened by these deadly
devices that kill and maim innocent people, often long after
conflicts have ended. This situation is intolerable and
cannot be accepted as inevitable.

Only the unswerving political determination of States,
allowing for the establishment of genuine international
coordination in the area of mine clearance, will put an end
to this situation. Aware of the crucial role the United
Nations has played and is called on to play in this area, the
Government of Switzerland would like here to pay tribute
to the International Committee of the Red Cross, which as
part of its humanitarian operations is faced every day with
the ravages caused by mines.

In view of the scope of the threat posed by the
uncontrolled spread of some 110 million mines in more
than 60 countries, mine- clearing assistance must
necessarily become a priority task for international
cooperation, as part of both peace-keeping and humanitarian
assistance. This priority must given form in the
establishment of large-scale demining activities. Indeed, no
economic or social recovery is possible in areas where
mines kill and maim on a daily basis.

The responsibility of the United Nations within the
framework of maintaining international peace and security
makes it the natural body to ensure the coordination of such
an endeavour. For that purpose the United Nations must
have at its disposal a structure adopted to this task and
obtain the financial resources enabling it to act wherever
the situation requires and permits. It will be in a position to
fulfil this mandate only when the international community
decides to accord to mine-clearing assistance the urgent
character and the global dimension that it has been lacking
to date.

With this in view, the Swiss Government will step up
its contribution to the international effort for assistance in
mine clearance. It will increase its voluntary financial
contributions for the various mine-clearance programmes,
the programmes that raise awareness of the mine problem,
and the programmes for rehabilitating victims that it already
supports. It will continue to support the development of
humanitarian demining technology. It will also seek to
make competent staff available to the United Nations
Department of Peace-keeping Operations. For now, the
Swiss Government is pleased to announce a voluntary
contribution of 1million Swiss francs to the United
Nations Voluntary Fund for Assistance in Mine
Clearance.

Mine-clearance efforts may still be in vain if the
rules of international law on the use of land-mines are not
strengthened. Protocol II, relating to mines, to the 1980
Convention on Conventional Weapons has just been
revised. Nevertheless, the improvements to the text are
not completely satisfactory. In the view of the
Government of Switzerland, only a total ban on anti-
personnel mines will allow us to vanquish this scourge.

In spite of the improvements of the revised version
of Protocol II, the Swiss Government believes that the
campaign for a total ban on anti-personnel mines must
continue and must be intensified. It will therefore take
part in any reasonable initiative along those lines, in
accordance with the humanitarian objectives of its foreign
policy.

It is not enough, however, to express the intention to
put an end to the use of anti-personnel mines. States must
be prepared to proceed to action. This was done by the
Swiss Government in November 1995, when it
unconditionally renounced the use, production, laying and
transfer of these mines. The unilateral renunciation,
announced internationally, will soon be incorporated into
Swiss legislation. Moreover, Swiss authorities are
convinced that only an international regime banning anti-
personnel mines - a regime strengthened by concrete
and periodic surveillance measures - will make it
possible for anti-personnel mines to be effectively
eliminated.

As a depository for the 1949 Geneva Conventions
and the additional Protocols I and II to these instruments,
Switzerland feels a special moral responsibility in the area
of anti-personnel mines. Their use flouts basic principles
of humanity and the requirements of public morality. A
ban on anti-personnel mines must therefore become an
essential component of international humanitarian law.
The Swiss Government will do its utmost to see to it that
this objective is achieved and its implementation
guaranteed.

