Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I thank you, Mr. President, for convening this very important open debate. I also thank Under- Secretary-General DiCarlo and Assistant Secretary- General Mueller for their briefings yesterday (see S/PV.8706). Several days ago, the Security Council and a large number of delegations debated an issue of overall consensus, namely, upholding the Charter of the United Nations to maintain international peace and security (see S/PV.8699). Delegations stressed the fact that the Charter provides Member States with a blueprint for achieving peace, security, stability and progress. In order to avoid crises, the world needs to uphold the Charter in letter and spirit. One pertinent example is the Palestinian question, given that, in relation to it, there is no commitment to the Charter, international law or international resolutions. We reject the Israeli occupation and illegalsettlements in the occupied territories, as well as Israeli practices of oppression of the brotherly Palestinian people, which is in non-conformity with the Charter and international law. In order to resolve the Palestinian question, the Israeli occupation of Palestinian and Arab territories, including the occupied Syrian Golan and Lebanese territories, must be stopped. Settlements in occupied territories must end and the blockade on Gaza Strip must be lifted. Illegal practices in the occupied Palestinian territories must cease. Refugees must be allowed to return and all practices that jeopardize the realization of the two-State solution must be stopped. An independent and viable Palestinian State must be established within the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, living side by side with Israel in peace and security. It is high time that we realize a just and comprehensive solution to the Palestinian question that grants the Palestinian people their rights and lets them meet their legitimate aspirations, through dialogue and meaningful negotiations in line with the Charter of the United Nations, international law, the international resolutions, the agreed terms of reference and the Arab Peace Initiative. The international community must spare no effort to achieve this envisioned goal so as to halt the long-standing suffering and instability and avoid putting the region and the world at further risk. The State of Qatar has been eager to play its role at every level to create an environment conducive to lasting and comprehensive peace. Aware of the deteriorating humanitarian situation, in particular in the Gaza Strip, the State of Qatar has continued to support the budget of the Palestinian Authority and provide humanitarian needs. We have also supported multiple projects, in particular the provision of electricity to Gaza, and United Nations temporary employment programmes to improve the living conditions of our Palestinian brothers. With regard to Syria, the crisis continues, accompanied by exacerbated humanitarian suffering and serious violations of international humanitarian law and international human rights law. It is high time that the brotherly Syrian people were able to see their legitimate demands for peace, security, a dignified life, unity, sovereignty and independence answered. Only a political solution, in line with the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex) and resolution 2254 (2015), will lead to achieving those goals. At this point, the Constitutional Committee must be promoted as a step in the right direction, and we will continue to support such efforts to eliminate obstacles to reaching a political solution in line with the United Nations and legal terms of reference. Concerning Libya, the military operations carried out by militias targeting the capital Tripoli and the attacks on the legitimate Government recognized by the international community threaten the unity and stability of Libya. We call on all actors to uphold their responsibilities, respect the will of the Libyan people for a peaceful solution, end the violence, achieve national consensus and implement the Security Council's resolutions. In that regard, we fully support the efforts of Mr. Ghassan Salame, Special Representative of the Secretary-General. With regard to Yemen, the Yemeni people deserve an end to the conflict and their acute humanitarian suffering. Actors must participate in dialogue geared towards achieving a political solution and national reconciliation, in accordance with resolution 2216 (2015). That would ensure the unity of Yemen and restore security and stability. We also support the efforts of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General and reiterate the need to uphold international law, safeguard human rights and meet the basic needs of all the Yemeni people by facilitating access of humanitarian assistance. Concerning Iraq, the State of Qatar is closely following developments there and the evolving sensitive situation in our region. That requires us to deploy collective efforts, mend communication bridges and relying on multilateralism instead of unilateralism in order to find solutions. We underscore the importance of depending on wisdom and reason to reduce tensions and achieve de-escalation. The State of Qatar has always stressed the importance of preventive diplomacy and the peaceful settlement of disputes and conflicts through dialogue and mediation. Today, our position remains steadfast. We call for respect for international law and friendly relations among countries. The international community must uphold its responsibilities by guaranteeing stability and security in our region. We will spare no effort, in cooperation and collaboration with friendly and brotherly countries, to reduce tensions and restore calm through diplomatic channels.The State of Qatar remains fully committed to its principled positions concerning the continued unjust blockade and illegal unilateral measures imposed on my country for more than two and a half years. That is a serious violation of the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and international law. It destabilizes our region and threatens regional and international peace and security. The countries imposing the blockade on my country have also engaged in campaigns of allegations and incitement reflecting their failure. The State of Qatar is steadfast in its position in favour of a peaceful resolution of this crisis through unconditional constructive dialogue that preserves State sovereignty, in keeping with the United Nations Charter, international law and cordial relations among countries. In order to defuse tensions and achieve international peace and security, we remain committed to mediation in seeking a solution to the crisis. In particular, we commend the efforts of His Highness Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, Amir of the sisterly State of Kuwait. In conclusion, the Middle East is now more than ever in need of ending all tensions that have serious consequences on international peace and security. The Security Council has a responsibility to take necessary measures in order to end all grave violations of international law and crises, leading to a safe region for its people and achieving peace, stability, development and prosperity.
