Mr. Baublys (Lithuania): I wish to thank
Ambassador Roman Oyarzun Marchesi for his first
report to the Council in his capacity as Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006). We are confident that the Committee will
benefit from his able guidance during this decisive
stage of its work.

Lithuania closely follows the intensive diplomatic
efforts by the E3+3 and Iran to find a comprehensive
solution to the Iranian nuclear issue. The negotiations
have now entered a crucial stage, and we hope that the
momentum we saw developing in the past few weeks
will facilitate an agreement within the time frame set
in November 2014.

We reiterate that only Iran's willingness to provide
verifiable guarantees to the international community
on the exclusively peaceful nature of its nuclear
programme can lead to a successful outcome of the
process. That will require flexibility and openness by
Iran in bridging the remaining gaps. For its part, the
European Union has shown significant goodwill in
extending the sanctions relief measures with regard
to Iranian crude oil, petrochemical products, gold and
precious metals, as well as increasing the thresholds for
financial transfers to and from Iran.

Iran's cooperation with the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) is another vital element in
rebuilding the international's community's trust. We
welcome the IAEA's conclusion that Iran has been
implementing its commitments under the Joint Plan of
Action. At the same time, we remain very concerned
that cooperation with the Agency under the Framework
for Cooperation appears to have stalled. Iran has yet
to provide explanations that could enable the Agency
to clarify the two practical measures outstanding, and
has not proposed further practical measures, despite
the Agency's repeated requests. We urge Iran to
cooperate fully with the IAEA on all the outstanding
issues, including those related to the possible military
dimensions of its nuclear programme, in order to
enable the Agency to provide credible assurances of the
absence of undeclared nuclear material and activities
in Iran.

Turning to the work of the Committee, Lithuania
wishes to reaffirm that the Joint Plan of Action does
not affect in any way the sanctions measures imposed
by the relevant Security Council resolutions. All
Council sanctions imposed on Iran therefore remain in
full effect, and all Member States have an obligation
to implement them. The obligation to cooperate fully
also extends to Iran, and we encourage it to engage
with the Committee to help facilitate the Committee's
investigations. The work of the Committee's Panel
of Experts in verifying compliance also remains
unaffected. In that regard, I would also like to take
this opportunity to thank the Panel of Experts for its
work. Lithuania looks forward to to the release of the
Panel's final report and to subsequent discussions in the
Committee.

Finally, I would like to reiterate Lithuania's hope
that the talks between the E3+3 and Iran will shortly
lead to a comprehensive and verifiable solution that will
strengthen international confidence in the exclusively
peaceful nature of Iran's nuclear programme for the
long term.

