Ms. Rice (United States of America): Let me start
by thanking the Government of Nigeria for its
leadership in bringing us together today to discuss
security sector reform (SSR) in Africa. Let me also
thank you personally, Minister Ashiru, for presiding
over our debate.

This Council discussion on SSR is long overdue.
A State's ability to police its territory, protect its
citizens and uphold its laws is central to its ability to
exercise its sovereignty and promote regional peace
and stability. However, in all too many instances, local
security forces lack capacity, or worse, they threaten
the very citizens they are meant to serve. All too often,
we have had to rely on international peacekeepers to
fill temporarily a gap that a nation's people would have
preferred to address permanently on their own.

From Liberia to Haiti to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the drawdown of international
peacekeepers is now linked to the build-up of
indigenous security institutions. At least 11 United
Nations peacekeeping operations, peacebuilding offices
and special political missions are now mandated to
conduct SSR activities, and 10 of them are in Africa.
The United Nations and many other actors are making
important contributions to SSR in those countries, and
that includes the United States.

Over the past several years, for instance, my
Government has invested more than $300 million to
support defence and police reform in South Sudan,
more than $280 million for defence, police and justice
sector reform in Liberia and some $110 million for
defence and police reform in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The United States also supports SSR
programmes in several other African countries
emerging from conflict.

Today's Security Council debate on security
sector reform and the draft presidential statement we
will adopt should spur action, we hope, on four fronts.

First, we should take a more long-term,
comprehensive approach to SSR. As the Secretary-
General pointed out in his 2008 report on the subject
(S/2008/39), the security sector is not only uniformed
personnel - it involves the entire defence
establishment, civilian law enforcement and
corrections personnel, intelligence services, institutions
dealing with border management, customs agencies
and organizations that handle civil emergencies and
elements of the criminal justice sector. As the
Secretary-General also pointed out, reform of the
security sector is not just about providing basic
training and equipment for a battalion or formed police
unit. It is about establishing a legal and constitutional

framework for the legitimate, accountable use of force,
via security personnel, in accordance with universally
accepted human rights norms and standards. True
security sector reform does not mean merely recruiting
more security personnel, it means thinking through
their overall numbers, determining what is fiscally
sustainable and creating mechanisms for their direction
and oversight.

Secondly, our approach to SSR has been too
narrow. We must broaden it to take into account what
host populations time and again demand, namely, a
clear recognition that human rights, good governance
and gender equality are inextricably linked with
security sector reform. Integrating a gender perspective
into the daily work of armed forces, defence ministries
and peace makers makes these institutions more
inclusive and democratic and improves the overall
effectiveness of security sector reform. A defence or
law enforcement agency that shuns corruption,
advances equality and protects the rights of all, rather
than trampling them, is far more likely to command the
support and confidence of its citizens. The Secretary-
General rightly highlighted these issues in his most
recent report on SSR. We hope that his next one will
suggest concrete benchmarks for measuring progress.

Thirdly, the United Nations needs to strengthen
its expertise and enhance the coordination among all
actors that play a role in SSR, especially human rights
defenders, development agencies, international
financial institutions such as the World Bank and
regional and subregional organizations. The United
States appreciates the work now being undertaken by
the Security Sector Reform Unit of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, the inter-agency Security
Sector Reform Task Force and other United Nations
entities such as the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime. We look forward to having them do even
more to spread lessons learned and best practices on
SSR, inside the United Nations system and beyond.

Fourthly, we must all do more to help build up
expertise outside the United Nations system,
particularly by regional and subregional organizations
working to address the challenges around them. For
example, the Economic Community of West African
States has helped make important SSR gains
throughout West Africa. Regional bodies are
increasingly important players when it comes to SSR in
Africa, and we support their efforts.

We will also need to work at both the national
and regional levels to address a range of twenty-first
century challenges in the waters off Africa, including
piracy, armed robbery at sea, trafficking in persons,
illegal or unregulated fishing and environmental
degradation. As such, maritime security sector reform
will increasingly become critical to overall SSR.

The United States looks forward to working with
our fellow Council members to sustain and increase
our focus on SSR within the Chamber and beyond.
Especially in Africa and in other lands that have known
too much suffering, we seek an international approach
to SSR that heeds the voices of citizens calling out for
a better future and bolsters the capacity of host
Governments and regional organizations to help make
those hopes real.

