Mr. Manongi (United Republic of Tanzania):
We, too, thank the Special Envoy, Mr. James Morris,
for his briefing and for his efforts to raise global
awareness of the threats facing Africa. We welcome the
Special Envoy today in the firm belief that his presence
here will galvanize and direct energies at the global,
regional and national levels in support of meeting the
dire humanitarian needs of Africa.

What has been characterized as the triple threat of
food insecurity, weakened capacity for governance and
HIV/AIDS represents a real menace for Africa, but we
believe that it can be overcome. It can be overcome
with support, technical assistance and dialogue.

Africa has great potential. It has plenty of fertile
agricultural land and is rich in natural resources.

But the widespread food crisis and the
humanitarian crisis that affect our region also show
how vulnerable it is. A common cause of the food
shortages being faced in parts of Angola, Lesotho,
Madagascar, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia,
Swaziland, Zambia and Zimbabwe is the erratic
weather that has been experienced during the current
crop production season. In some countries, this is the
third or fourth successive year of crop failures. Dry
spells and the late onset of rains have left many
farmers with little or no harvest. We know that. In our
own country, we consider ourselves fortunate because
the current crop season indicates improvement in the
food situation over last year's season, only because of
better rainfall.

Widespread poverty has also constrained the
productivity of the agricultural sector in Africa. As
indicated, poverty is compounded by the HIV/AIDS
pandemic, which has an impact on the amount of land
placed under cultivation as farmers become
incapacitated by their own illness or by the demands of
caring for sick family members. The continent's
vulnerability is further exacerbated by the fact that
most of our economies are based on agriculture and
depend on the export of traditional or primary
agricultural products. We import most of our
manufactured goods, including agricultural inputs such
as machinery and fertilizer, and we import them on
trade terms that militate against both our agricultural
and our industrial sectors. Those systemic imbalances
need to be addressed.

African countries differ geographically,
economically and in their levels of development.
Climatic conditions are not uniform, and that results in
the production of different crops and in differences in
cropping patterns. That in turn indicates differing
vulnerabilities to food crises. Some countries, such as
Namibia, Botswana, Zimbabwe and Zambia, are
persistently prone to drought and famine.

There is ample literature about the extent to
which governance contributes to hunger and poverty.
None of us is immune to criticism; we all can do better,
and we must strive to do so. We must also learn to
engage in discourse that promotes our shared
aspirations and our collective commitment to move
forward in the interests of all our people. In meeting
those challenges - governance, food insecurity and
combating the HIV/AIDS pandemic - capacities
differ. Countries in the region need to be assisted to
enhance and sustain their capabilities.

The region of southern Africa, for instance, is
also grappling with those challenges, believing that our
people expect and want to see their quality of life
improved through increased economic growth that is
regionally driven and based and that is pro-poor. The
following illustrates that pursuit.

In 2003, the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) adopted what is called the SADC
HIV/AIDS Strategic Framework and Programme of
Action, 2003-2007. In 2004, we adopted the SADC
Regional Indicative Strategic Development Plan, which
set out a vision for an integrated community. The same
year, we also adopted the Dar es Salaam Declaration on
Agriculture and Food Security, which, among other
things, seeks to develop an early-warning and
vulnerability monitoring system - an intervention
strategy that we believe could be a valuable interface
for international partnership. In addition, we have the
Dar es Salaam Declaration on Peace, Security,
Democracy and Development in the Great Lakes
Region, adopted in November 2004. Lastly, we have
the SADC Principles and Guidelines Governing
Democratic Elections, adopted at the summit held in
August 2004.

Africa has had many tears shed for it - some, I
might even say, crocodile tears. We know that, for, as a
country that hosts a huge population of refugees from
war-torn countries, we have seen repeated pleas for
food assistance go unheeded. The archives of the
Organization are full of best intentions. We are all far
better at talking than at acting. It is our hope that the
High-level Plenary Meeting this September will
present an opportunity - a turning point - that we
should not miss.

What Africa needs is the support of the
international community in enabling the region to face
the challenges that confront it. The collective
determination of the region to overcome is firm.
Concrete responses to the Special Envoy's appeal are
urgently needed and must be heeded as humanitarian
action.

Lastly, with regard to Zimbabwe, we share the
concerns about the reported dislocation of people in
urban areas. We note that the Secretary-General has
sent the Executive Director of UN-HABITAT,
Mrs. Anna Tibaijuka, as his Special Envoy to examine
the impact of the Government's "Operation Restore
Order". The Council has just heard a number of
competing figures regarding the actual number of
displaced persons. In our View, it is only fitting that we
reserve any judgement on the issue until the matter is
clarified.

