Mr. Cappagli (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish again to congratulate you, Mr. President, on the
very effective way in which you are guiding the work
of the Security Council. I also welcome the presence
and the contribution of the Minister for External
Relations of Angola, Mr. Joao Bernardo de Miranda.

I should like to thank Ambassador Richard Ryan
of Ireland, Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 864
(1993) concerning Angola, for his introduction of the
report of the Monitoring Mechanism on Angola
Sanctions established by resolution 1295 (2000). I
would also, through you, like to thank Ambassador
Juan Larrain and the team that makes up the
Mechanism for their excellent work and for the
preparation ofthis valuable and very sound report.

Less than two years ago, the delegation of the
United States put forward an interesting plan which
proposed the establishment of a group of experts to
study comprehensively the violations of the sanctions
regime against UNITA. This idea developed, thanks to
a strong impetus from Canada, and resulted in the
creation of the first panel for Angola.

That first panel succeeded in answering a number
of essential questions: how sanctions were being
violated, who was violating them and what measures
could be taken to make the sanctions a more effective
instrument for peace in Angola.

Following that, and given greater awareness of
the problem on the part of the international community,
the Monitoring Mechanism has succeeded not only in
going into greater depths on these issues, it has gone
much further, serving as a genuine monitoring or
control mechanism on the implementation of sanctions.

Among the important recommendations made by
the Mechanism, we concur on the need for the
countries exporting weapons to strengthen their
monitoring mechanisms and, whenever necessary,
incorporate into end-user certificates monitoring
elements that would make it difficult to falsify them. In
this regard, we encourage contacts with the Wassenaar
Agreement, which should make it possible, on the basis
of their experience in the field, to build in useful
elements in the area of arms export monitoring.

As far as diamonds are concerned, although
significant advances have been made, much remains to
be done. The report clearly indicates the existence of
lacunae which still make it possible to evade the
recently established controls, and consequently enable
UNITA to secure the resources it needs to advance its
military objectives.

In the light of the important work done by the
Mechanism, we feel that it was right to adopt Security
Council resolution 1336 (2000), which extends the
operation of the Mechanism for three more months. We
also regard its paragraph 2 as particularly sound. The
policy of "naming and shaming" sanctions-busters is
not sufficient. We also need to take specific measures
with regard to them.

Recently, the progress made in monitoring and
refining the sanctions instrument has been significant.
In that regard, we have acknowledged the link between
illegal exploitation of natural resources, and in
particular of diamonds, and the continued waging of
armed conflict. The creation of the panels on Sierra
Leone and the Democratic Republic of the Congo is a
clear example of this.

We have placed illegal traffickers on an equal
footing, whether they trade in arms or in diamonds. We
have agreed on the importance and have acknowledged
the benefits of having all sectors involved working
together, be it in the area of arms sales or in the
diamond area. In the latter sector, the General
Assembly last December adopted resolution 55/56 on
the international diamond certification regime.

We have launched a serious campaign to heighten
the awareness of the international community. We have
agreed that sanctions violations should not go
unpunished and we have taken actions to ensure that
this is not the case. Lastly, we have recognized that
monitoring mechanisms are essential if we are to have
effective control of sanctions, as an instrument
whereby to deter violations and to exert continued
pressure on the targets of sanctions.

Consequently, we believe that the Security
Council should take the following step: it should
establish a monitoring mechanism for all sanctions
regimes, one that is comprehensive and semi-
permanent. By this means and by the analysis of
elements common to the various armed conflicts
involved, this new monitoring mechanism will be able
to act in an integrated way, leading to more effective
monitoring of sanctions and a more rationale use of
available resources.

The measures implemented through the Panel and
the Monitoring Mechanism have undoubtedly affected
UNITA's military capacity. However, the situation is
far from being under control. Long-term monitoring
measures are required to avoid a relapse in the
situation. Almost a year ago in this Chamber we were
asking ourselves what message would be sent by a
sanctions regime without effective monitoring, and
what consequences might more strict control have had
for the peace process in Angola. Let us avoid having to
ask ourselves these same questions in a few years'
time.

After more than 25 years of fratricidal conflict, it
is clear that there is no military solution to the conflict.
We are convinced that there is no dispute that cannot
be resolved peacefully and fairly if both parties are
inspired by a genuine willingness to talk and to act
reasonably and with restraint. We believe that after so
much shedding of innocent blood, a final solution to
the conflict is an obligation that both parties have
towards the Angolan people.

