Mr. Shaanika (Namibia): I thank you, Madam
President, and your country, Argentina, for organizing
this open debate on the important issue of the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General for his informative briefing, as
well as Ms. Navanethem Pillay, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights; Ms. Valerie Amos,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator; and Mr. Philip Spoerri,
Director for International Law and Cooperation of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, for their
invaluable contributions and briefings. They all made
persuasive presentations on the numerous challenges
and risks that civilians face in conflicts and in which
they are victims.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict can
be strengthened by strict adherence to the elements
highlightedbythereportsofthe SecretaryGenera1,which
are, enhancing compliance by parties to conflict with
international law, enhancing compliance by non-State
armed groups, enhancing protection by United Nations
peacekeeping and other relevant missions, improving
humanitarian access and enhancing accountability for
violations of international humanitarian law.

The Namibian delegation appreciates the fact that,
since adopting resolution 1265 (1999), the Security
Council has been addressing the issue of the protection
of civilians in conflict and has adopted numerous
resolutions on that issue. The international community
has long had in place instruments of international law
that provide the legal framework for the protection of
civilian populations in armed conflicts. They notably
include the following: international humanitarian law,
in particular the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 and
the two Additional Protocols of 1977, which established
basic rules of conduct during hostilities and the need for
making a fundamental distinction between the civilian
population and combatants. Those instruments include
the prohibition of torture. The protection of particularly
vulnerable groups, notably women, the elderly, children
and internally displaced persons, are essential elements
in protecting civilians in armed conflict. It is more often
women and girls who are disproportionately affected
in conflict because, in many cases, they have been
subjected to rape and other forms of sexual violence.

The preamble to the Charter of the United Nations
opens with a firm determination by Member States to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war.
Therefore, it is our shared responsibility to protect
civilians and vulnerable groups in conflict situations.
However, the protection of civilians in conflict situations
should not be motivated by factors other than purely
humanitarian considerations. Also, double standards
and selectivity send the wrong signals to perpetrators
of crimes against civilians in armed conflict and make
a mockery ofjustice.

While the primary responsibility to protect
the civilian population lies with the Governments
concerned, in some conflict situations, it may happen
that Governments are unable to act on that responsibility.
If their inability is due to a lack of capacity, then the
international community should offer its assistance. It
is for that reason that, at the World Summit in 2005,
Heads of State and Government adopted the global
norm known as the responsibility to protect.

However, those assuming the responsibility to
protect, in particular under the third pillar of that
responsibility, should take extra precautions so
that civilians do not become statistics of so-called
collateral damage due to the negligence of those
assuming responsibility to protect them. Hence, my
delegation rejects the usage or deployment of drones
as inappropriate for the purpose of protecting civilians
in conflict. In most cases, the use of unarmed drones
results in the death of innocent civilians. Therefore,
enhancing compliance with international humanitarian
law, human rights law and refugee law is an obligation
that requires strict adherence by all warring parties,
including those assuming the responsibility to protect
civilians. Those who have been identified and proven to
have committed or tolerated war crimes should be held
accountable for their crimes.

With the goal of meeting the challenges I have
mentioned here, international humanitarian law has
been integrated into the training programmes of the
Namibian defence force, as well as the Namibian
police force, so that when deployed in peacekeeping
missions or in any other operations, they will abide by
international humanitarian law and effectively assume
the responsibility of protecting civilians in conflict.

In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm Namibia's strong
commitment to meeting its international obligations,
particularly under international humanitarian and
human rights law. In doing so, we strive to contribute
to the attainment of the noble ideals of reaffirming faith
in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth
of the human person and in the equal rights of men and
women to live in peace and freedom.

