Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Ms. DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs; Mr. Lamamra, African
Union (AU) High Representative for Silencing the
Guns in Africa; and Mr. Gounden, Executive Director
of the African Centre for the Constructive Resolution
of Disputes, for their briefings today.

Today's debate and vote on resolution 2457 (2019),
supporting the AU Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative,
is intended to advance the goal of creating an African
continent that is free of conflict. As we have stated
before, the goal of a conflict-free Africa is ambitious
and worthy, but it will not be easy to implement.
Nevertheless, the resolution and gatherings like today's
open debate demonstrate the willingness of the African
Union and its member States, as well as the broader
international community, to take on the challenge.

The factors contributing to violence in Africa
are complex. Poor governance, corruption and
underdevelopment create fragility that feeds cycles
of conflict. Additionally, poor management of natural
resources can contribute to the problem. The proper
management of natural resource endowments should
bring prosperity and social development; but in too
many countries natural resource wealth does not
translate into improved livelihoods for citizens but
feeds corruption, violence and conflict.

As most other speakers have also noted, the
trafficking in and circulation and use of small arms and
light weapons remain key drivers of conflict in Africa
and are responsible for a majority of deaths in conflicts.
Small arms are illicitly acquired through various

means, including diversion from national stockpiles,
attacks on military posts and trafficking and sales by
networks willing to sell weapons to non-State actors.
Those activities often violate United Nations arms
embargoes or contravene United Nations sanctions
regimes. Corrupt officials who turn a blind eye to the
pilfering of unsecured weapon stockpiles also facilitate
the smuggling of arms.

Weak criminal justice systems, weak border and
maritime controls, inadequate physical security and
poor stockpile management further exacerbate the
problem. These are just a few of the many factors that
propagate conflict in Africa today. Today we must ask
ourselves what actions we can take to combat those
drivers of violence.

First, we can strengthen existing mechanisms
to anticipate the outbreak of conflict, whatever the
cause, and support mediation and prevention efforts.
Empowering the continental early warning system
by giving additional political weight to its analytical
findings and endorsing diplomatic responses that
address potential crises in their infancy are two
critically important examples. Taking action as a result
of the warning systems is often politically difficult but
can be key to reducing the potential for Violence.

Secondly, States can partner bilaterally with
countries across the continent to address arms control in
Africa. The United States is assisting Kenya, Tanzania,
Rwanda and Uganda to meet their commitments
under the Nairobi Protocol. In Somalia, United States
programmes bolster the security of Federal Government
of Somalia stockpiles against attacks by Al-Shabaab
and other armed groups. The United States has also
worked to stabilize the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo by destroying excess and poorly secured
weapons and ammunition and by improving physical
security and stockpile management for the Congolese
army and national police. Additionally, the United
States funds a multimillion-dollar responsible minerals
trade programme aimed at breaking the link between
conflict and the mineral trade in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

The United States has also consistently supported
many objectives of the African Union Agenda
2063. The Agenda includes important goals such
as improving access to and the quality of education,
investing in infrastructure, protecting the environment
and strengthening democracy and the rule of law. We
are concerned, however, by language committing to
reducing food imports, which could have a negative
impact on food security and may not be consistent
with the trade obligations of African members of the
World Trade Organization. We hope to hold further
discussions with the AU on that issue.

Thirdly, the international community should
continue to look for ways to bolster cooperation with
the African Union, other regional organizations and
individual African States to prevent and mitigate crises,
resolve conflicts and prevent mass atrocities and the
displacement of populations. Strong African leadership
and commitments to addressing the underlying causes
of violence will facilitate that cooperation. Today's
resolution is a good example of that type ofpartnership.

Finally and perhaps most importantly, we can
expect Governments in Africa to hold each other
accountable to provide security to all their citizens,
regardless of race and ethnicity and in a way that
respects and values human rights. Societies that
promote and protect human rights are more resilient.
The United States also recognizes the role of women's
empowerment and leadership in preventing conflict.
It is particularly troubling when armed State security
forces repress and abuse citizens, as we have seen
recently in countries such as Zimbabwe, where earlier
this year State security forces were responsible for at
least 13 deaths, 600 victims of violence and torture and
at least 600 arbitrary arrests. We call on Governments,
including that in Zimbabwe, to hold accountable those
State security forces who misuse their positions to
commit human rights abuses and violations.

The escalating crisis in the anglophone regions of
Cameroon is also of concern. We urge both sides in
the north-west and south-west regions of Cameroon to
renounce further violence and to allow unfettered access
for humanitarian and health-care workers. We call for
immediate and broad-based reconciliatory dialogue,
without preconditions, between the Government of
Cameroon and separatists in the north-west and south-
west regions.

In the Sudan, President Omer Al-Bashir has
declared a year-long state of emergency and dissolved
national and provincial Governments in response
to protests calling for his removal from office as a
result of months of economic and political crisis. At
the same time, the repressive tactics of the Sudanese
security forces, including the use of live fire, arbitrary
detention and torture, threaten to further destabilize
the Sudan. There is an urgent need for political and
economic reform in the Sudan that is fully inclusive
and that addresses the legitimate grievances expressed
by the protesters.

The United States recognizes that lasting stability,
prosperity, independence and security on the African
continent are in the national interests of the United
States and of the countries represented in this Chamber
and around the globe. We will continue to be a close
partner of the African Union and its member States
in addressing the underlying causes of conflict. With
the collective support of the Security Council, we look
forward to continuing to work together to silence the
guns and end conflict on the African continent.

