Mr. Ataide Amaral (Portugal): Portugal fully
aligns itself with the statement delivered earlier by
the Deputy Head of the Delegation of the European
Union, and would like to make further comments in its
national capacity.

More than ever, multilateralism is essential in
addressing new and old threats to peace and security, as
they become increasingly global. Beyond the traditional
factors that threaten international peace and security,
including territorial disputes, other kind of threats
are challenging our stability and our current pursuit
of prosperity and development. Climate change, food
insecurity, the scarcity of water, pandemics, terrorism,
organized crime, cyberattacks and all kinds of illicit
trafficking, including in human beings, human organs,
weapons, narcotics and cultural goods, are some of the
contemporary challenges and risks that we face. Intense
and lasting conflicts often cause severe humanitarian
crises that not only generate deep suffering and
indignity for the Victims, but also spread insecurity and
distress to surrounding regions.

Given their transnational nature, those types
of challenges can be overcome only through the
cooperation and effective action on the part of the entire
international community. Portugal believes that lasting
peace can be achieved only ifthe root causes ofconflicts
are addressed, including underdevelopment and
extreme inequality. Complex contemporary challenges
require the continuous adaptation of our mechanisms,
better coordination and early action to address threats
at the national, regional and international levels. The
prevention of conflicts at the earliest possible stage is
crucial in order to avoid instability leading to conflict.

In that context, we acknowledge the Secretary-
General's firm commitment to conflict prevention,
and we support his reform proposals. A comprehensive
approach to peace and security reform based on
prevention and a resurgence of diplomacy is needed as
part of our common effort to achieve sustaining peace.
The integration of a gender-balance perspective is also
a priority for my country. Within that framework, an
ever-stronger relationship among the General Assembly,
the Security Council and the rest of the United Nations
system, including the Peacebuilding Commission,
will strengthen our collective capacity to prevent
conflicts. To break the conflict cycle, it is important
that the Security Council hold early consultations on
situations of imminent risk and take collective action to
prevent Violence.

In conclusion, new and more complex challenges
to international peace and security require a systematic
and comprehensive approach. Only the United Nations,
through its various institutions and bodies and its
universality, is in a position to respond adequately.
Portugal stands ready to be part of that United Nations
effort and cooperate with the Security Council in
fulfilling its mandate.

