Mr. Repkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation welcomes the presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Niger at today's briefing. We thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Guinea-Bissau, Ms. Rosine Sori-Coulibaly, and the Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, the Permanent Representative of Brazil, Mr. Ronaldo Costa Filho, for the information they have provided. We are pleased at the fact that the elections in Guinea-Bissau took place within the legally mandated timeline in accordance with relevant standards of democracy and transparency, for which it was highly commended by regional and international observers. We note the special role played by the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) and the Economic Community of West African States in the preparation of the elections. As is rightly noted in the report of the Secretary General (S/2020/105), the conclusion of the electoral cycle could be a milestone in the modern history of Guinea-Bissau. We trust that with those elections the country will be able to turn the page on an era of protracted political tumult, thereby creating conditions that would enable the country to make a peaceful shift towards socioeconomic development. Such path can be followed only if national consensus is made a priority. At this critical juncture, we call upon all social and political forces to act responsibly, in line with national interests, facilitating prompt resolution of disputes. We believe that the time has come for addressing the issue of lifting the Security Council sanctions against Guinea-Bissau. The sanctions have long been obsolete in nature. The current situation is a far cry from the events of 2012. As the recent elections have again shown, the armed forces are staying out of politics. We can therefore observe that the sanctions achieved their objective long ago. Maintaining the sanctions, in the light of the drawdown of the United Nations presence in the country, is all the more bewildering. As was the case in the past, we believe that the restructuring of UNIOGBIS is necessary and should be carried out in a phased manner in line with the timeline set out in resolution 2458 (2019). By the end of 2020, when UNIOGBIS is to conclude its operations in Guinea-Bissau, the United Nations country team should have secured the relevant mechanisms and tools not merely to facilitate development in Guinea-Bissau but also to provide meaningful assistance to the country in countering such challenges as drug trafficking and corruption and in fine-tuning the institutions of State governance.
