Mr. Ladsous: I am indeed pleased to be here
today as the Council once again debates the important
issue of the role of peacekeepers in peacebuilding and
the related issue of transitions.

In the last three years, we have come a long way
in terms of sharpening our understanding of what
building peace entails. There is a consensus across the
United Nations and beyond on the broad priorities of
what is inevitably a complex and long-term effort.

Building peace means helping national
institutions reach a point where they are able to
maintain a sufficient level of stability and security, in
particular through respect for the rule of law and
human rights. It also means that such national
institutions are sufficiently representative to maintain
the consensus necessary to advance the peacebuilding
process. Peace is more likely to be sustained if tangible
progress is also made in addressing basic needs and
advancing economic recovery.

The consensus on peacebuilding has been refined
through the report (S/2009/304) of the Secretary-
General on peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath
of conflict and further elaborated on in the 2011 World
Development Report. The Secretary-General's 2009
report in particular provides a broad framework by
highlighting five recurring priorities for United Nations
engagement in peacebuilding: first, the delivery of
basic safety and security for citizens; secondly,
inclusive political processes; thirdly, the provision of
2

basic services; fourthly, the restoration of core
Government functions; and fifthly, economic
revitalization.

Building peace is an ambitious undertaking; it
reflects a generational effort that will continue long
after peacekeepers have left. Success depends on
national and international political will and decades of
support from a broad array of international and
regional actors.

What, then, is the specific role of peacekeepers in
this effort? Peacekeepers are seen as the guarantors of
the fragile shift from conflict to peace. When the
Council mandates peacekeeping operations, it is not
only to stabilize the country and keep the peace but
also to contribute to the building of a sustainable
peace.

Multidimensional peacekeeping operations are
fundamentally political tools. A study undertaken by
the Centre for International Cooperation on the
peacebuilding elements of peacekeeping mandates
found that peacebuilding tasks have been a steady
feature of peacekeeping mandates since the early
1990s. Over time, those tasks have become more
complex and wide-ranging. Most of the mandated
peacebuilding tasks focus on the first two priority areas
outlined in the report of the Secretary-General, namely,
support for basic safety and security, and support for
political processes. For instance, in resolution 1996
(2011), which set the mandate of United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), the term
"peacebuilding" is mentioned nine times. Talking about
the role of peacekeepers in peacebuilding is not about
expanding peacekeeping or adding new tasks to
mandates. It is about making the most of the tasks that
peacekeepers are already being asked to perform.

In an effort to further clarify the role of
peacekeepers in peacebuilding vis-a-vis other actors,
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support developed their "nexus
paper", which states that peacekeeping operations have
three peacebuilding roles: first, we help Governments
articulate priorities by supporting consensus among
national counterparts and the broader international
community, and guiding overall strategy development
and implementation; secondly, we enable other
national and international actors to implement
peacebuilding tasks by providing a security umbrella,
logistical support and political space for reconciliation
12-27487
efforts and economic recovery to develop; and, thirdly,
we implement certain early peacebuilding tasks
ourselves, including through support for political
processes, security sector reform and by engaging in
early capacity-building in certain areas, in close
collaboration with other partners.

While we have developed a better and shared
understanding of what peacebuilding entails and our
specific role in it, the answer to successful
peacebuilding does not lie in terms and definitions. The
true challenge remains the question of how we build
peace. To give just one example, there is broad
consensus that strengthened institutions are a critical
element of sustainable peace. Yet after years of
engagement in such countries as Liberia, Sierra Leone,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Timor-Leste,
Haiti and others, despite undeniable and substantial
progress, national institutions remain fragile and we, as
well as our partners, are still grappling to find the best
approach that would allow us to improve our individual
contributions and yield the expected results.

To maximize the United Nations contribution to
building peace, and specifically that of peacekeepers,
three elements are critical. We must ensure that we
identify and address the specific priorities of a country
and its people. We have to clarify the roles and
responsibilities of the various United Nations actors
and strengthen our partnerships with non-United
Nations actors. We should periodically review and
adjust our engagement to best adapt to an evolving
situation on the ground.

Applying these elements continuously and
systematically throughout our presence will have the
added benefit of facilitating a more controlled
drawdown and withdrawal of our engagement, and
thereby help guarantee that our combined investment
will result in long-lasting progress.

We do not believe that peacekeepers should
address the full spectrum of peacebuilding activities.
Peacekeepers are best suited to prioritizing those
initiatives that advance the peace process or political
objectives of a mission. These initiatives may also
ensure security or lay the foundation for longer-term
institution-building in a few key areas. The DPKO-
DFS early peacebuilding strategy guides peacekeeping
operations to use this political and security prism to
identify appropriate activities. For the rest, other
partners must come to the fore.
12-27487

As I mentioned earlier, this is not about
expanding the tasks of peacekeepers. In our
experience, the Council does not need to assign new or
more detailed tasks or mandates to peacekeeping
operations. Rather, our focus should be on translating
the broad goals of the Council into operational plans
and tools on the basis of national priorities.

Determining national priorities in post-conflict
countries is indeed a delicate task. When societies are
still too torn and politically polarized, and when
national consensus and reconciliation remain elusive,
formulating objectives and pursuing them in a
consensual manner is a political challenge. This is why
the role of the Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General is essential to balancing the political
process and institution-building imperatives, in close
consultation with national actors. Also, institutional
capacity to formulate priorities can be weak or
non-existent. We must avoid overwhelming fragile
institutions, and we must provide consistent and
coherent support.

Strong national ownership and leadership in the
formulation of peacebuilding priorities are essential. In
Liberia, the host Government and the Peacebuilding
Commission adopted a statement of mutual
commitments in October 2010, which outlines
commonly agreed peacebuilding priorities: the rule of
law, security sector reform and national reconciliation.
In Timor-Leste, the Strategic Development Plan
provides the basis for international support to the
country and is coordinated through the national
priorities programme supported by the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste. The South Sudan
Development Plan provides the national priorities
around which the United Nations country team and the
United Nations Mission in the Republic of South
Sudan have developed their peacebuilding goals, called
for in Security Council resolution 1996 (2011).

In this context, I would like to also mention the
New Deal, which, as members know, was adopted at
the Fourth High-Level Forum on Aid Effectiveness in
Busan, Republic of Korea, last year and aims at
aligning international development assistance around
five peacebuilding and State-building goals. The New
Deal stresses mutual obligations and strong national
ownership. Among the signatories, seven countries
playing host to United Nations missions -
Afghanistan, Liberia, Timor-Leste, South Sudan, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Sierra Leone and
3
the Central African Republic - have volunteered to
trial this new approach. The Government of South
Sudan has also requested the United Nations family to
orient its engagement around those goals.

The New Deal reflects a strong expression of
commitment by host countries to strengthening their
leadership role in the peacebuilding process. We are
working closely with relevant missions, the
Peacebuilding Support Office, the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) and the World Bank
on the follow up to the New Deal at the global level.

We count on Member States to align their various
national policies behind those priorities articulated by
host countries, and to speak with one voice in their
multiple functions as Council members, representatives
to the Fifth Committee, members of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, or members
of executive boards of United Nations agencies, funds
and programmes, and international financial
institutions.

To help national actors transition from war to
peace, we have to work in partnership with United
Nations and non-United Nations actors. Integrated,
multidimensional United Nations missions help to
realize this partnership as they bring together, through
one leadership team, the whole spectrum of the
capacities of the United Nations system. Yet, differing
mandates, governance structures and financing
arrangements complicate effective coordination and
coherence focused on priorities.

An answer to this challenge lies in integrated
planning and leadership. The integrated mission
planning process provides a framework through which
the United Nations leadership on the ground can
articulate a joint vision and strategy for United Nations
engagement based on the mandate and national
priorities. A strong integrated plan would ideally
clarify the contributions of each United Nations actor
based on comparative advantage and actual capacity to
deliver.

Responsibilities may change over time as
priorities and capacities shift. Peacekeeping missions
have a restricted time horizon and must synchronize
their plans with those actors better suited to
undertaking long-term engagements. For their part,
United Nations partners often have limited capacities
in the early post-conflict period and need time to scale
up. In such circumstances, we try to bring our relative
strengths to bear. For instance, in the Sudan in 2005,
the peacekeeping mission provided bridge funding for
the integrated United Nations disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme until the
United Nations Development Programme-administered
Multi-Donor Trust Fund became available.

We must do more to increase incentives across
the United Nations to work together. The international
review of civilian capacities (see 8/2011/85)
recommended strengthening interoperability and
flexibility across the United Nations to make better use
of our own resources to support peacebuilding
priorities and harmonize service delivery across
agencies. DPKO is working within the Secretary-
General's Steering Committee on civilian capacity to
see how best to take these recommendations forward.

The United Nations is only one of many actors
contributing to any peacebuilding effort. Building
strong partnerships with regional organizations,
bilateral partners and international financial institutions
in the early stages of our planning processes is also
necessary to ensuring a coherent and coordinated
approach. Likewise, as missions draw down, regional
and bilateral partners are critical as risks may persist
after mission drawdown, requiring the planning of
over-the-horizon security guarantees with the help of
partners.

This takes me to my final point. How do we know
when to move beyond a peacekeeping mission?
Clearly, there is no easy, one-size-fits-all answer to this
question. Just as the full impact of peacebuilding
cannot be measured quantitatively, it requires keen
judgment to know when it is appropriate for
peacekeepers to withdraw. A key consideration in many
cases is the need for the security assistance represented
by blue-helmeted troops. As they draw down, the
civilian elements of a peacekeeping operation may in
some cases continue in a follow on presence. Indeed,
the functions reflected in the mandate of peacebuilding
missions or integrated offices are largely the same as
those of multidimensional peacekeeping operations
because they are focused on the same goal, namely,
supporting a political process, assisting with
institution-building in specific areas and linking
through integration with the United Nations country
team to ensure a coherent approach.

In an ideal scenario, drawdown should happen
gradually and on the basis of a careful review of the
12-27487
situation on the ground, discussions with our national,
bilateral and regional partners, testing of the host
country's capacity to assume responsibilities and, of
course, public perceptions. Benchmarks for drawdown
and exit should be included in our initial deployment
plans, and revised to reflect the evolving situation on
the ground.

It is clear that transitions do not follow a linear
process. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
mandate, size, components and structure of the Mission
have evolved over the last 12 years to reflect the
changes in the political and security situation. As part
of the last reconfiguration, we strengthened our
peacebuilding contribution in the west while
maintaining a very strong focus on the protection of
civilians in the eastern parts of the country.

In Liberia, in February 2012, we conducted a
technical assessment mission, the conclusions of which
suggested that the security situation would allow for a
reduction of the force component of the United Nations
Mission in Liberia over the next three years but
encouraged strengthening our police presence there,
potentially reconfiguring our civilian roles and
maintaining our political engagement.

That is why a regular review and adjustment of
our mandates needs to consider the roles of United
Nations and non-United Nations partners and their
contributions to the building of peace, along with what
we expect to be a possible follow-on presence. A
drawdown for a mission often means significant
adjustment and the start-up or surge of activities for
our partners. A transition is not, and should not be,
about simply reducing numbers in a peacekeeping
operation.

No matter how much progress a country has made
towards building peace, we have to be mindful that the
departure of a peacekeeping mission can be expected to
raise anxieties and may be destabilizing in and of
itself. Building confidence between the host
Government, key national stakeholders and the
international community and clearly articulating the
facts of a transition through continued dialogue and
communication strategies are critical to a successful
drawdown plan.

Efforts to build peace will continue long after a
peacekeeping mission has left a country. As
peacekeepers, we have a responsibility to countries
12-27487
emerging from conflict to help secure a peace that will
endure without our presence.

