Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): We express our
sincere thanks to you, Sir, for presiding over today's
important debate. We congratulate Cote d'Ivoire on a
successful presidency thus far, and are honoured by
your presence.

We thank Secretary-General Guterres, African
Union Chairperson Faki Mahamat and the President of
the Commission of the Economic Community of West
African States, Mr. Brou, for their briefings.

We align ourselves with the statement to be made
later by the observer of the European Union.

Conflict prevention and peacebuilding are at the
core of the external action of the European Union,
and cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations is a key
element for prevention and peacebuilding. In that
context, I will highlight three points: first, the need
to strengthen cooperation; secondly, the need for
complementarity; and thirdly, the need to better use the
Peacebuilding Commission.

On my first point, enhanced cooperation of
subregional and regional organizations with the
United Nations is crucial to preventing the outbreak
of conflicts. An example of this - and my American
colleague just mentioned it as well - is the cooperation
between the Economic Community of West African
States, the African Union (AU) and the United Nations,
in preventing the outbreak of conflict in the Gambia
last year, when Italy was in this chair during our two-
year split-term on the Council.

Further institutionalizing cooperation will
strengthen our efforts aimed at prevention. A good
example of this is joint risk assessment and joint
analysis. In particular, we would welcome joint risk
assessment for all root causes of conflict, and this
especially includes the adverse effects of climate change
and water stress. Various Security Council mandates,
together with conclusions of the AU Peace and Security
Council and of the Council of the European Union (EU),
recognize the link between climate change and conflict.
This recognition creates a possibility to work together
to address climate-related risks. If relevant regional
and international organizations work together better to
assess, analyse and address these kind of security risks,
we ensure collective thinking for collective action.

My second point concerns complementarity. One
of the priorities of the Secretary-General's Action
for Peacekeeping initiative, as he mentioned this
morning, is partnerships. Through the signing of the
Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations
Peacekeeping Operations, some 151 Member States so
far have committed to enhancing cooperation between
international, regional and subregional organizations.
Partnerships are essential to really improving
peacekeeping, and there are several examples
of this. One example is the EU-United Nations
Strategic Partnership on Peace Operations and Crisis
Management, and the trilateral cooperation between
the AU, the EU and the United Nations in peacekeeping
is another prime example of this cooperation and should
be further institutionalized.

Joint fact-finding missions should be the rule
rather than the exception. An example of this are those
with the Security Council, the AU Peace and Security
Council and the EU Political and Security Committee
to countries on the Council's agenda. Regional and
subregional organizations should enhance partnerships
through these joint missions.

Additionally, let me emphasize the need for
sustainable funding and streamlined compliance
mechanisms for future AU peace support operations.
We feel that the time has come for a draft resolution
in this context by the Security Council, which will
strengthen cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union, and we commend the leadership
of C6te d'Ivoire on this point and on peacekeeping
more generally.

As previous reports of the Secretary-General
have rightly observed, regional interests and the
proximity of neighbours sometimes complicate
conflict prevention and efforts aimed at resolving
conflicts. Cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organization should
therefore be determined by comparative advantage,
complementarity and organizations' willingness to act.

That brings me to my third point - the important
role ofthe Peacebuilding Commission. In the Secretary-
General's prevention and sustaining peace agendas,
peacebuilding is increasingly important, and the
Peacebuilding Commission has to play a central role.
The Peacebuilding Commission is a hinge between
the United Nations, host Governments and affected
countries. It is also a hinge between the United Nations,
regional organizations, subregional organizations and
civil society. In building sustainable peace, the role of
the Peacebuilding Commission is essential and should
be enhanced. The Commission should ensure that
experiences on the ground are shared here in New York
both with the United Nations system and with other
countries. Especially in transitional situations, the
Peacebuilding Commission can provide subregional
and regional organizations with a link to the Security
Council, thereby ensuring that peacebuilding
is inclusive.

In conclusion, enhanced cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations is imperative in all phases of the conflict
cycle. By better working together, we can do what the
Charter calls upon us to do: "to unite our strength to
maintain international peace and security".

