The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Argentina, Australia, Canada, Egypt, the Islamic Republic
of Iran, Mexico, New Zealand, Norway, Pakistan, the
Republic of Korea, Ukraine and the United Arab Emirates
in which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Petrella
(Argentina), Ms. Wensley (Australia), Mr. Fowler
(Canada), Mr. Elaraby (Egypt), Mr. Kharrazi (Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr. Tello (Mexico), Mr. Powles
(New Zealand), Mr. Aass (Norway), Mr. Kamal
(Pakistan), Mr. Lee (Republic of Korea),
Mr. Yel'chenko (Ukraine), and Mr. Samhan (United Arab Emirates) took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/1998/476, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Costa Rica, Japan, Slovenia and Sweden.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following other documents: S/1998/450,
letter dated 1 June 1998 from the Charge d'affaires ad
interim of the Permanent Mission of the United Arab
Emirates to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-
General; S/1998/458, letter dated 2 June 1998 from the
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General; S/1998/463, letter dated
2 June 1998 from the Permanent Representative of the
Philippines to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General; S/1998/464, letter dated 4 June 1998
from the Permanent Representative of India to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council; S/1998/468, letter dated 3 June 1998 from the
Permanent Representative of Belarus to the United
Nations addressed to the Secretary-General; and finally,
S/1998/473, letter dated 5 June 1998 from the Permanent
Representatives of China, France, the Russian Federation,
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, and the United States of America to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
vote on the draft resolution before it. Unless I hear any
objection, I shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I shall first call on those members of the Council
who wish to make statements before the voting.


