Ms. Tincopa (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I wish to thank you, Sir, and your delegation for
having organized this important debate. We also wish
to express our gratitude for the report submitted by the
Secretary-General (S/2007/757) and for the statements
made this morning by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
the Executive Director of UNICEF and the
Representative of Watchlist on Children and Armed
Conflict on behalf of non-governmental organizations.

Because of the conditions of underdevelopment
and exclusion, protecting children is extremely difficult
in many of the countries covered by the Secretary-
General's report and by the Security Council's Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict. Conflict is a
circumstance in which the situation of children requires
redoubled and concerted efforts. Therefore, Peru
supports the Secretary-General's recommendations and
requests the Security Council and the other bodies
concerned to adopt them.

States have equipped themselves with binding
instruments to protect human rights and humanitarian
law. Even in the context of conflict situations, we must
reaffirm the importance of making progress in the
universalization and effective implementation of such
law. For its part, the Security Council should continue
to employ, or expand the use of, available instruments
and measures to halt the abuse of children's rights in
conflict situations.

We wish to highlight the need for Member
States - particularly those affected by armed
conflict - to continue, within the framework of their
legal systems, to undertake or adopt measures to bring

to justice those responsible for the recruitment and use
of children and other grave crimes committed against
children. Neither amnesty nor impunity is acceptable.

We would also like to highlight the role that has
been played by the International Criminal Court in
cases such as those in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the importance of expanding the categories
of offences against children falling within its
jurisdiction. Support for the work of international
justice mechanisms is part of an holistic approach by
the Security Council to support peace, truth and
national reconciliation. Peru is pleased that it has been
able to contribute to the prosecution of those accused
of these and other crimes before the International
Criminal Court.

We agree with the Secretary-General's
recommendation that the Security Council attach the
same importance to all categories of grave violations,
not only the recruitment and use of child soldiers, but
also the killing and maiming of children, rape and
other grave sexual violence, abductions, attacks against
schools, hospitals and refugee centres, and denial of
access to humanitarian aid that specifically targets
children.

The task of implementing resolution 1612 (2005)
remains pending and should be approached in a
coordinated fashion, by States, the United Nations
system and civil society alike. Also pending is the
updating and strengthening of existing mechanisms to
achieve the objectives of resolution 1612 (2005) under
the new circumstances of insecurity that children
confront, particularly in countries where the Security
Council has established peacekeeping operations or
political missions.

To this end, Peru considers it important that the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict should also include in her
reports, in a disaggregated manner, information on
rapes and sexual abuse of children, particularly girls,
along with information from peacekeeping operations
and the Department of Political Affairs. It would also
be desirable to bolster the capacity of such missions
with child protection advisers.
As borne out by the improved situation of
children in Cote d'Ivoire, in stabilized areas of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in Nepal, when
a country's political leaders reach a viable and
sustainable peace agreement and assume the
responsibility to protect their population, particularly
their children, conditions tend to improve.

It is for this very reason that emphasis should be
placed on the need for the Security Council and the
other United Nations organs to support the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission in order to adopt an
integral approach to managing post-conflict processes
with a view to preventing the resurgence of violence.

In conclusion, we are of the view that human
rights, peace, international security and development
are mutually interlinked. Dealing with them in an
integral manner will contribute more effectively to
successfully addressing issues concerning children,
especially those in conflict situations. Their lives and
the future of countries in conflict or emerging from
conflict depend on our efforts, as, ultimately, does the
stability of entire regions everywhere in the world.

