Ms. Wickramanayake: Since my last briefing to
the Security Council in April 2018 (see S/PV.824I), I
have had the opportunity to travel to many parts of the
world and meet young people from all walks of life.
From the refugee camps in Jordan, to schools of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East in Gaza in the Gaza Strip,
to municipalities in Kosovo, to youth councils in
Denmark, I have seen and heard one thing - young
people care about peace.

However, young women and men still suffer from
stereotypes, myths and policy panics that diminish
their agency and prevent them from realizing their full
potential for peace. Unfortunately, contrary to reality,
the narrative is still dominated by a focus on the small
minority of young people attracted to extremism and
violence and fuelled by the victimization of young
people, especially young women.

The overarching consequence of these negative
stereotypes is that they contribute to the marginalization
and stigmatization of youth by framing young people as
a problem to be solved and a threat to be contained.
This detrimentally skews youth, peace and security
programmatic responses towards hard security
approaches and away from prevention - ignoring the
fact that most young people, in fact, are not involved
in violence.

That is all the more reason why we need to keep
going back and referencing resolutions 2250 (2015)
and 2419 (2018), so that in this increasingly globalized
world shaped by pervasive concerns about terrorism,
organized crime and extremist violence, we can make
sure that perspectives on youth are not distorted by
contagious stereotypes that associate young people
with violence.

Allow me to thank the Government of Peru for
its leadership in convening this important Security
Council briefing on youth, peace and security.
I am pleased to be joined by two young women
peacebuilders - Ms. Wevyn Muganda from Kenya
and Ms. Sofia Ramyar from Afghanistan - as we take
stock of the progress made in the youth, peace and
security agenda.

Today, there are 1.8 billion people in the world- the
largest generation of young people ever. Some 90 per
cent of them live in developing countries, where they
make up a large proportion of the population. With a
global median age of 29.7 years, it is estimated that
408 million young people today live in contexts affected
by armed conflict.

Moreover, around the world, today's young
generation faces enormous challenges. One in five
young people is not in employment, education or
training; every year millions of girls become mothers
while they are still children themselves; and mental
health issues among young people are on the rise.
Without action to address inequality, intolerance and
the climate emergency that faces us all, this generation
of young people could face devastating repercussions.
It must be clear therefore that we need to engage young
people not only as beneficiaries, but as equal partners in
our efforts, especially in our efforts to prevent conflict
and build peace.
Since the release ofTheMissingPeace: Independent
Progress Study on Youth, Peace and Security last
September, the agenda has entered a new phase,
increasingly shifting the focus towards implementation
at multiple levels while also expanding stakeholder
support. Let me focus on a few key issues.

First, young people are reclaiming the narrative
on youth, peace and security. Despite myths,
misconceptions, fake news, stereotypes and claims that
presume them to be and portray them as troublemakers,
young people are resisting, protesting, organizing
and implementing youth-led peacebuilding initiatives
in their communities and countries to bring back
democratic values, good governance and transparency
in institutions in the places they live. They are not
waiting to be invited to join decision-making tables;
they are bringing alternative, innovative solutions to
solve those global problems.

However, in the past months, I have noticed with
grave concern incidents of young peacebuilders and
young human rights defenders being subjected to threats,
intimidation, violence, arbitrary arrest and retaliation
by State and non-State actors. I would like to recall
and remind us all with great emphasis that protection
is an integral part of resolution 2250 (2015). I call on
Governments and all parties to uphold and protect the
fundamental rights of young people, including their
freedom of expression both online and offline.

Secondly, the youth, peace and security agenda is
being recognized and institutionalized within the United
Nations as core to the United Nations priorities on youth.
The United Nations Youth Strategy, Youth 2030, which
was launched by the Secretary-General in September
2018, identifies peace and resilience-building as one of
its five core priorities for the United Nations system's
work with and for young people.

With this first ever United Nations Youth Strategy,
we have set out on a new path and will support young
people in all their diversity in accessing education,
decent work, social protection and health care, while
we will stand with young people when they oppose
injustice and will work with them to prevent conflict
and build peace. In doing so, the United Nations system
will promote an enabling environment that recognizes
young people's important and positive contributions
to peace and security, while creating safe spaces and
expanding opportunities for young people.

To support the implementation of the peace and
resilience-building priority of the United Nations Youth
Strategy, a joint United Nations action plan is being
developed under the leadership of the joint United
Nations Population Fund (UNFPA)/Peacebuilding
Support Office (PBSO) secretariat on youth, peace and
security, bringing together other United Nations system
partners. This joint action plan focuses specifically
on strengthening policy support, implementation,
monitoring and review at the local, national and
regional levels. PBSO, UNFPA and the United Nations
Development Programme are furthermore developing
a joint global programme to support field and
regional-level implementation of the youth, peace and
security agenda in the five geographic regions.

Furthermore, we are seeing a surge in programming
and funding in United Nations entities. For instance,
$37 million have been allocated by the Peacebuilding
Fund since 2016 through its Youth Promotion Initiative,
a special fund dedicated to supporting projects fostering
youth inclusion and participation. Nonetheless, we
continue to fall far short of meeting the needs of youth
organizations and networks on the ground, which often
operate on minimal financial and other resources.

Thirdly, the United Nations peace and security
pillar is increasingly engaged in implementing
resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018) with special
political missions and peace operations involved in
numerous activities. For instance, the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia organized dialogues
with youth representatives from different political
parties in various regions, focusing on discussing the
implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace.
As a result, there are new inter-party youth pacts to
reject violence in the context of the upcoming local
elections. I commend the Mission for establishing a
network of youth focal points across its field offices
to support the implementation of the Mission's youth
engagement strategy.

To promote peaceful coexistence and support
youth participation in peacebuilding and stability in
Iraq, the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
engages youth across the country on issues relating
to tribal conflicts, unemployment, State control of
arms and youth inclusion in decision-making and
political processes.

Across the African continent, from West Africa
and the Sahel to Somalia, United Nations missions
are stepping up their efforts to engage young people
and youth organizations in consultative processes and
dialogues aimed at preventing conflict and advancing
peace, while supporting efforts to build the capacities
of youth organizations and networks to participate in
decision-making processes.

The United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia, through its Prevention
Academy project, is building linkages with youth
throughout Central Asia as a means of creating a culture
of prevention among young people.

Inspired by the impressive work done by the youth
focal points in our missions in Colombia, Kosovo and
Somalia, I encourage all United Nations political and
peacekeeping missions to appoint and allocate youth
focal points to effectively implement youth, peace and
security agendas within their respective mandates.

Fourthly, since the adoption of resolution 2419
(2018), the importance of young people's participation
in peace processes has garnered increased international
attention. As a first step in that process, the first
International Symposium on Youth Participation in
Peace Processes was held in March in Helsinki and
co-hosted by the Governments of Finland, Qatar and
Colombia. The Symposium analysed how young
people have influenced peace processes and mediation
efforts using diverse and innovative approaches. From
participating in peace negotiations as delegates of the
parties of conflict to monitoring ceasefire agreements
to addressing local-level disputes, from drafting and
shaping peace deals to using technology and social
media to reach broader constituencies, young people
have shaped peace processes in countries such as
Colombia, South Sudan and the Philippines.

I am therefore pleased to use this opportunity to
officially announce the launch of a key outcome of
the Symposium: the global policy paper entitled We
Are Here: An integrated approach to youth-inclusive
peace processes, which includes a foreword by the
Secretary-General. The paper evaluates young people's
participation and inclusion in peace processes that have
taken place over the past 20 years from young people's
own points of view. It highlights that their roles in
peace processes often build relationships between the
formal and informal realms of peace negotiations,
making mediation efforts that otherwise take place
behind closed doors more open, inclusive and, thereby,
sustainable.

However, there are still massive gaps in
meaningfully including young people in peace
processes at all levels and documenting young people's
roles in peace negotiations and mediation efforts. The
symposium concluded with a set of recommendations
to address those gaps and will serve as a useful tool
to all stakeholders, especially mediators on the ground.

It is encouraging to note that, at the country level,
youth groups are already testing and validating some
of those recommendations. In Cameroon, under the
leadership of young peacebuilders, over 600 young
mediators are being trained to step up and support
community level negotiations. Last weekend, 30 young
Libyans representing minorities from Amazigh, Tabu
and Tuareg communities, including young people with
disabilities from all regions of the country, gathered to
discuss topics pertaining to peace, people, prosperity,
planet and partnerships. I hope that this is the beginning
of a process that will continue to inspire their leaders
with regard to concrete actions to bring lasting peace.

I am also pleased to note that the State of Qatar has
already committed to hosting a second symposium in
2020 in Doha, focusing especially on young women's
participation in peace processes. I hope that this will be
a good opportunity to further explore the interlinkages
between resolutions 2250 (2015) and 1325 (2000).

Lastly, the report of the Secretary-General on
youth, peace and security will be presented to the
Security Council by May 2020.

The successful implementation of resolutions
2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018) requires further support,
including political will and ownership from Member
States, funding for programming, institutional support
for capacity-building and prioritization. Achieving
lasting peace is not an elitist cause that Governments,
politicians, the United Nations and other institutions
can or should undertake alone. Sustainable peace cannot
be achieved at the cost of social inclusion. Our efforts
to build and sustain peace need to be democratized to
include the communities most affected. Young people
are our best chance for succeeding at that.

