Mr. Kariyawasam (Sri Lanka): Let me thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this debate. Sri
Lanka is particularly pleased to take the floor on this
important issue under the guidance of the delegation of
Viet Nam.

This meeting provides an opportunity to refocus
our efforts in addressing the scourge of the recruitment
and use of child combatants. The reports of the
Secretary-General on specific situations, as well as his
annual report (S/2007/757), are informative and
illustrative in that regard.

This debate takes place three years after the
adoption of resolution 1612 (2005). The journey
between that event and today has been marked by the
establishment of monitoring and reporting task forces,
the evaluation of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism, the adoption of the Paris Principles and
Commitments and the lO-year review of the Graca
Machel report (A/51/306). Those initiatives, together
with the relevant international instruments, have helped
strengthen the protection framework for children in
armed conflict in its practical and normative aspects.

However, the threat of the recruitment and use of
child combatants continues unabated and remains the
primary concern. Therefore, current efforts in the
Council in taking measures against persistent
perpetrators of such crimes need to be intensified in a
more realistic, practical and effective manner.

In that regard, Sri Lanka compliments the efforts
made so far by the Council Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict in recalibrating the monitoring and
reporting mechanism. It is our hope that those efforts
and measures adopted by the Working Group will
eventually lead to the elimination of the pernicious
offence of the recruitment and use of children for
armed hostilities.

However, to achieve that end, it is important that
the Council and the Working Group, at this point,
remain essentially focused on this most urgent task in a
more coherent manner and not seek to broaden the
canvas to include other issues that are not of immediate
practical benefit. Actions that make a difference on the
ground should engage our attention in our effort to
attain concerted international and national measures to
bring perpetrators to justice.

In that context, let me offer some views on the
issue on children and armed conflict for the
consideration of the Council, the Working Group and
the Secretary-General.

First, introducing under the Council mandate
other categories and subcategories of violations against
children without resolving the core issue of child
recruitment would only make the Council process on
children and armed conflict seem ineffective by
missing the wood for the trees. Instead, the Council

could, for instance, address issues more relevant to its
work on peace and security, such as how armed actors
resort to new tactics of recruitment to defy and mislead
the international community, whose attention to the
matter is based on existing norms.

We have observed that discernible trend in the
north of Sri Lanka, where the Liberation Tigers of
Tamil Eelam (LTTE) subject schoolchildren to
compulsory weapons and combat training with a view
to enlisting them for active combat as and when the
need arises. That is a new form of recruitment and use
of child combatants adopted by the LTTE.

Secondly, it is important to underline that, as
distinct from Member States, non-State actors are not
bound by internationally enforceable legal instruments
and, therefore, should be subjected to stricter scrutiny
and more rigorous and internationally enforceable
punitive measures so as to make them accountable for
grave abuses against children.

Thirdly, since the primary responsibility for the
protection of children under national and international
legal instruments lies with the State, a zero-tolerance
policy on recruitment and the use of children by any
party whatsoever assumes greater significance as an
obligation of a State. The Government of Sri Lanka has
declared and followed such a policy consistently, with
the corresponding commitment to address all abuses
identified by resolution 1612 (2005) and other relevant
national and international legal instruments.

Fourthly, the Council and the Working Group
must agree on how to deal with persistent and
recalcitrant violators in respect of situations listed in
the Secretary-General's report (S/2007/757) and evolve
a realistic approach to address the issue. In that regard,
we support the recommendations made by the
Secretary-General in his report calling for increased
pressure against persistent and recalcitrant violators,
including through effective targeted measures.

Fifthly, the most important of all the measures
that underpin the effective implementation of 1612
(2005) is the reintegration of child combatants. They
need special protection after having surrendered to
national authorities or having been rescued from armed
groups. As the Secretary-General suggests in his report,
the successful reintegration of child combatants
requires resources as well as expertise. It is imperative,
therefore, that current international concern in this
important area move beyond words of sympathy into
sustained engagement and the flow of necessary
resources to facilitate effective reintegration. In that
regard, the Paris Principles provide guidance towards a
long-term self-sustaining effort that can also lead to
peacebuilding and reconciliation.

Sri Lanka remains committed to working closely
with the Council and the Working Group to rescue
children trapped in situations of armed conflict, in the
cause of making the world safer for children. With our
rich, long-held tradition of promoting the welfare of
children, including the provision of free health care
and education from primary to tertiary level, we seek
nothing less.

