Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): I, too, would like
to join our colleagues in welcoming an old friend,
Ambassador Kamalesh Sharma, back here. One of his
great assets is that he enjoys great confidence in the
United Nations community here. I am sure that this
confidence will prove to be an asset to him in the field.
I also have one small suggestion to make to him. I am
sure he is thinking a bit about writing his memoirs after
he leaves Timor-Leste and I have found a title for him.
The title should read "From New Delhi to New Dili".

Let me begin, first of all, by endorsing a point
that I believe Ambassador Williamson made in his
statement when he said that the United Nations success
in Timor-Leste provides a textbook example of a
success story in exit management that we could use in
other areas where the United Nations is working. I
think that is an important point because, frankly, if we
look at the record of the United Nations in terms of its
exit strategies, some of its past peacekeeping
operations have been less than glorious. We hope that,
this time around, the United Nations will get it right.
The likelihood is that, of course, the United Nations
will get it right partly for the reasons that Ambassador
Sharma spelled out at the beginning of his statement,
when he spelled out the various strengths of Timor-
Leste as a new country. I think, too, if I remember
correctly, Ambassador Williamson also spelled out a
list of strengths that Timor-Leste enjoys. I think we
should build on the strengths that Timor-Leste has.

If I had to add one more point to that list of
strengths - and I hope my new colleague from Timor-
Leste will not mind if I make this point - it is that
Timor-Leste is a relatively newly independent State
that can actually learn from the mistakes of all of us
who became independent 10 or 20 years ago. I think
Timor-Leste can benefit from seeing what mistakes
have been made by others.

There seems to be a sort of consensus so far in
the discussions that, if we are to continue to maintain
this success story, we must have a clear and balanced
understanding of the achievements made so far and the
challenges that remain for Timor-Leste. It is clear that
much has been achieved, but it is also clear that we still
have a lot to do before the mandate is accomplished
and before Timor-Leste can stand completely on its
own. Even then, there will have to be continued United
Nations development assistance for many more years
to come.

Clearly, the United Nations and Timor-Leste are
at a very important stage of their relationship, a phase
in which the United Nations Mission of Support in East
Timor (UNMISET) is devolving more and more
operational responsibilities to the Timor-Leste
authorities. This has to be done very cautiously and
gradually. It cannot be done so slowly that the Timor-
Leste Government does not have the opportunity to
take up the reins in the areas in which it is able to do
so, but at the same time it cannot be too quick, without
due regard for the actual situation on the ground. As
we have said repeatedly, a hasty downsizing and
withdrawal of UNMISET will unravel all the
achievements that have been made by the United
Nations in Timor-Leste. Therefore, a very fine balance
has to be struck in this devolution.

In some ways, Ambassador Sharma's job is
probably more difficult than that of his predecessor,
because his predecessor functioned more or less like a
chief executive officer, making all the decisions. I
think Ambassador Sharma, if I may describe his job,
serves more like a facilitator trying gradually to allow
the emergence of a strong, newly independent State.
Ironically, the best test for success for Ambassador
Sharma is to make himself completely redundant in
Timor-Leste by 2004.

Having said that, it is also clear to me, listening
to everybody, that there are many important challenges
that remain. They have been spelled out by virtually
everyone that has spoken here, and we just want to
mention three or four.

My first point is that, while Timor-Leste is
consolidating its foundations, its emerging institutions
remain fragile and its leaders will have to continue to
deal with the dissatisfaction and protests of diverse
interest groups, former combatants and veterans.

Secondly, while Timor-Leste and Indonesia have
taken concrete steps to enhance bilateral cooperation,
including on border issues, we note the phrase in the
report that says that "earlier assumptions about
progress towards demarcation have proven optimistic"
(S/2002/1223, para. 48).

Thirdly, despite the efforts of the UNMISET
Civilian Support Group, insufficient technical and
substantive capacity within the Timor-Leste public
administration continues to pose significant challenges
to stability. I believe Ambassador Greenstock raised
some questions about the filling of the development
posts that have been created. One important point that
was also made is that it is important to ensure that the
international experts, as someone said, are not seen to
be doing their job. They must be seen to be preparing
the people of Timor-Leste for the job.

My fourth point - and again, this has been
touched upon by several speakers - is that the
development of the judicial system suffers from a lack
of clarity regarding the separation of powers among the
judiciary, legislature and executive. Of course, there is
also a lack of crucial resources. The seriously limited
national capacity may affect serious crimes
investigations and proceedings, with possible
implications for the reconciliation process.

These are just a few of the challenges. Taking all
this into account, it is clear that, as we move forward
from here, there must be a clear understanding that the
process of the devolution of UNMISET cannot move
on the basis of an autopilot. It has to make constant
judgements on the stage of progress we are making at
each point in time. Here again, if my memory serves
me correctly, I believe that Ambassador Williamson
also indicated in his statement that we should
constantly judge and see whether we are making
progress along the lines in which we are expected to do
so, and bear this in mind.

This brings me to a point that we raised at the
private meeting of the Security Council on Timor-
Leste. That is whether we can come up with more
specific benchmarks for Timor-Leste's progress similar
to those which Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Michael Steiner has worked out for Kosovo. It
is possible that we were not clear at that meeting, so
maybe we should elaborate on what we meant by this.
We recognized that milestones for UNMISET were
included in the Secretary-General's report of 17 April
2002 (S/2002/432), which recommended the
establishment of the peacekeeping mission.

We would like to suggest that UNMISET produce
a document similar to that produced by United Nations
Interim Administrative Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
which breaks down the milestones into detailed goals
and benchmarks. In fact, UNMIK has moved on to
develop a set of progress indicators, to systematically
track what has been achieved and to identify areas
where greater efforts need to be made. We found this
document very helpful in assessing progress in Kosovo.
We wonder whether the same could be done for
UNMISET and for Timor-Leste. We would appreciate
Ambassador Sharma's comments.

Someone once commented to me that the
meetings on Timor-Leste had become very boring. I
think that this is a good sign. It shows that we are
basically on the right track on Timor-Leste.
Paradoxically, the best ways to ensure that we keep the
meetings on Timor-Leste boring in the months to come
is to ensure that the international community remains
engaged in this process.

