Mr. Sparber (Liechtenstein): We welcome this
timely debate on mediation and the settlement of
disputes. Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations
defines mediation as a central function of the United
Nations in the maintenance of peace and security.

In 2009, the Security Council recognized the
importance of mediation, to be launched at the earliest
possible phases of conflicts, reflecting a widespread
understanding of the core functions of the United
Nations. We are grateful that the Secretary-General
has chosen to prioritize conflict prevention, including
through his High-level Advisory Board on Mediation.
We thank Archbishop Welby, one of its members,
for joining us today. We also extend our support for
the activities of the Mediation Support Unit of the
Department for Political Affairs, as well as the Standby
Team of Mediation Experts.

I wish to focus my comments today on the need to
build sustainable peace through inclusion, preventing
impunity for grave abuses of international law and
addressing the proliferation of intra-State conflicts
over issues of self-governance.

Successful mediation is not only about preventing
or ending conflict, but about building the foundations
for a sustainable and durable peace. Peace requires the
inclusion of participants and perspectives beyond the
parties to armed conflicts themselves. In particular, both
participation and outcomes in mediation processes must
be gender-sensitive. Women must have a meaningful
role in negotiations, and there must be adequate gender
expertise around the table. A 2015 study of 156 peace
agreements showed that when women are included
in peace processes there is a 20 per cent increase in
the probability of an agreement lasting at least two
years, and a 35 per cent increase in the probability
of an agreement lasting at least 15 years. In addition,
in ensuring the participation of often-marginalized
groups such as youth, refugees and indigenous peoples,
the designers and facilitators of mediation processes
can give an agreement the best opportunity to build a
broad constituency for peace and prevent a situation in
which only the powerful are its beneficiaries.

Sustainable peace cannot allow for de facto or
de jure impunity for the most serious crimes under
international law. Making sure that those responsible
for atrocity crimes face justice removes the most
likely spoilers of a peace agreement from post-conflict
society. The promise ofjustice will also deter them and
others from committing similar crimes in the future.
On the other hand, when mediation processes do not
address serious crimes and ignore victims' calls for
justice, they deny those victims the opportunity to heal
and to collectively rebuild the fabric of society. When
agreements do not seek out and remove the root causes
of atrocities, there can be no deterrence for such crimes.
Instead, they allow the seeds of conflict to grow again.
Therefore, we support the position of the United Nations
that the peace agreements it endorses can never promise
amnesties for genocide, war crimes, crimes against
humanity or gross violations of human rights.Mediation
efforts must give the necessary space to accountability
work in situations where the most serious crimes under
international law have been committed.

In order to continue to facilitate the mediation of
sustainable peace settlements, we must examine the
changing nature of conflict itself. We have witnessed
a significant growth in intra-State conflicts, in
particular the proliferation of those that originate
in claims by communities within a State to a greater
measure of governance over their own affairs. We
believe that finding peaceful means to address such
self-governance situations should be a focus area of
the conflict prevention and resolution architecture of
the Organization. United Nations field missions may
be able to effectively support early local mediation
in those situations by offering to facilitate a good-
faith dialogue on self-governance between the State
and affected communities where both parties have
consented. Overall, we believe that sustainable peace
is most achievable when all communities have a
stake in how they are governed and can contribute to
arrangements that consider different identities within
the State. We will continue to work on this issue in
partnership with the Liechtenstein Institute on Self-
Determination in Princeton.

