Mrs. Mladineo (Croatia): Let me begin by
welcoming the presence among us of the Presidents of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), Judges Pocar and Byron,
as well as the Tribunals' respective prosecutors,
Ms. Del Ponte and Mr. Jallow. We have listened
attentively to their presentations and took note of their
reports to the Council, which record a continuous
commitment on the part of each Tribunal to implement
its Completion Strategy.

Before making further remarks on the work of the
ICTY in particular, I would like to express our
profound appreciation to the outgoing Prosecutor of the
ICTY, Ms. Carla del Ponte, who has carried out her
mandate over the past four years with courage and
persistence. We also welcome the appointment of
Mr. Serge Brammertz as the new Prosecutor and wish
him every success in this work.

As the Tribunal is getting closer to the
completion of its mandate, we are glad to note that
efforts have been undertaken to design residual
mechanisms that will ensure the continuation of the
Tribunal's essential functions after the completion of
all trials and appeals. We support this timely initiative.
In many ways, it will be crucial for the long-term
legacy of the Tribunal.

We believe it is important to have that legacy
anchored in the countries of the region where it matters
most. One of the issues deserving attention is certainly
that of the Tribunal's archives. It has been rightly noted
that the significance of the archives extends beyond
judicial processes and raises broader questions
regarding their legacy. Their physical location and
management needs to be properly addressed. Every
initiative on their future location should be assessed
only by taking into account the interests of all the
stakeholders in the region.

Another issue I would like to highlight in this
context is the serving of sentences. We see the
circumstances as having changed substantially since
the inception of the Tribunal, thereby justifying the
serving of sentences in the region. We would urge
Council members to take this aspect into account when
deliberating on the future arrangements.

Perhaps most important for the long-term legacy
of the Tribunal is to ensure that it has been embraced
by the countries that have been subject to its
jurisdiction. Active involvement of national judiciaries
in war crimes trials can be an effective means to that
end. We would therefore urge the Tribunal and the
Council to give greater attention to the role that
national legal systems in the region can play in
carrying out the residual functions of the Tribunal.

The Croatian judiciary has shown its maturity in
fairly and freely trying even the most sensitive cases.
As a result, the ICTY demonstrated its trust by
transferring one of its cases to the Croatian court.
Within the framework of the Tribunal's exit strategy,
Croatia stands ready to take over all the remaining
cases involving Croatian citizens.

However, one cannot truly speak of the
completion of the mandate while those most
responsible are still at large. Radovan Karadiie, Ratko
Mladic and Goran Hadzic' have to face charges before
the ICTY. Without their trials the Tribunal's mandate
remains unfulfilled and its legacy incomplete. They
should not be allowed to outlive the Tribunal.

We continue to believe that justice is an essential
prerequisite for lasting peace. As one of the strongest
proponents of the establishment of the ICTY, we can
note with satisfaction that in many cases the Tribunal
has been a vehicle for justice, asserting the values of
humanity. Justice begins with establishing individual
criminal accountability. All crimes are, after all,
individual.
A just punishment is a powerful deterrent. Allow
me to quote here the Croatian Prime Minister Ivo
Sanader who, during his recent participation in the
General Assembly session on the ICTY, said:

"[J]ust punishment offers a measure of respect for
the victims. Just punishment also serves truth
and opens the way for lasting peace, security and
reconciliation". (A/62/PV25, p. 8)

However, the recent judgment delivered by the
Tribunal in the case of the "Vukovar Three", involving
Mile Mrksie and others, has provoked strong reactions
in Croatia and beyond, most acutely among the
victims' families and associations. The Tribunal
sentenced Mile Mrksie and Veselin Sljivancanin, both
senior officers in the Yugoslav People's Army at the
time, to 20 and five years in prison, respectively. They
were found guilty of aiding and abetting torture and of
executing of nearly 200 civilians in the Croatian city of
Vukovar in 1991. The third accused, Miroslav Radic',
was acquitted. The so-called Ovcara site is one of the
biggest war graves in post-war Europe. More than 260
persons are believed to be buried there, including all
the patients taken from the Vukovar hospital, 194 of
whom have been identified. Paradoxically, direct
perpetrators of the crimes committed in Ovcara, who
were tried for war crimes before the Belgrade War
Crimes Court, were given harsher sentences than their
commanders before the ICTY.

We believe it is our common responsibility to
ensure that crimes against humanity do not go
unpunished. We note with concern that no appeal has
been filed regarding Radie's acquittal. It is our hope
that the appellate judgment in the Vukovar case will
render justice that can stand the test of time.

When creating the ICTY and the ICTR, the
Security Council set a milestone in the fight against
impunity and the protection and promotion of
humanitarian law and rule of law in general. Croatia
has been a strong supporter of the objectives and
principles for which these Tribunals stand and will
continue to promote them in its new capacity of an
elected member of the Security Council.

