The President: I should like to inform the
Council that l have received a letter from the
representative of Yugoslavia, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. ln conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sahovie
(Yugoslavia), took a seat at the Council table,

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
photocopies of the report of the Security Council
mission to Kosovo, Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,
which will be issued as a document of the Security
Council under the symbol S/2001/600.

I shall now, in my capacity as head of the
Security Council mission to Kosovo, Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia, make a presentation of the report of the
mission.

It is with great honour that I present to the
Security Council the report of the Council mission on
the implementation of Security Council resolution 1244
(1999). The mission visited Pristina, Mitrovica and
Belgrade from 16 to 18 June. Since the report was
finalized only this morning upon the return of the
mission last night, the English version is currently
available as a working text. Versions in other languages
will be available first thing in the morning tomorrow.

This mission has been significant in a number of
ways. First, all members of the Security Council joined
in the mission. Then, this was also the first mission led
by the Council President. It will be recalled that the
first Council mission to Kosovo, in April 2000, did not
include Belgrade in its itinerary. This mission had good
discussions this time in Belgrade with the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia leadership. The mission also
had an unscheduled but substantive and important
meeting with President Putin of the Russian
Federation.

The Council report is divided into four sections.
The first section lays down the terms of reference of
the mission; the second sets out its composition; and
the third is on its activities and contains a summary of
the meetings. The final section has the findings.

The programme of the mission was tightly
scheduled and very intense. The mission undertook a
series of meetings with the key actors in Kosovo and
interacted with the representatives of various
communities. In Belgrade, the mission had meetings
with President Kostunica of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, Foreign Minister Svilanovic and Interior
Minister Zivkovic. We had an opportunity to hold in-
depth discussions with various people of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) and the Kosovo Force (KFOR), in addition
to those with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Hans Haekkerup, and KFOR
Commander Lieutenant General Skiaker. We believe
that the intensity of the visit and the compactness of
the programme, accompanied by the wealth of inputs
received, yielded very good results in terms of the
objectives of the mission, continuing the trend set up
by the Council in its mission to Kosovo last year.

The situation in Kosovo is complex, as is the
process of implementing resolution l244 (1999). The
task of UNMlK is enormous. With the election in
Kosovo, scheduled for November, approaching fast, its
task has become arduous. The UNMlK and KFOR
leaderships are deeply engaged in addressing the
volatile situation there. We have been encouraged to
see the spirit of the staff of the international civil and
security presence in Kosovo. We have been impressed
by the teamwork and mutual collaboration.

In the section on the activities of the mission, the
report presents the details which I would recommend
for the Council's close attention.

UNMlK has made some considerable
achievements and is also facing many challenges as it
marks its second anniversary. The major challenge for
all is to encourage all communities, particularly the
Kosovo Serb community, to participate in both
registration and elections. An important element is
UNMIK's developing dialogue with the authorities of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and efforts to
facilitate the latter's engagement of the Kosovo Serb
community to be part of the process. The Special
Representative has now met with President Kostunica
four times and several times with Foreign Minister
Svilanovic. One of UNMIK's first priorities was the
establishment of an office in Belgrade, which has now
been accomplished.

The mission, in its interaction with the ethnic
communities, could sense their clear desire for a return
to normalcy, the restitution of law and order, and
economic reconstruction. The mission made use of all
opportunities to send a strong message to the ethnic
communities to reject all violence, to promote stability,
safety and security and to cooperate fully with UNMIK
in the implementation of resolution 1244 (1999). We
are pleased to say that the mission's message was taken
seriously.

The mission has seen the preparations for
Kosovo-wide elections in November, with particular
emphasis on the inclusion of all communities, with the
notable exception of the Kosovo Serbs. The Kosovo
Turkish community, which hardly participated in last
year's municipal elections, is ready to participate this
time.

Some progress has been made in the area of
Kosovo Serb return. At the beginning of this month,
the Interim Administrative Council endorsed a
statement of principle on their return.

In Kosovo the mission met with Russian
President Putin, who was visiting the region. A fruitful
exchange of Views on a wide range of pertinent issues
in the region took place. This included the means for
establishing a multi-ethnic Kosovo; strategies for
combating extremism and terrorism; and conditions for
the return of the Kosovo Serb community and its
participation in the forthcoming Kosovo-wide
elections.

On the last day, the mission, accompanied by the
Special Representative, met in Belgrade with President
Kostunica of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, its
Foreign Minister and the Interior Minister. The
increasing dialogue between UNMIK and the
authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia was
welcomed by the mission. The discussions focused on
issues of mutual concern, including security, the return
of Kosovo Serbs, the constitutional framework and
elections, as well as the need for confidence-building
measures.

The mission underlined that participation in the
political process was a prerequisite to progress in these
areas of mutual concern and called on the authorities of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to assist in
reinforcing the message with the Kosovo Serb
community.

During its Visit the mission made a number of
important observations and findings. The report of the
mission mentions them in detail, and I am going to
mention only a few of them here. This is in accordance
with the terms of reference of the mission.

We found that UNMIK has made considerable
progress in implementing Security Council resolution
1244 (1999) in the two years since its establishment,
although there remains a lot to be done. UNMIK has
now reached a critical stage in the implementation of
its mandate, and continued effectiveness requires a
major effort by UNMIK, KFOR and UNMIK police,
backed up by close attention from the Security Council
and the sustained input of resources from the
international community.

While the mission was left in no doubt that strong
reservations exist, not least in Belgrade, about the
difficulties involved in taking forward elections in
Kosovo on the basis of the constitutional framework, it
also recognizes that the status quo is unacceptable and
that a political process has to be taken forward in
accordance with Security Council resolution 1244
(1999).

The mission underlined that elections will
enhance the democratic process in Kosovo and the
stability of the region and stressed that secure
conditions for the election should be ensured. The
participation of all communities in the elections, the
return of refugees and displaced persons and their
participation in elections should be encouraged.

The current political process is crucial to
combating extremism and encouraging moderates on
all sides. Key to the success of this process is the active
engagement and participation of all communities. The
mission supports UNMIK's efforts for the creation of a
multi-ethnic Kosovo, which remains one of the main
challenges.

The mission welcomes the establishment by the
Special Representative of pillar I, relating to law and
order and justice, and key legislation to combat
organized crime, illegal weapons possession and
terrorism.

The mission recommends that a formal request be
sent to KFOR to regularly provide detailed
information, including that pertaining to the origin,
type and quantity of weapons seized, in order to enable
the Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1160 (1998) to pursue any possible
Violations.

The mission recommends that more intensified
efforts should be put into the issue of the missing of all
communities, as well as detainees. The mission, in
accordance with resolution 1244 (1999), supports
efforts to resolve the complex situation in Mitrovica.

In supporting the efforts currently being
undertaken by UNMIK and KFOR, the mission
underlines the responsibility carried by the Kosovo
leadership for creating conditions conducive to
improving inter-communal relations and promoting
reconciliation. The mission conveyed firm and
balanced messages to all community leaders that the
responsibility lies with them to clearly and openly
reject violence, extremism and terrorism. Promoting a
culture of peace and non-violence is crucial for the
success of these efforts.

In turn, minority communities too must realize
that there is no alternative to establishing a multi-
ethnic society. The mission acknowledges that the
minority communities have legitimate grievances and
urges UNMIK and KFOR to address these, but believes
that the only viable future for all communities lies in
participation. The Kosovo Serb community, in
particular, must integrate into the structure being set up
by UNMIK, rather than attempt to set up parallel
structures.

These are basically the findings of the mission,
and it is the intention of the Council to hold a public
meeting with the participation of the Council and non-
Council members on Friday, 22 June. We believe there
will be wider participation of the membership of the
United Nations in that public debate. We would also
like to mention that the Council has authorized me, as
the President of the Council, to transmit this report to
Mr. Hans Haekkerup, the Secretary-General's Special
Representative for Kosovo, and to request him, while
transmitting the report, to bring this report to the
attention of all those with whom the Council mission
had an opportunity to meet, and also to share this with
the authorities in Belgrade. We believe that such wide
dissemination of the report, the message contained in
the report and the findings of the mission will be
helpful in promoting greater understanding of the role
of the Security Council with regard to the
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999).

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Council will remain seized of the matter.

The next meeting of the Security Council to
consider the report, as I mentioned, will take place on
Friday, 22 June, at 10 a.m.

The meeting rose at 4.30pm.

