Mr. A] Hussein: I welcome this invitation of the
Security Council to provide a briefing on the human
rights situation in the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea, where gross violations continue, the
institutional nature and severity of which pose a threat
to international peace and security. The abduction
of foreign nationals, the enforced disappearances,
the trafficking and continued movement of refugees
and asylum-seekers make this point clearly. These,
in addition to a litany of other gross human rights
violations, have still not been halted or reversed by the
Government of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea. Victims are still unable to find judicial redress,
and there is still no accountability grounded in the work
of an independent judiciary.

It is appropriate that today's discussion falls on
Human Rights Day, which this year focuses on "our
rights, our freedoms, always". Millions of people in
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea continue
to be denied their basic rights and freedoms. They are
not allowed to move freely within and outside their
country or to speak out about injustices. They are not
allowed to follow their faith. They are denied access to
information not sanctioned by the regime and the right
to form organizations that can, in any way, be seen to
be critical of the Government.

The independent international commission of
inquiry established by the Human Rights Council
described in graphic detail the appalling nature of
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea's political
prison-camp system, where people, including children,
have been deliberately starved, made to carry out forced
labour, subjected to extrajudicial killings and summary
executions, tortured and raped. The commission of
inquiry stated that hundreds of thousands of people
have died in these camps over several decades and that
they are still believed to contain between 80,000 and
120,000 prisoners.

Over the past year, my Office began implementing
the recommendations of the commission of inquiry,
which concluded that "the gravity, scale and nature of
[the human rights] violations reveal a State that does
not have any parallel in the contemporary world"
(A/HRC/25/63, para.80) and stated unequivocally
that a wide range of crimes against humanity had
been committed. Their recommendations included
the establishment of a presence by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR); I inaugurated that Office in Seoul in June,
and it is now fully operational, in accordance with its
mandate. The Office has begun collecting testimonies
from individuals who have left the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, documenting developments in the
human rights situation and deepening the evidentiary
basis for the accountability that surely is owed to the
victims and deserved by the alleged perpetrators.
During my visit, I met with a number of defectors,
men and women, and their personal experiences were
indeed extraordinarily harrowing. I must also mention
my concern over the threats issued by the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea authorities and media
against the OHCHR Office in Seoul when it was first
established. I reiterate that it is wholly unacceptable
for a Member State to issue threats like that against a
United Nations office and its staff, and I hope it will
not reoccur.

Three types of allegations have emerged from
OHCHR's recent monitoring and documentation efforts.

First, victims and witnesses have spoken of the
severe treatment of detainees in political prison camps
and in other detention locations, especially at the early
stages of criminal proceedings. Detainees have no
access to independent lawyers and, we have been told,
endure inhuman detention conditions, as well as torture
during interrogation, adding weight to the findings of
the commission of inquiry.

Secondly, food insecurity is an ongoing concern.
While food availability may have improved relative to
past periods of massive starvation, the systemic failure
of the public distribution system has not been addressed.
Given the social inequalities within the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, the vulnerability of those
lacking adequate cash income remains worrisome.

Thirdly, as in many other countries, women in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea are subject
to gender-based violence and discrimination. Their
suffering appears to be exacerbated by a lack of
awareness that such violence is unacceptable and by
the absence of appropriate support mechanisms. Recent
restrictions on movement across the border with China,
often used by women engaging in private trade, are also
said to have had a strong negative impact on women,
restricting their ability to provide for their families,
increasing vulnerability to trafficking for those seeking
to leave, and augmenting the risk of detention and ill-
treatment for those who try to cross the border or are
repatriated.

The family reunions that took place in October were
a welcome development, and such reunions should be
regularized. Today, on the occasion of Human Rights
Day, my Office in Seoul is organizing a workshop on the
human rights implications of the separation of Korean
families, which affects more than 130,000 individuals.
Most have reached an advanced age and are longing to
be reunited with their loved ones. The very few who
were selected for previous reunions have to live with
the psychological impact of a one-off meeting, with
no possibility of maintaining contact. I hope that the
commitment and collaboration shown by both sides
through the most recent reunions will continue.

The matter of international abductions remains a
cause for very grave concern. While the establishment
of a special investigation committee in the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea on this issue, following
bilateral talks between Japan and the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea in May 2014, was a positive
development, no information has been provided
since then on the results emanating from its work.
Equally, the fate of hundreds of victims of abduction
from the Republic of Korea must be established.
On 21 September, OHCHR organized consultations
on the situation of human rights in the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, including on the issue of
international abductions, enforced disappearances and
related matters. This was followed up by a visit to Japan
by my Seoul team.

Once again this year, the General Assembly
may well call on the Security Council to take action
by referring the situation in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea to the International Criminal
Court, which I believe to be essential, given the scale
and extreme gravity of the allegations. Any call for
accountability must, however, go hand in hand with an
open dialogue with the Government of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, encouraging it towards
reform and urging it to accept assistance. My Office
has continued to engage with the authorities on possible
technical cooperation, with the goal of assisting them
to address the prevailing human rights challenges and,
ultimately, to trigger positive change in the lives of all
people in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.

There are signs that the Government is making some
tentative efforts to engage in the international arena.
In this context, I very much welcome the invitation
extended to me by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to visit the
country. My Office is now engaged with the authorities
to explore modalities for a possible future visit.

The continuing violations and systemic failings
simply heighten international anxieties over the
possibility of a precipitous turn, an event of great
centrifugal consequence that could rapidly engulf
the region. As we have stated time and again, if the
international community is serious about reducing
tensions in the region, more must be done collectively
to ensure respect for human rights in the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea. Addressing the chronic
human rights situations in that country is urgent and
long overdue.
