Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): The
Central and Eastern European countries associated with
the European Union - Bulgaria, the Czech Republic,
Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania,
Slovakia, Slovenia - and the associated countries,
Cyprus, Malta, Turkey and Liechtenstein, align
themselves with this statement.

The European Union (EU) expresses its
appreciation to the Security Council for convening this
open debate, which offers a good opportunity to
discuss the question of how the international
community can work together in a coordinated way in
the area of conflict prevention and resolution in Africa.
The European Union welcomes the establishment of
the Security Council ad hoc Working Group on conflict
prevention and resolution in Africa, presided over by
Ambassador Koonjul, Permanent Representative of
Mauritius.

The European Union attaches great importance to
partnership and enhanced cooperation between the
main bodies of the United Nations, on the one hand,
and between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations, on the other hand. The
Union welcomes the participation and statements made
today in the debate by the Permanent Observer of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) in New York,
Ambassador Kebe, and the President of the Economic
and Social Council, Ambassador Simonovic'.

It is encouraging to see that the consultations
between the United Nations and the African Union are
now a routine matter and that coordination between
these two organizations on conflict prevention and
resolution is beginning to take shape. The Union
welcomes the recent report of the Secretary-General on
the establishment of an ad hoc group of the Economic
and Social Council on African countries emerging from
conflict, since we believe the Economic and Social
Council could play an important role in those countries
through its coordinating role and responsibility in
peace-building and economic and social reconstruction.
The Union considers that the establishment of two ad
hoc groups on Africa in the Economic and Social
Council and in the Security Council will provide an
opportunity to enhance the coordination between those
two bodies in order to address the challenges of peace-
building and to mobilize support for the needs of the
African countries emerging from conflict.

Regional and subregional cooperation is also a
matter of priority for the Union. We attach great
importance to our dialogue with subregional
organizations, notably the Southern African
Development Community (SADC), the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD).
These are important building blocks for African
integration and can contribute to securing peace and
prosperity in the continent.

On the matter of electoral observation, the
European Union is committed to long-term electoral
observation in Africa in the framework of the Cotonou
Agreement, which recognizes the rule of law and
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms
among its essential elements.

We support the New Partnership for Africa's
Development (NEPAD) in its objective of creating the
conditions for development in Africa. This African-
owned and African-led initiative clearly demonstrates
that Africa and the EU share the same goals:
sustainable economic growth and development, poverty
eradication, good governance, democracy, the rule of
law, respect for human rights, investment in human
resources, the fight against corruption and conflict
prevention and resolution. We look forward to the G-8
summit to be held in June in Canada and to the African
summit to be held in Durban in early July.

The Union is ready to work towards a unified
framework of action by the United Nations system and
the international community, based on a rationalization
of existing initiatives. In that regard, the final review
and appraisal of the United Nations New Agenda for
the Development of Africa in the 1990s, scheduled for
September 2002, will provide an opportunity to assess
the role that the United Nations and the international
community have played in supporting Africa's
priorities, including a comprehensive review of
initiatives on Africa. We note that preparations are
under way for a new ad hoc working group to be
chaired by the President ofthe General Assembly.

I have the honour now to yield the floor to
Mr. Hans Dahlgren, the Special Representative of the
EU Presidency for the Mano River Union countries.

