The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council reaffirms its
commitments to a comprehensive and lasting
settlement of the situation in Somalia, consistent
with the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, bearing in mind respect for the
sovereignty, territorial integrity, political
independence and unity of Somalia. It reiterates
that full responsibility for achieving national
reconciliation and peace rests with the Somali
people themselves.

"The Security Council expresses its full
support for the efforts exerted by the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) to find a political solution to the crisis in
Somalia. It welcomes and fully supports the
initiative of the President of Djibouti aimed at
restoring peace and stability in Somalia and urges
States and international organizations, in a
position to do so, to give these efforts political
support and to provide financial and technical
assistance to the Government of Djibouti to this
end.

"The Security Council expresses its deep
concern at the ongoing abuse of human rights and
grave deterioration of the humanitarian situation
in Somalia, which has led to death, displacement
and the outbreak of diseases among the civilian
population, particularly children and other
vulnerable groups. It expresses appreciation to
the efforts of all United Nations agencies, other
organizations and individuals carrying out
humanitarian activities in Somalia. The Council
strongly condemns attacks by armed groups on
innocent civilians and all humanitarian personnel.
It strongly urges the Somali factions to respect
international humanitarian and human rights law,
to ensure the safety and freedom of movement of
all humanitarian personnel and to facilitate the
delivery of humanitarian relief to all those in
need.

"The Security Council underlines the
importance of the widest participation of the
representatives of all parts of Somali society in an
effort to rehabilitate Somalia. The Council
strongly urges representatives of all social and
political forces of Somali society to participate
actively and in a constructive spirit in the work of
the Somali National Peace and Reconciliation
Conference in Djibouti. In this regard, it urges the
warlords and faction leaders to desist from
obstructing and undermining efforts to achieve
peace. The Council expresses its readiness to
consider taking appropriate steps regarding the
warlords and faction leaders who engage in such
activities. It also urges all States to stop providing
these individuals with the means to carry on their
destructive activities.

"The Security Council reminds all States of
their obligation to comply with the measures
imposed by resolution 733 (1992) and urges them
to take all necessary steps to ensure full
implementation and enforcement of the arms
embargo. The Security Council further urges all
States, the United Nations and other international
organizations and entities to report to the
Committee established by resolution 751 (1992)
information on possible violations of the arms
embargo.

"The Security Council remains seized of the
matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2000/22.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose 6111.30 p.m.
