Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful to the presidency of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands for the timely convening of this meeting
on this special occasion as we celebrate World Water
Day, a vital element for the well-being of human
beings and the promotion of their economic and social
development. We are also grateful to Ms. Amina
Mohammed, Mr. Mohammed Bila and Ms. Chitra
Nagarajan for their briefings.

Peru continues to be particularly concerned about
the crisis in the Lake Chad basin, which affects more
than 17 million people in Nigeria, Cameroon, Chad
and the Niger. Approximately 11 million people are in
urgent need of humanitarian assistance. We must also
condemn and confront the terrorist violence of Boko
Haram and Da'esh, and prevent the occurrence of major
conflicts by addressing their root causes. That requires
the timely promotion of socioeconomic development
and the mitigation of the effects of climate change and
environmental change. These effects involve water
scarcity, which in turn has created chronic drought,
desertification, land degradation, extreme poverty and
food insecurity in the Lake Chad region. The situation
highlights the interrelationship between security,
development and human rights.

Building sustainable peace requires a coherent
and comprehensive response, with a broad,
multidimensional and multi-stakeholder approach. The
United Nations system has the capacity to contribute to
more effective responses through its relevant agencies,
funds and programmes. The Security Council, the
main body responsible for maintaining international
peace and security, can and should benefit from a
better understanding of the factors behind the crisis
and conflict and the tools needed to address them. That
should be done through timely situation analysis and
development, risk assessments and risk-management
strategies, as well as early-warning analysis and
coordinated early-response mechanisms and the
creation of integrated strategies aimed at preventing
a recurrence of conflict. We welcome the efforts
in that regard of the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS), the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) and
regional and subregional organizations, such as the
Lake Chad Basin Commission, the African Union and
the Economic Community of West African States.
We encourage them to increase their support to the
Governments of the States of the Lake Chad region
around a holistic regional strategy designed to address
the conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism and
violent extremism.
That strategy should go beyond an urgent short-term
military response and focus on long-term sustainable
development focused on ensuring human dignity.
That includes eradicating poverty and vulnerability to
the negative effects of climate change. It also means
creatingjobs, especially for young people, and access to
education, and strengthening Government institutions.
In that context, we welcome the 2018 Humanitarian
Response Plan for north-eastern Nigeria.

In conclusion, we would like to point out the
importance of ensuring that UNOWAS and UNOCA
reports include special sections on the problems in Lake
Chad and on their joint work. We would also like to
stress the importance of adopting a gender perspective
in investigations and data collection, with a view to
proposing specific policies and programmes aimed at
sustaining peace in the Lake Chad region.

