Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish at the outset, Mr. President, to thank you and your
delegation for the initiative of convening this meeting
to discuss the progress made in the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1308 (2000). I also wish to
thank Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, and Mr. Peter
Piot, Executive Director of the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), for their
presentations.

We wish to recall that yesterday marked five
years since the adoption of resolution 1308 (2000), by
which the Security Council sought to provide
recommendations and ways to deal with HIV/AIDS in
relation to uniformed personnel belonging to
peacekeeping operations.

Argentina has always believed that collaboration
and cooperation among the system's various actors
responsible for this issue, together with assistance from
Governments and non-governmental organizations, are
indispensable in responding comprehensively to this
pandemic. We also believe that in the fight against
HIV/AIDS, it is essential to enhance mechanisms for
prevention and awareness without neglecting to treat
those affected. We recall that those principles are part
of resolution 1308 (2000) and of the draft presidential
statement to be adopted at the end of this meeting.

We believe it is essential that best practices and
lessons learned be properly disseminated and that
United Nations Member States implement them in their
preparation programmes for the men and women who
will be sent to participate in peacekeeping operations.
For our part, we wish to indicate that the Argentine
Joint Training Centre for Peacekeeping Operations has
incorporated those recommendations into its training
courses for Argentine and other Latin American Blue
Helmets.

We know that Blue Helmets must carry out their
tasks in a fragile, dangerous and extremely demanding
environment. HIV/AIDS is often one of the risks that
they must face. That is why training, knowledge and
solidarity are needed: the personnel of a peacekeeping
operation must have all of them. In that context, we
pay tribute to all the men and women who have
sacrificed their welfare, their health or their lives to
attain the objectives of peace and understanding among
peoples.

With regard to the ongoing process of
implementing measures to fight exploitation and sexual
abuse in the field, we want to affirm that that challenge
and the fight against HIV/AIDS must be addressed
together and that we must not run the risk of giving
priority to one at the expense of the other. In that
respect, we believe that the coordination of those two
strategies must be as efficient as possible.

In conclusion, we wish to thank the Government
of Greece for its draft presidential statement, which our
delegation supports.

