Mr. Dah (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his
quarterly report on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question. My delegation also
wishes to welcome the new Permanent Representative
of the United Kingdom, and assures her of its support.

Cote d'Ivoire reiterates its concern about the
lack of significant progress in the peace process in
the Middle East. It reaffirms its principled position
that only credible political dialogue and negotiations
between the parties will lead to the viable solution of
two States living side by side in peace and security,
based on the mutual recognition of the legitimate rights
of both parties. It therefore calls for a resumption of
talks between Israelis and Palestinians, in keeping with
the relevant Council resolutions with a View to breaking
the current political impasse.

The socioeconomic, political and humanitarian
situation in the Gaza Strip also remains worrisome and
critical. On the economic front, my delegation remains
concerned about persistent youth unemployment in the
context of an acute economic crisis aggravated by the
lack of water, electricity and medicine.

On the political and humanitarian front, the
resurgent tensions between the Palestinian Authority and
Hamas hamper the return of the Palestinian Authority
to the Gaza Strip and undermine national reconciliation
efforts between the two entities. In that connection, my
delegation condemns the 13 March attack on the convoy
of Prime Minister Rami Hamdallah in the Gaza Strip.
We urge the Palestinian parties to show restraint and to
conduct all necessary investigations to apprehend the
perpetrators of the attack. We encourage the parties to
pursue dialogue to ensure the effective return of the
Palestinian Authority to Gaza, in accordance with the
reconciliation agreement signed in October, in order to
better manage the humanitarian situation.

In the context of ever-decreasing contributions
to the budget of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), my delegation welcomes the significant
financial contribution of $100 million made during
the Extraordinary Ministerial Conference in support
of UNRWA on 15 March in Rome. It thanks Member
States for the show of active solidarity with the
Palestinian people and refugees at a time when UNRWA
is experiencing the most serious financial crisis in its
history. It encourages the international community,
including relevant humanitarian agencies, civil society
and the private sector to contribute in order to bridge
the lack of financing.

In conclusion, my delegation unreservedly
commits to the goal of lasting comprehensive peace
in the Middle East and reiterates in readiness to work
alongside Council members to bring about a peaceful
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian crisis.

