Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): Allow me
to thank the presidency of the Council for this timely
meeting and also to thank John Holmes for his
introduction to our debate.
This debate is taking place in a very particular
context. The Secretary-General and Mr. Holmes have
just returned from Burma. Clearly, the situation of the
civilian population victims of cyclone Nargis cannot be
confused with the situation of the civilian population
victims of an armed conflict. But can we talk about the
protection of civilians without talking about the
tragedy that we have been watching for weeks now for
hundreds of thousands of persons in Burma? Can we
talk about access to humanitarian assistance without
addressing the obstacles that have unacceptably been
encountered in access to Burmese civilians? In the face
of such a heavy reality, can the Council retreat into an
academic distinction between two types of population:
the victims of armed conflict and the victims of a
natural disaster? We do not believe that, all the less
because the victims of cyclone Nargis are not just the
victims of a natural phenomenon.

As our Minister for Foreign Affairs said on
19 May, "The Burmese people are the victims of a
two-fold scourge - a natural disaster on an
exceptional scale on the one hand and the stubborn
obstruction of proposals for emergency assistance on
the other. In French national law, that is called

"7

'non-assistance to persons in danger .

We do not know today whether the assurance
given by the Burmese authorities to the Secretary-
General, and then at the donors conference that was
held in Rangoon on Sunday, will be translated into
action. We do not know whether all the international
assistance that has been proposed will actually be
accepted. We do not know whether the humanitarian
agencies will truly have access to the distressed
population.

What we do know, however - and I am referring
to what Mr. Holmes said on behalf of the United
Nations and the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) on Sunday -that only 41 per cent of
the population affected by the cyclone has received any
assistance, that is, 1 million out of 2.4 million people.
What we know is that out of this 1 million people who
have begun to receive some assistance, a vast majority
are in the Rangoon area; only a minority of victims
living in the delta has received help. What we know is
that the population in the delta was deprived of the
1,500 tons of food supplies and other relief - the
equivalent of 30 cargo planes - that the French ship
Mistral could have provided starting 15 May.
Finally, what we know - and I am referring
again to Mr. Holmes's remarks in Rangoon - is that
there is a possibility of a second wave of deaths that
will be the result of epidemics and malnutrition.

Do we have to accept this? Should we do nothing
and condemn the population of Burma? If the
commitment to openness and cooperation undertaken
by the Burmese authorities several days ago are not
followed by actions, should our Council continue to
hide behind a restrictive interpretation of its
competencies? Some were surprised to hear Bernard
Kouchner talk about the responsibility to protect. But,
as we have had the opportunity to emphasize, there is
always a risk of slipping from not helping people in
danger to crimes against humanity. Must we really wait
until we have crossed that threshold before the Council
agrees to consider a situation? I will say this clearly:
that is not the concept of the United Nations or of the
Security Council that France champions.

That is all the more the case, in view of the fact
that the concept of non-assistance to persons in danger
is not foreign to the international community, least of
all to the United Nations. On 8 December 1988,
20 years ago, the General Assembly adopted its
resolution 43/131, which sets out, if not legal, then at
least political obligations. By virtue of the principle of
subsidiarity, it is the territorially competent State that
bears the primary role in organizing, carrying out and
distributing assistance. If, and only if, that State is not
in a position to cope with the situation, because of a
lack of means or political will, the international
community takes over and replaces the State that is
failing to assist the endangered population.

Resolution 45/100, adopted by the General
Assembly on 14 December 1990, confirmed the
principle of free access to victims of natural
catastrophes and other similar emergency situations.

For all those reasons, if the situation does not
rapidly change in Burma to the benefit of the
population affected by the cyclone, France will not sit
idly by in the Council. The Security Council can decide
to intervene to force the delivery of humanitarian
assistance, as it did in the recent past by opening
humanitarian corridors in Kurdistan, Bosnia and
Somalia. Was the outrage at those massacres greater
than that provoked by those drowned or starving in
Burmese countryside?
I have spoken at length about what seems
indispensable to us. I shall be more concise on the
remainder of the themes related to our debate.

In the view of France, it is indispensable to
promote the protection of civilians throughout United

08-3528]

Nations activities, in particular in the context of
peacekeeping missions. As the Secretary-General
recommended, we think it is useful that States
members of the Council take the initiative to meet at
the expert level to consider ways and means of more
systematically tackling the protection of civilians when
peacekeeping operations are set up or when their
mandates are renewed. France, together with others, is
ready to initiate such meetings. The troop-contributing
countries should naturally be associated with these
endeavours in some way or another.

In addition, we commend the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs for the
information it has provided on obstacles to
humanitarian assistance to populations in need.

We also hope that all Council resolutions on the
protection of civilians are given systematic follow-up.
We are thinking, of course, of resolution 1674 (2006).
In that regard, we look forward to the adoption of a
presidential statement at the end of today's debate,
calling upon the Secretary-General to inform us, in the
context of his next report, on the implementation of
protection mandates by United Nations missions.
Another aspect of resolution 1674 (2006) is of great
importance for us: combating impunity. The
International Criminal Court has a key part to play. The
obligation to cooperate arising from the Rome Statute
and from Security Council resolutions must be
respected.

We are also thinking of resolution 1325 (2000) on
women and peace and security. As already stated here,
sexual violence is systematically being used as a
weapon of war. These are abominable crimes affecting
millions of people. Such crimes must be prevented and
punished. I welcome in this regard the arrest this
weekend of Mr. Bemba, who had been sought by the
International Criminal Court for many crimes,
especially for sexual violence. I would also like to
repeat our preoccupation with reports of abuses
involving peacekeeping personnel. The soldiers of
peace must have exemplary conduct; the United
Nations must see to that.

We are also thinking about resolution 1502
(2003) on the protection of humanitarian personnel and
about 1738 (2006) on the protection of journalists.

I also reiterate my commitment as Chairman of
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict in
favour of very effective implementation of resolution
1612 (2005).

I wish to conclude my statement by sharing with
members the decision just taken by France in order to
contribute to the momentum that has begun even
before we see the final text of the treaty now being
negotiated, to immediately withdraw the M26 rocket
from operational service. This is an important gesture
that attests to the responsible attitude of our armed
forces. That weapon actually accounts for 90 per cent
of our cluster munitions stockpiles.

In doing this, France, which has not used cluster
munitions in 17 years, shows that it is possible to
reconcile humanitarian demands with the requirements
of defence. Following the Oslo Conference on Cluster
Munitions in February 2007, France was among the
first States to be mobilized by a clear objective: to
prevent the humanitarian tragedy caused by cluster
munitions.

