Ms. Lintonen (Finland): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union. The following
countries - Albania, Bulgaria, Croatia, Iceland,
Liechtenstein, Moldova, Montenegro, Romania, Serbia,
The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey
and Ukraine - align themselves with this statement.

The European Union is deeply concerned by the
escalating violence in Gaza and the West Bank. In
particular, we are shocked by the large number of
civilian deaths and injuries caused by the shelling of
Beit Hanoun by the Israel Defense Forces on
Wednesday. We deeply regret the growing number of
civilian casualties, many of them children, as well as
the destruction of houses and other civilian
infrastructure.

While recognizing Israel's legitimate right to self-
defence, we urge Israel to exercise the utmost restraint
and underline that action should not be
disproportionate or in contradiction to international
humanitarian law. We call on Israel to end its incursion

into Gaza. It is imperative that the humanitarian
conditions of the Palestinian people be urgently
alleviated.

The European Union also calls on the Palestinian
leadership to bring an end to the firing of rockets on
Israeli territory. The deterioration of the situation will
only aggravate the already grave circumstances in the
region, where a return to a comprehensive peace
process with a clear political perspective is urgently
needed.

The time has come for all parties to fulfil their
responsibilities. The present stalemate must be urgently
brought to an end, and a process of dialogue must be
opened.

To achieve that, an immediate cessation of
violence is imperative. The process of reconciliation
among Palestinians must be given a chance. We urge
the Palestinians to continue their efforts to form a
Government of national unity with a platform
reflecting the Quartet principles and allowing for early
engagement.

The European Union reiterates its intention to
actively contribute to the work within the Quartet to
get the Middle East peace process urgently back on
track in order to make progress towards a
comprehensive settlement on the basis of the Road
Map, the relevant Security Council resolutions and the
commitments made at Sharm el-Sheikh in 2005. The
international community must provide its full support
to the parties in that respect.

This terrible violence clearly underlines once
again that there can be no military or unilateral
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The only
way forward for Israel and the Palestinians is the
negotiation of a viable two-State solution. All parties
have a clear duty to act now to revive a credible peace
process and to avoid further tragedies such as those
witnessed in Beit Hanoun.

