The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the
signing of the Framework Agreement in the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia by
President Trajkovski and the leaders of four
political parties on 13 August 2001. The Council
calls for the full and immediate implementation
of the Agreement, which promotes the peaceful
and harmonious development of civil society
while respecting the ethnic identity and the
interests of all Macedonian citizens.

"The Council calls for the full
implementation of its resolution 1345 (2001) and
reaffirms the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.

"The Council calls again on all those
concerned, including on leaders of ethnic
Albanian communities in the region, publicly to
condemn violence and ethnic intolerance and to
use their influence to secure peace. It reiterates its
call to all who have contact with extremist groups
to make clear to them that they have no support
from any quarter in the international community.
The Council condemns the ongoing Violence by
extremists and calls on all parties to respect the
ceasefire. The Council rejects any attempt to use
violence, including the use of landmines, to
undermine the Framework Agreement, which has
been negotiated by the democratically elected
political leadership of the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia.

"The Security Council supports the actions
of the President and Government of the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia aimed at
resolving the crisis and assuring a stable and
democratic future for all of the citizens of the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
including through continued dialogue with the
full representation of all legitimate political
parties to strengthen democracy and preserve the
multi-ethnic character of Macedonian society and
the stability of the country.

"The Security Council welcomes the efforts
of the European Union, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization in support of
the Framework Agreement. It also calls on the
international community to consider how best to
assist the Government of the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia in facilitating its full
implementation.

"The Security Council will continue to
follow closely developments on the ground."

This statement will be issued as a document of

the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/200 1/20.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 6pm.
