Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, we wish to thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman for his
briefing on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question.

Although the intervals between meetings where we
take up this issue are short, the situation in the Middle
East is dynamic enough to provide new developments
each time. Thus, in recent months there have been some
significant developments that are worthy of comment. I
will therefore focus on two topics today - the situation
in the Syrian Arab Republic and the Middle East peace
process.

Regarding the situation in Syria, the Council's work
has been focused on finding a political solution to the
conflict that has wracked the country, but despite the
many efforts undertaken, we have seen only an increase
in the use of violence, both by the Government and by
the armed opposition, all of which has resulted in the
deaths of thousands ofinnocent civilians, the suffering
of millions of people, and a humanitarian crisis of the
most serious dimensions. Worse still, the trend shows
no signs of improving, as both parties are governed by
the logic of military victory over the other, but with
very little prospect of achieving that goal. That is why
Guatemala continues to strongly believe that the only
solution to the conflict in Syria is for both parties
to agree to lay down their weapons and negotiate a
political solution.

We do not believe that the militarization of the
conflict will solve the underlying problems that gave
rise to demonstrations in Syria two years ago. Rather,
the continuation of the armed struggle will serve only
to increase sectarian violence in the country, with the
additional risk of spreading it to neighbouring countries.
We are also deeply concerned about the emergence of
groups within the armed opposition that do not conceal
their association with terrorist organizations. We
believe that those organizations should not be allowed
to take advantage of the existing instability.

We acknowledge the efforts made and the work
done to place the various opposition groups in Syria
under the same banner, which has so far resulted in
the creation of the so-called Syrian National Coalition.
However, we remain concerned that the label of
"legitimate representative of the Syrian people" is
being assigned to the Coalition. Guatemala believes
that any transition in Syria should be the product
of a Syrian-led process that respects the rights of all
parties, and that it is premature to legitimize a group
that, like the Government, may not enjoy the broad
support of the Syrian population, much less has not
been elected democratically. We hope that the function
of that group is focused on facilitating interlocutors to
advance peaceful negotiations between the parties. On
that point, it should be clear that the perpetrators of
all crimes committed in Syria, whoever they may be,
should be held accountable for their actions. Atrocities
of the magnitude of those that have occurred in Syria
must not go unpunished.

In addition, Guatemala recognizes the urgent need
for the implementation of the humanitarian response
plan in Syria. It is unacceptable for the suffering of the
Syrian people to continue. In that regard, although we
have welcomed the pledges that have been made in the
various meetings of donor countries, we believe that it
is important that they be made effective. In the same
context, it is also indispensable to help all countries
that provide humanitarian aid and receive Syrian
refugees. The impact that the conflict has had within
their borders is quickly consuming those resources,
thereby also putting them at risk.

Turning now to the Middle East peace process,
including the Palestinian question, we hope that in
the short term both Israel and Palestine can commit
themselves to the peace process and work to advance
a solution that will lead to a long and lasting peace.
In that regard, on 8 April my Government took
the decision to recognize Palestine as a State. That
decision, based on the principle of the right to self-
determination, was made while taking into account the
importance of relaunching direct negotiations between
Israel and Palestine with the support of the international
community and leading to the adoption of a definitive
agreement that would allow both parties to live in
peace within clearly defined, secure and internationally
recognized borders, and that would ensure peaceful
coexistence between the two peoples. We hope that
the Quartet will resume playing a proactive role in that
regard.

Above all, we hope that the parties directly involved
will assume the responsibility of working to find viable
solutions in the short term. The year 2013 should be
marked by the long-delayed resumption of substantive
negotiations that will lead to a definitive agreement
to resolve all outstanding issues and demands. In that
regard, we believe that the work done by the United
States in recent weeks may help steer the process and
give the parties the necessary push to launch much-
needed dialogue.
Furthermore, we are concerned with respect to the
poor state of the Palestinian economy and its negative
impact on efforts to build State institutions. We believe
it necessary for the international community to reaffirm
its support for the Palestinian Authority and encourage
countries of the region and emerging economies to
fully extend their assistance for the revitalization of the
Palestinian economy.

The international community should urge both
sides to avoid any act, action or provocation that would
hinder the possibility of returning to the negotiating
table. We believe that the international community,
through the United Nations, is obliged to condemn all
violations committed, including those related to safety,
and take all necessary actions to put an end to those
transgressions. The parties cannot be expected to act
responsibly if condemnation for their actions is not
forthcoming.

Finally, my delegation believes that it is only
through respect for the rights of each of those peoples
and a firm commitment to a peaceful solution that both
parties will be able to live together in peace, within
secure and recognized borders.

