The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Israel in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Carmon
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter dated
11 December 2006 from the Permanent Observer of
Palestine to the United Nations, which will be issued as
document S/2006/960 and which reads as follows.

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the open thematic debate of the Security
Council on the situation in the Middle East to be
held on Tuesday, 12 December 2006."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting, in accordance with the
Council's provisional rules of procedure and previous
practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mansour
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.


The President (spoke in Arabic): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
2

its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2006/956, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the Middle East.

I invite the Secretary-General, His Excellency
Mr. Kofi Annan, to take the floor.


