Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, allow me to thank you, Sir, for your
invitation and to welcome your very timely initiative to
convene a debate on the current situation of United
Nations peacekeeping operations. We also thank in
particular the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, the Under-Secretary-General
for Field Support and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti for their valuable
briefings.

This is a sensitive period for peacekeeping
operations, with an unprecedented increase in field
operations, increasingly complex and difficult
mandates to implement, greater risks to United Nations
personnel and humanitarian workers, a deterioration in
respect for human rights, and costs that are rising in a
context of budgetary constraints and an international
financial and economic crisis.

As an example, I must mention the significant
and growing gap between the number of military and
police personnel approved under Security Council
mandates and the number of troops actually deployed
in the field. This is a clear illustration of the serious
difficulties facing the system. This calls for in-depth
consideration of the entire issue, but it also calls for
decisions, to try both to improve the situation in the
short term and to create sustainable conditions for the
medium and long term.

Even if interim answers can be found, there are
no magic formulas to instantly resolve these problems.
Suffice it to recall that a few years ago the
Organization engaged in a wide and profound
examination of this issue, from which important
recommendations arose. In many cases, these were
translated into concrete reforms, whose results we are
beginning to see.

It is important that the Organization continue the
reform process that was initiated, in particular by
pursuing the initiatives towards strengthening the
strategic approach of a United Nations presence in
conflict zones. This approach takes into account the
various activities that can contribute to attaining peace
processes that encompass conflict prevention,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding.

As we seek to improve the situation regarding
peacekeeping operations, we cannot forget those other
two components. The Organization has been taking
concrete steps with the goal of achieving a
comprehensive approach in order to provide stability
and peace in conflict zones. Uruguay firmly supports
the intensification of these efforts and the specific
initiatives that have been developed by the Secretariat.
These include the integrated mission planning process,
which we fully support; prevention of conflict
activities, including a strengthened role for the
Department of Political Affairs; and post-conflict
reconstruction.

Although the number of conflicts in the world has
diminished in the past few years, the cases in which a
United Nations presence has been required have
increased considerably. On the one hand, this can be
given a positive reading: that the system possesses both
legitimacy and an significant foundation of credibility.
On the other hand, it is clear that even with the best
efforts in the areas of recruitment, financial
contributions and operations management, the United
Nations system will not be able to have a peacekeeping
operation in every conflict. That reality makes
prevention and reconstruction efforts even more
crucial, as the latter is ultimately a form of prevention
as well.
In this respect, while activities to maintain
security are key, they are insufficient to guarantee
sustainable stability without efforts to promote the
economic and social development of the conflict zone.
Moreover, it is far less costly to prevent the emergence
or resumption of a conflict.

Uruguay is committed to these efforts, and it is
for that reason that we have so vigorously sought
membership of the Peacebuilding Commission. We
believe that the Commission is a crucial forum and a
crucial tool, through which we hope to contribute in
the best way possible on the basis of our experience on
the ground in the sphere of public security, as well as
on the basis of our experience of achieving growth
with social equity based on respect for the rule of law,
democratic values, legal empowerment and equal
opportunities for all.

Another very sensitive subject that everyone
agrees must be addressed is the mandates agreed upon
by the Security Council, particularly for operations
taking place in complex situations, which involve, inter
alia, the protection of civilians, the defence of human
rights and reconstruction. We share the concern of
those who advocate greater clarity in these mandates,
but we would also note that emphasis must be placed
on making these mandates realistic. It is our concern
that forces on the ground should have the human and
material resources needed to fulfil those mandates, so
that, as the Panel on United Nations Peace Operations
of 2000 put it, United Nations forces can "pose a
credible deterrent threat" (S/2000/809, para. 51).

Finally, I should like to address the issue of the
effective strategic oversight of peacekeeping
operations, which undoubtedly a key area for the
system's sustainability. This is an area in which the
management of truthful and accurate information as
well as consultation and coordination among the
parties concerned are key elements for the decisions
that the Council must take, which have a direct effect
on the ground - and thus on the troops that have been
deployed. In that regard, we endorse the ideas set out
in the non-paper prepared by the United Kingdom and
France with the aim of promoting broader participation
by troop-contributing countries.

Those States, most of which are developing
countries, provide the largest part of the personnel
deployed in peacekeeping operations. But their level of
participation in the management of the operations is
very low, and they have few opportunities to provide
inputs which could be valuable, in particular in the
preparation and planning stage, when crucial elements
must be carefully considered in order to have a
successful mission, such as the provision of adequate
human, financial and logistic resources; exit strategies;
and capacities that can provide flexibility on the
ground in case of unexpected events.

Moreover, when mandates are reviewed, first-
hand information and the perspective of a country that
has troops in the field can be of great value in the
process carried out by the Council to understand the
situation and consider the opportunities and threats on
the ground.

That is why we attach central importance to an
enhanced level of exchange of information,
coordination and consultation with troop-contributing
countries during the stages I have mentioned. As we
have said during consideration of the reform of the
Security Council's working methods, as a troop-
contributing country we aspire to having a real
opportunity to express our opinion before the specifics
of an operation are defined.

In that regard, we propose the creation of a
mechanism that would make such interaction possible.
We particularly wish it to be a depoliticized and
effective mechanism that will help minimize risks and
maximize the efficiency of peacekeeping operations.

On a related subject, let me conclude by recalling
that delegations are invited to participate in the
workshop organized by the Missions of Australia and
Uruguay on the implementation of civilian protection
mandates in the context of peacekeeping operations,
which will take place on Tuesday, 27 January, at the
Millennium Hotel.

