Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I too
thank Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and Mr. Miguel de Serpa Soares,
United Nations Legal Counsel, for their briefings. I
would also like to thank Mr. Dacie, First Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia,
and Ms. Citaku, Ambassador of Kosovo to the United
States, for their statements.

With regard to working methods, and this goes
for all Council meetings, I would note the request,
repeated on many occasions, for briefers to limit their
presentations to 15 minutes.

Twenty years after the end of the conflict in Kosovo
and the deployment of NATO's military force, the
Kosovo Force, Kosovo is living in peace. In the light of
the many ongoing intercommunal tensions, that peace
is, admittedly, fragile, but it should spur us to redouble
our efforts to meet the aspirations of the people there.
In the spirit of that objective, I would like to briefly
highlight three points.

First ofall, I commend the role ofthe United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
in continuing to successfully promote security,
stability and human rights in Kosovo. In recognition
of the continuing stability challenges in the Western
Balkans, France recently adopted a national strategy
to increase its support for the sustainable stabilization
of the region, its economic and social development
and the strengthening of the rule of law. The strategy
sets out concrete measures for economic and social
development, with the participation of the French
Development Agency. It contemplates several actions
in the field of security, including a Franco-German
initiative to combat trafficking in small arms and light
weapons; and, in the fields of justice and defence, it
calls for enhanced cooperation. However, while we
must support the stabilization of the Western Balkans,
the main responsibility lies first and foremost with
the countries of the region - as Northern Macedonia
and Greece demonstrated with the historic Prespa
agreement, which I welcome once again.

I now come to my second point - the regrettable
lack of dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina since
November and the high level of tension between the
two parties, which is unsustainable. This stalemate
explains the approach of the President of the Republic
Emmanuel Macron and German Chancellor Angela
Merkel to invite Kosovo, Serbia, the countries of the
region and the European Union to a summit in Berlin
on 29 April, as the German representative has just
mentioned. The challenge was to convince both sides
to resume dialogue. Efforts to achieve that objective
are ongoing.

In order to achieve the resumption of genuine
dialogue, it is essential that each party refrain from
actions, declarations or measures that could exacerbate
tensions, as Mr. Schulz just explained. In that regard, I
reiterate our request that the 100 per cent tariffimposed
by the Kosovo Government on products from Serbia
and Bosnia and Herzegovina be lifted or, at the very
least, suspended.

The Kosovo police operation on 28 May has been
mentioned by several speakers, and I, too, will touch
upon it briefly. France, naturally, supports the fight
against organized crime and corruption in Kosovo, in
full respect of the rule of law, which we wish to see
consolidated. Given the local context, particularly in
the north of the country, it is nevertheless essential that
such operations be proportionate. Furthermore, as the
Legal Counsel pointed out, we highlight the importance
of respect for the privileges and immunities of all
United Nations personnel, including those of UNMIK,
as defined in the 1946 Convention on the Privileges and
Immunities of the United Nations. We will carefully
review the results of UNMIK's internal investigation.

Finally, I should like to highlight the role of the
European Union in the Western Balkans region. In our
view, the stability of the region is first and foremost a
European matter. The European Union is thus leading
a mediation process that will resume once both parties
are ready to relaunch the dialogue. Some progress has
already been made, for example the conclusion of many
technical agreements between Serbia and Kosovo in
the early 2010s, facilitated by the European Union. The
challenge now is to reach a comprehensive and legally
binding agreement between the two parties.

The European future of Serbia and Kosovo depends
largely on the conclusion of such an agreement. In
addition, there are many reforms to strengthen the rule
of law, which is at the heart of the European project.
The primary responsibility for the European prospects
of Serbia and Kosovo lies primarily with the political
leaders of those countries. Only the full normalization
of relations between Pristina and Belgrade will make
it possible to achieve that European future, which is
a shared future. We encourage First Deputy Prime
Minister Dacie and Ambassador Citaku to redouble
their efforts to that end. They can always count on the
fraternal support of France.

