Mr. Legwaila (Botswana): For almost two years
now, the international community has been assisting the
people of Angola, through the instrumentality of the
United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM III), to carry out the process of rebuilding and
transforming a country ravaged by war into one
committed to beating swords into ploughshares.
UNAVEM. III has played and continues to play an
important role in making it possible for the people of
Angola to realize that peace is not an option, not a matter
of life or death, but rather a question of live and let live.
We firmly believe that the acceptance by the Government
of Angola and UNITA of the fact that there can be no
military solution to the conflict in their country was an
important first step on the road to peace and democracy
in Angola. Today, the international community can bear
witness to the long and difficult road which the two
parties have travelled together so far. There can be no
doubt that while the peace process remains fragile and
reversible, the fact remains that never before in the
history of the Angolan conflict has so much been
achieved to establish a lasting political solution. Botswana
therefore strongly hopes that the Government of Angola
and UNITA will not waste this historic opportunity to
make peace for their country and people a living reality.

The implementation of the Lusaka Protocol was
never intended to be an unending process. There are
greater challenges which await the people of Angola, such
as the rehabilitation and reconstruction of the national
economy. Some of the urgent tasks which have to be
tackled expeditiously are the resettlement of the more
than one million internally displaced persons, demining
and road rehabilitation, demobilization and social
reintegration of the ex-combatants and the disarming of
the civilian population, to mention but a few. These are
monumental tasks which must be addressed adequately as
they have a direct bearing on the sustainability of the
peace process.

Botswana fully supports the Secretary-General's
appeal to the Government of Angola and UNITA to
establish the Government of National Unity and
Reconciliation before 1 January 1997. We are convinced
that the formation of the Government would enable the
Government of Angola and UNITA to focus their
attention on the issues that unite rather than divide them.
The socio-economic aspects of the situation in Angola, as
outlined in the report of the Secretary-General, clearly
indicate that the parties have no choice but to seek
common ground in addressing the problems which
confront their country. This is the basis of our optimism

 

that the Government of Unity and National Reconciliation
would serve as a catalyst in resolving outstanding political
issues.

My delegation is satisfied with the understanding that
the withdrawal of UNAVEM. III formed military units
should not be carried out in a manner that might endanger
the peace process. The draft resolution also makes it
sufficiently clear to the parties that the international
community expects them to honour and to complete the
implementation of their commitments under the Lusaka
Protocol. In this respect, the commencement of the
withdrawal of UNAVEM. III should not be misinterpreted
as an opportunity to slow down the implementation of the
outstanding issues and ultimately to renege on commitments
and obligations already agreed. The Security Council is
united in its determination to ensure that the peace process
is not put in jeopardy. A follow-on United Nations
presence, as set out in operative paragraph 20 of the draft
resolution, would therefore play a crucial role to this end.
Clearly, the international community has no intention to
abandon the people of Angola.

In conclusion, I reaffirm Botswana's strong support for
the proposal to send a Security Council mission to Angola
before the expiry of the mandate of UNAVEM. III. The
mission would offer members of the Council a rare
opportunity to observe at first hand and on the ground the
peace process in action and to make specific
recommendations on the support necessary for post-conflict
peace-building.

