Mr. Cohen (United States ofAmerica): The United
States expresses its deepest sympathies to all affected
by the crash of Ethiopian Airlines Flight 302. We offer
our condolences in solidarity with the people and the
Government of Ethiopia responding to the crash. Our
Embassies in Addis Ababa and Nairobi are working
tirelessly to offer all possible assistance. The tragedy
was especially difficult for members of the United
Nations community, with at least 19 United Nations
workers from various agencies and offices among those
dead. We mourn the lives of all 157 victims, alongside
the people and Governments of the more than 35
countries from which they came.
I thank Special Representative Yamamoto for his
briefing and the continuing hard work that he and
his team have been doing in support of economic
development in Afghanistan. I also thank Ms. Tapesh
for her briefing today and for the important and
courageous work she is doing in support ofhuman rights,
women's empowerment and women's participation in
Afghanistan's political process. And I thank Mr. Mohib
for joining us in the Council today.

We share the concerns expressed today about the
many challenges facing Afghanistan, including the
very difficult humanitarian situation. We recognize
that more than 6.3 million people are in need of urgent
humanitarian assistance. That number has nearly
doubled from last year, as severe drought in 2018
affected more than 10 million Afghans. Moreover,
Afghanistan remains one of the most dangerous places
for humanitarian workers to deliver assistance. The
United States continues to step up to provide assistance
to vulnerable populations in Afghanistan in response
to this emergency. We continue to be the largest
humanitarian donor in Afghanistan and have contributed
more than $232 million in life-saving assistance in the
past year. We encourage our colleagues to continue to
rise to the challenge alongside us.

We also recognize the very difficult security
situation in Afghanistan. At the same time, we
believe that 2019 promises to be a year for peace.
The United States is committed to using its influence
with all interested parties to make 2019 that year, in
close consultation with the Afghan Government. We
are not seeking a withdrawal agreement but rather a
comprehensive peace agreement that can guarantee
that Afghanistan never again becomes a platform
for transnational terrorism and that can codify an
intra-Afghan consensus on a political road map for the
future of the country.

In January, we agreed in principle to a framework
addressing the interconnected issues of counter-
terrorism and withdrawal, including agreement on
enforcement mechanisms to guarantee implementation.
The recently concluded round of talks in Doha
clarified a more detailed understanding of those
topics. We have also consulted extensively with the
Afghan Government and our international partners on
the issues. In mid-February, the Taliban took a step
towards the type of intra-Afghan dialogue that we
believe is necessary, by appointing and empowering a
negotiating team led by Mullah Baradar. We have asked
President Ghani to work across broader Afghan society
to build an inclusive national team. All sides agree that
there can be no military solution. Consequently, we
are also pressing for an end to Afghans killing other
Afghans, and specifically for the Taliban to implement
a ceasefire or a major reduction in violence that would
create an enabling environment for an intra-Afghan
dialogue to proceed.

As we heard from Special Representative
Yamamoto and his team over the past week, a peace
agreement will enjoy broad Afghan and international
support only if it preserves and strengthens the social
and economic gains achieved since 2001. Afghanistan's
State institutions must survive and develop. Human
rights must be respected, there must be a free press and
women and girls must be empowered. We would prefer
to see a peace agreement that brings the Taliban into the
political process and facilitates a political framework
for the future of Afghanistan. However, even if there
is no progress on the peace track, elections need to
take place.

The United States is doing what it can to support
the preparations for a credible election and encourage
the Afghan Government to move forward with
preparations for presidential elections. Building on
lessons learned from the parliamentary elections and
previous cycles, electoral reforms must have a realistic
and firm timeline and be carried out in consultation
with election stakeholders, including the presidential
candidates. Also, we have called on Afghanistan's
neighbours to lend their cooperation, participation and
facilitation to assist Afghans to come to the peace table
and make an honourable, just peace with each other.

We look forward to coming to an understanding
on the shape of a regional mechanism that could
facilitate the finalization of the peace agreement.
Afghans deserve to live in peace, and the United States
welcomes the strong international support for efforts
that we believe have a real chance to bring peace to
Afghanistan after 17 years of war.

Finally, we look forward to the renewal for another
year of the mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). The next 12 months
will be a pivotal period for Afghanistan, and UNAMA
will have a critical role to play in strengthening the

legitimacy of Afghanistan's election process and
supporting the Afghanistan peace process and in
donor coordination.

