Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I would like
first of all to commend the initiative of the French
delegation to organize today's open Security Council
debate at the ministerial level on the protection of
minority Victims of attacks and abuses on ethnic or
religious grounds in the Middle East. I welcome His
Excellency Mr. Laurent Fabius, French Minister for
Foreign Affairs and International Development, as well
as all the ministers present in the Chamber.

I also thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon;
Prince Zeid Ra'ad Al Hussein, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights; His Beatitude Louis
Raphael I Sako, Patriarch of Babylon of the Chaldeans;
and Mrs. Vian Dakhil, member of the Iraqi Parliament,
for their briefings.

Today's debate is timely, especially as it comes at a
particularly critical moment for the Middle East, which
is going through a deep political and security crisis that
has ushered in the emergence and expansion of extremely
Violent terrorist groups. These groups commit crimes
of unheard of atrociousness, in particular in Iraq and
Syria, in Violation of human dignity and international
law.

Individuals and groups belonging to national,
ethnic or religious minorities are the favoured targets
of such terrorist movements as Daesh and its affiliates,
which engage in systematic and widespread persecution
of Christians, Kurds, Yazidis, Shabaks, Turkmens and,
in certain regions, Sunnis, Shiites and other ethnic
and religious minorities. That persecution consists of
murders, abductions, torture, forced displacement and
all other forms of atrocity. As evidenced by the moving
testimony of Mrs. Dakhil, women and children are
subjected to physical and sexual violence as part of their
daily lives, and some are deliberately executed. The
destruction of works including cultural assets shows the
degree of terrorist groups' animus towards minorities.
However, Christians and other minorities have lived
for millennia in the region and are an integral part of
the social fabric. By targeting these groups, Daesh has
destroyed the social fabric and peaceful coexistence
that have existed among the different communities in
the Middle East for millennia.

The issue of minorities is as ancient as their
existence across countries and regions of the world.
The Middle East has its own share of minorities who,
with all their religious ethnic, social diversity and their
own history and cultural values, have contributed to the
influence of this part of the world.

Political transitions under way in the Arab world
that should be bringing about social cohesion have
instead caused confusion, from which, unfortunately,
terrorist groups have been able to benefit. Already in a
precarious situation, minorities persecuted by terrorist
groups doubly suffer the horrors of war. Daesh's recent
persecution of Christian, Shiite and Kurdish minorities
in Iraq and the barbaric executions of Egyptian Copts
in Libya are not only a source of concern for the future
of those minorities, but also serve to point to the fact
that substantial efforts at international and regional
levels are needed for their protection.

Faced with such a grave situation, we need to
guarantee these minorities our support and protection.
In that regard, we believe that the actions that the
United Nations and the international community
could undertake should take the following elements
into account: stepping up international and regional
cooperation in the fight against terrorism, taking into
account the recent decisions taken at the Washington,
DC, summit on 19 February and the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council on terrorism and
violent extremism; the regular inclusion of the issue of
the protection of minorities in the agenda of the Security
Council's deliberations in order to find the ways and
means to increase protection while respecting the
territorial integrity, national unity and independence
of States; broadening the scope ofjudicial cooperation
among States, especially those in the Middle East
region, to ensure that cross-border criminals do not
evade justice; and helping to establish democracy and
the rule of law, which are a vehicle for human rights and
the only guarantor of true peace. On the humanitarian
front, we should provide massive assistance to affected
communities in conflict zones in the Middle East and
help them resettle in their homelands.

We know that the emergence and rapid growth
of Daesh in Iraq, Syria and elsewhere are the
consequences of years of exclusion and marginalization
of a significant portion of the population that has been
left behind in political, economic and social processes
and which has suffered from all forms of frustration,
thereby reinforcing the need for identity politics or
the rejection of the other, which the terrorists have be
able to exploit. Under these circumstances, it is not
just military solutions to the various conflicts that
could prevail in the Middle East; we need to encourage
countries in crisis to engage in peaceful and inclusive
political processes leading to the establishment of
a State in which citizenship is the only criterion of
belonging to the nation and where all the components
of society can enjoy their right to live in their country
in peace, freedom, equality and dignity. From this
perspective, we believe that to ensure the protection of
minorities, education and outreach are the best means
for breaking down barriers between communities and
dispelling stereotypes from which antagonisms are
built in the Middle East as elsewhere.

