Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I would like to welcome you, Sir, along with the other
ministers joining us today. I would also like to thank
the Lithuanian presidency for organizing today's open
debate on the protection of journalists in situations
of armed conflict. I also thank Mr. Jan Eliasson,
Deputy Secretary-General; Mr. Christophe Deloire,
Director-General of Reporters Without Borders; and
Ms, Mariane Pearl, of the Daniel Pearl Foundation, for
their briefings.

The armed conflicts currently taking place around
the world expose the suffering of civilians, especially
that of women, children and vulnerable individuals.
The eyewitness accounts of journalists in situations
of armed conflict have become essential. Thanks to
their presence, we receive information in real time
about the numerous violations and abuses committed
against innocent civilians, which has often enabled the
international community to take important decisions.
Not only do the men and women of the press work
under difficult conditions, but they are increasingly the
target of deliberate attacks in conflict zones. They are
often abducted or kidnapped for ransom, if not tortured
or executed in the absence of any legal proceedings.
Women journalists and their female associates are not
spared and are even, at times, deliberately singled out.
When the terrorists of Daesh, Al-Qaida in the Islamic
Maghreb, other Al-Qaida affiliates and other armed
groups make them a favoured target, our obligation
must be to offer immediate help by strengthening their
protection. The effective pursuit of the perpetrators of
such acts is a way to dissuade non-State actors who
do not consider themselves bound by international
instruments to protect journalists.

Journalists present in situations of armed conflict
enjoy the same protections as other civilians in the
application of international humanitarian law in
accordance with the Geneva Conventions and their
Additional Protocols. The adoption of resolution 1738
(2006), which demands the protection ofjournalists in
war zones, raised great hopes and was cause for rejoicing
within the profession, even if its implementation did
not meet expectations. Despite the obligations derived
from the Geneva Conventions and resolution 1738
(2006), attacks againstjournalists have not diminished.
According to the concept note (S/2015,303, annex)
provided by the Lithuanian presidency, in 2014 alone,
61 journalists were killed, 87 per cent of whom were
local, while 221 others were imprisoned. The problem
of protecting journalists in situations of armed conflict
is therefore more closely tied to insufficient or absent
political will on the part of warring parties with
respect to their obligations, than to the lack of a legal
framework.

We hope that the resolution we have just adopted
(resolution 2222 (2015)) marks a new phase in the
commitment of States to fully assume their obligations
with respect to the protection of media professionals
in armed conflict and sends a strong message from the
Council that unjustified attacks on journalists around
the world will not go unpunished. In that light, it is
urgent to stress practical, effective measures that will
help prevent and reduce the attacks that currently target
men and women in the media. While recalling the
primary responsibility of warring parties, especially
States, to protect journalists, we would do well to
highlight the contribution of international, regional and
subregional organizations to bolstering compliance.
Raising awareness among those concerned and
providing technical assistance to developing countries
with respect to protection will also contribute to
promoting cooperation on the issue. In that regard, we
welcome the specific attention that UNESCO and the
Human Rights Council have devoted to the matter of
protecting journalists.

We commend the immensely important role of
journalists and associated staff in the protection of
civilians caught up in situations of armed conflict and
their contribution to establishing democratic societies.
We stress the fact that their training and rigorous
adherence to professional codes of ethics will help
some of them avoid the pitfalls of disinformation and
the calls to hatred that risk exacerbating conflicts. In
that regard, journalists should respect the principles
of impartiality and objectivity in the exercise of their
profession. We also remind those in charge of media
outlets to carefully weigh the risks before sending
journalists and associated staff into conflict areas, in
order to avoid subjecting them to the indiscriminate
terror that all too often targets them today.

In conclusion, allow me once again to honour the
memory of all those who have been unjustly executed
and to pay homage to those still in the hands of armed
groups and terrorists. We join with others in calling
for their immediate and unconditional release, and in
demanding that the perpetrators of those crimes be
pursued and brought to justice. Impunity for those who
kill journalists must be stopped.

