Mr. Onowu (Nigeria): I thank you, Sir, for the
initiative of convening this open debate and the
excellent concept paper (S/2011/496, annex) that
provides the basis of our discussions today. I also thank
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive briefing.

Peacekeeping, a rather recent concept that is not
reflected in the Charter, has evolved as the United
Nations flagship endeavour. As a nation from the
continent with the highest concentration of current
United Nations peacekeeping operations, Nigeria
places a special premium on this subject. Informed by
our national experiences, my contribution this morning
will focus on the outlook for United Nations
peacekeeping operations from three perspectives.

The first is the issue of mismatch between
resources and mandates. Meeting the demands of
modern peacekeeping operations has stretched the
United Nations capacity to its limits and put a strain on
the effectiveness of peacekeeping. In this context, it is
not surprising that several peacekeeping missions
cannot deliver the results expected of them. There is a
need to strike a balance between the expectations of the
Council and the resources given to enable
peacekeeping missions to implement their mandates.

Our mandates must not only be clear but also
adequately resourced, in terms of both personnel and of
international outlay. Hence, there is a need for accurate
assessment of mission requirements, the optimal use of
available resources across our missions, and the firm
commitment of Member States to United Nations
peacekeeping.

The second issue relates to partnerships and
capacity-building. The multidimensional nature of the
new generation of peacekeeping operations requires
improved collaboration and coordination among
peacekeeping actors, including regional organizations.
It is vitally important to better align the objectives and
performance criteria of the various peacekeeping
missions. In keeping with the spirit and letter of
resolution 1353 (2001), partnership also implies
seeking the views and benefiting from the experiences
of the troop- and police-contributing countries in the
deliberations on and design of peacekeeping missions.
In this regard, I wish to reiterate the strategic role of
the Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations. We
strongly believe that the platform of the Working
Group can be better harnessed in synchronizing the
efforts of the troop-contributing countries and the
Security Council in the formal atmosphere it provides.

As regards capacity-building, we note the
considerable progress that has been made in several
missions - such as the United Nations Mission in
Liberia and the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste, among others - in strengthening the
capacity of host countries in various areas, including
police, judicial and corrections capacities. However,
the real test of the success of these various missions'
support to the host countries is the degree to which the
host authorities are able to sustain efforts initiated by
the peacekeeping operations after their departure.

Following the independence of South Sudan on
9 July, UNMIS was brought to a successful close and
the Council shepherded the establishment of two new
peacekeeping missions. Drawing on the lessons for
missions that have had to contend with national
conflicts with subregional dimensions, such as
MONUSCO, we believe that the authorities of the new
missions - the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan and the United Nations Interim Security Force
for Abyei - should work more closely together with
host nations in deterring and eliminating threats posed
by armed groups and focus efforts on disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation, resettlement and
reintegration. Such collaboration would make
significant contributions to improving daily lives of the
residents of Abyei and South Sudan.

Thirdly, I wish to seize this opportunity to remind
ourselves that peacekeeping has become a valuable
instrument for maintaining international peace and
security. As with all valuable instruments, the integrity
of peacekeeping operations must be protected and
preserved.

We must ensure that the principles relating to the
use of force do not by themselves jeopardize a
mission's objective. Indeed, when force is deployed,
the operational mandate should adapt to the local
context and the requirements of the field. It is equally
important to emphasize respect for the principle of

11-4815]
national sovereignty. A peacekeeping operation should
be considered only in situations in which parties
previously at war have agreed to sheathe their swords
and to involve the United Nations in enforcing a peace
accord. The United Nations must remain one hundred
per cent neutral in conflicts.

Guided by these principles and practices, Nigeria
remains fully committed to the principle of collective
security, as enshrined in the Charter. It will remain a
reliable contributor of troops to the United Nations
operations.

In concluding, we would like to thank Council
members, the Secretary-General and the international
community for their words of support following the
bombing incident that occurred in Abuja today.

