Mr. Dumitru (Romania): I would like to join
other members of the Council in thanking the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(S/2004/669) on the United Nations Mission of Support
in East Timor (UNMISET), and to express gratitude to
Mr. Hedi Annabi, Assistant Secretary-General, for his
presentation and the very useful update on the latest
developments in Timor-Leste.

As Romania aligns itself with the statement to be
made shortly by the permanent representative of the
Netherlands, on behalf of the European Union, I would
like to make only a few brief comments.

First, I would like to express Romania's
satisfaction with the steady pace of the post-conflict
stabilization and nation-building processes unfolding in
Timor-Leste. The progress in that regard is the result of
the continued close cooperation between the
Government of Timor-Leste and the United Nations -
with its complex involvement - together with the
Bretton Woods institutions and development partner
countries. In this context, we should underline that the
decision taken by the Security Council on 14 May 2004
to extend UNMISET's mandate has already been
fruitful. Through its different components, UNMISET
has been concretely contributing to capacity-building
within all the basic sectors of the young Timorese
State, helping put new institutions and structures into
operation.

Secondly, one cannot overlook that, in various
areas, the process is still either just being launched or
at a very early stage. The administrative capability of
the major institutions in Timor-Leste is being
hampered by a lack of experienced and skilled
personnel, proper training and equipment and, in some
cases, by a very limited logistical potential for
deployment.

Of particular concern is the fact that, in spite of
the progress in the prosecution of serious crimes since
the Secretary-General's last report (S/2004/333), it
seems that the serious crimes process may not be able
to fully respond to the desire for justice of those
affected by the violence in 1999. This means that many
cases of grave human rights violations will not be
investigated, and victims and their families will be
denied justice. Romania stands ready to work in this
regard with the other members of the Security Council
and with the Secretariat.

Also, even though the overall security situation
has remained calm and peaceful since Timor-Leste's
formal assumption of full responsibility for security on
20 May, smuggling, illegal trading and border-crossing
should be perceived as cause for concern, as are the
tensions related to the demonstrations in Dili last July.

Certainly, there is no doubt that, in a number of
key areas, including economic planning, finance,
justice and infrastructure, external support remains
crucial. Because UNMISET's ability to help will
continue to be limited and can only complement
bilateral efforts, the Security Council should further
encourage greater assistance from the international
community, which will be critical to the long-term
stability and development of Timor-Leste. In addition,
the cooperation of Member States is more necessary
than ever to ensure that those responsible for serious
crimes do not enjoy impunity. We believe that many of
the persons indicted as part of the serious crimes
process remain outside Timor-Leste and have not been
brought to justice.

We would also like to join the appeal made by the
Secretary-General in his report to the respective
leaderships of Indonesia and Timor-Leste to make
every effort in the coming months to finalize their
agreement on their land border and on the management
of the border area. UNMISET's military component
has already facilitated contacts between Timorese and
Indonesian security forces. Furthermore, UNMISET is
called upon to continue to provide effective assistance
and to facilitate confidence-building measures, so that
the bilateral relations between the two countries rapidly
reach full normalization, to their mutual benefit.

We also agree with the importance attached by
the report of the Secretary-General and by the other
members of the Council to the positive steps expected
with regard to relations between Timor-Leste and
Australia.

Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1543
(2004), UNMISET will complete its final mandate by
20 May 2005. The remaining nine months represent a
short period, as compared to the medium- and long-
term challenges that will continue to confront Timor-
Leste and its Government. In spite of that, we are
confident that UNMISET will finally make a difference
between success and failure in the Timorese
stabilization and State-building processes.

