Mr. Traore (Guinea) (spoke in French): Allow
me, Sir, to extend once again the congratulations of my
delegation on your assumption to the presidency of the
Council during the month of April and to assure you of
our full cooperation.

As I have already said, I know that the legacy that
I have left you to take up is a heavy responsibility.
Indeed, war is continuing in Iraq. The Council has not
yet fully recovered from the differences that arose
before the war. But thanks to your rich experience and
your personal skills, I remain convinced that the
Mexican presidency will be able to guide us during this
difficult period for the sake of the unity and
effectiveness of the Council.

I would like to thank you, and the other
colleagues here, for the gratitude you expressed
towards Guinea during its presidency in March 2003.

I would also like to thank Sir Jeremy Greenstock
for his presentation, which has further briefed us on
work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC).

There is absolutely no doubt that terrorism, which
is one of the scourges of our time, is antithetical to our
Organization. The adoption of resolution 1373 (2001)
and 1456 (2003), inter alia, and the establishment of
the CTC by the Security Council have once again
demonstrated our determination to combat this scourge
robustly. My delegation welcomes the actions taken by
the Committee to effectively carry out these
resolutions.

The drafting of rules on the conduct of the work
of the Committee, the making available to Member
States the necessary guidelines for drawing up their
national reports, the publication of lists of contacts, the
coordination of the question of assistance and the
creation of a Web site on this issue are clear evidence
of the desire of the Committee and Member States to
fully cooperate on this question.

We would like here to reiterate to the Chairman
and members of the Committee, as well as support
staff, our appreciation for the volume and high quality
of the work that has been accomplished over the last
year and a half by dint of their immense efforts.

My delegation particularly appreciated the
personal devotion of Sir Jeremy Greenstock as well as
the transparency with which he has constantly kept
Member States and institutions informed of the
activities of the Committee. This attests to his
determination to cooperate with all parties to complete
the mandate that was entrusted to him.

We have no doubt that the spirit that he has
imparted to the Committee will continue to guide it.
The professional skills of our colleague Ambassador
Arias are a guarantee of that. We wish him every
success in his new responsibilities as the Chairman of
the Committee and assure him of our full cooperation.

My delegation cannot overstress the point that the
campaign to combat terrorism is long-term endeavour.
The success of any action to counter this scourge will
continue to depend on the solidarity of members of the
international community. This is why we appreciate the
strengthening of contacts between the Committee and
international, regional and subregional organizations to
improve its ability as well as that of interested States to
combat terrorism collectively.

We note with satisfaction the meeting of 6 March
2003 with these organizations and encourage the
Committee to pursue efforts to follow up on that
meeting.

We urge all States to assume their responsibilities
for implementing resolution 1373 (2001). Moreover,
we hope that the international community will give
particular attention to the question of assistance to
allow all players to shoulder their respective
responsibilities for the effective implementation of the
various resolutions.

My delegation welcomes the extension of the
mandate of the Committee and urges it to continue its
work with transparency and to focus its attention on the
lessons learned from the 18 months of its existence in
order to obtain better results. It supports the
programme of work of the Committee for the seventh
term.

Finally, my country, which has always strongly
condemned terrorism and taken specific and energetic
measures to eliminate it, will continue to contribute to
this common endeavour.

