Mr. Mufioz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile, in
accordance with its commitment to regional peace and
security, promptly joined the provisional multinational

force, helping to prevent a civil war and a humanitarian
tragedy in Haiti. Aware that our support for Haiti
should not be limited to the current emergency
situation, we also joined the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). In doing
so, we were convinced that only a comprehensive,
multidimensional and long-term mission would be
successful in Haiti.
Today, we would like to reaffirm that conviction.
Therefore, we resolutely support the Secretary-
General's proposal to extend the Mission's mandate for
an 18-month period, which is consistent with our
vision that the political, economic and social
reconstruction of Haiti requires a long-term effort -
specifically, at least until the conclusion of the
electoral process that will produce legitimate
authorities for the people.

Hence, we regret the fact that, ultimately, the
resolution we have adopted contemplates a renewal of
only six months. We believe that that could weaken the
Mission's capacity to plan and carry out long-term
activities. That could cause some countries to reassess
their participation in MINUSTAH at the end of that
period.

Despite what I have said, we voted in favour of
the resolution. We did that because, in the resolution,
priority is placed on aspects that we consider central to
Haiti's security and stability: for example, the
strengthening of institutional capacities, respect for
human rights, a necessary end to impunity and
effective national reconciliation.

Finally, we particularly value the fact that this
resolution highlights the need for an inclusive political
dialogue with the participation of all the political and
social forces of Haiti that have opted for the
democratic process, as well as the urgency of releasing
the funds committed by donor countries and
international financial institutions to facilitate the
development projects that this brotherly country needs
so urgently.

