Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the holding, under your presidency,
Madam President, of this debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict and the adoption of a new
presidential statement (S/PRST/2014/3) to reinforce the
legal arsenal resulting from the Council's work in this
field. The Security Council addresses this important
issue on a regular basis, and that is, sadly, entirely
justified, given the turbulent international environment,
which is of concern to us all. Moreover, the relevance
of this debate was aptly reflected in the briefings this
morning by Ms. Navanethem Pillay, United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights; Ms. Valerie
Amos, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator; Mr. Herve
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations; and Mr. Yves Daccord, Director General of
the International Committee of the Red Cross.

The picture painted in the tenth report of the
Secretary-General shows that the current state of the
protection of civilians "does not give much cause for
optimism" (S/2013/689, para. 8). Civilians in many
parts of the world continue to suffer the tragic and
devastating consequences of armed conflict and are
regularly targeted during attacks and indiscriminate
reprisals committed in violation of the Fourth Geneva
Convention. The tragic events in the Central African
Republic are the most recent reminder of the heavy toll
paid by civilians, in particular women and children, in
the armed conflicts imposed on them. To avoid Violence
and vengeful acts, civilians are often obliged to flee
or seek refuge in neighbouring countries, with all the
consequences that can have for the physical and mental
health of those vulnerable people.

We welcome the progress made by the international
community in protecting civilians who have been
held hostage by conflicts, and we are pleased to take
part in those efforts within the various peacekeeping
operations of the United Nations.

The deadly nature ofconflicts and the sophistication
of the weapons used in them endangers not only
civilian populations but also humanitarian workers
and journalists, who are often caught in the crossfire
between the warring sides and prevented from carrying
out their noble mission of assisting civilians exposed
to armed conflict and make their plight known. In that
respect, I would like to reiterate our condemnation of
acts of aggression and intimidation perpetrated against
humanitarian personnel and to pay due tribute to the
courage of the men and women of the United Nations
who are carrying out their tasks in often very difficult
conditions, sometimes risking their very lives.

While the protection of civilians is one of the
major concerns of peacekeeping operations that have
a mandate to that end, the success of that humanitarian
task is dependent on coordination with the host country,
which has, as has been stated many times in this debate,
the primary responsibility to protect its own civilians.
Success also depends on the mission's mandate being
in line with the resources at its disposal to prevent
possible atrocities against civilians and to guarantee
optimal protection for them in times of conflict.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict also
requires a comprehensive approach that reflects the
multidimensional legal, humanitarian and security
aspects. There must be a clear division of the mandates
and roles entrusted to the various stakeholders operating
in complex situations and effective coordination
between the stakeholders.

Moreover, the protection of civilians in the
framework of peacekeeping operations mandated
to that end requires a periodic assessment of the
implementation process for those strategies with a view
to identifying gaps and shortcomings and learning
positive lessons that can improve the implementation
of such strategies.

Finally, the protection of civilians must go
hand-in-hand with the fight against trafficking in
weapons and their proliferation and ensuring respect
for arms embargoes, when those are put in place by the
Security Council.

As also stated many times in this debate,
humanitarian work for the protection of civilians must
be clearly dissociated from political goals and protected
from becoming an instrument of any of the parties to

the conflict.

In his report, the Secretary-General rightly stresses
that humanitarian operations are often hindered by
host country restrictions on the freedom of movement
of humanitarian personnel and refugees seeking
assistance and protection. The presence of non-State
armed groups in refugee camps, in violation of the
fundamental principles enshrined in the 1949 Geneva
Conventions and the 1951 Convention relating to the
Status of Refugees, and the infiltration by armed
elements of those populations make the implementation
of any refugee protection strategy an illusion and is
a challenge that needs to be dealt with. The duty to
protect those vulnerable populations requires that they
be guarded from any act of violence or intimidation
and that their freedom of movement be guaranteed.
The protection of civilians requires, of course, greater
respect for international law, international humanitarian
law and refugee rights by all stakeholders. However,
while much progress has been made at the normative
level, much remains to be done on the ground and
in practice to ensure the effective implementation of
commitments undertaken in that field.

In conclusion, we should stress the importance of
the preventive aspect of the protection of civilians as
it enhances the capacities of the countries concerned
and the rule of law, guarantees good governance, lays
the basis for a culture of human rights and helps in the
implementation of early-warning mechanisms able to
detect pre-conflict situations and prevent them from
turning into open and deadly conflicts.

