Ms. Graham (New Zealand): I thank you for
convening this debate, Mr. President. We welcome the
Secretary-General's latest report (S/2009/277), which
provides a thorough assessment of the first 10 years of
Council involvement in the protection of civilians and
highlights the challenges that Member States must still
address to ensure better protection for them. We
commend the Council for its ongoing consideration of
this issue and we especially thank Under-Secretary-
General Holmes for his comprehensive briefing this
morning.

The immediacy of the need to protect civilians is
evident from the new and ongoing conflicts around the
world. Sadly, we continue to see civilians suffering
seriously and disproportionately, even in the short time
since the last debate on this subject in January.

The 26-year conflict in Sri Lanka has cost the
lives of many of its people and led to a serious
humanitarian crisis. New Zealand joined with others in
condemning Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam attacks
on the civilian population, its forced recruitment of
soldiers, including, reportedly, children, and its use of
civilians as human shields. At the same time, New
Zealand was very concerned by reports of Sri Lankan
Government forces using heavy artillery in areas with a
dense civilian population.

While the fighting is now over, we remain deeply
concerned about the plight and safety of internally
displaced persons (IDPs) who fled that conflict. We
join other countries in urging the Government of Sri
Lanka to improve access to the IDP camps for
humanitarian agencies in order to ensure that all those
affected by the conflict receive the assistance that they
so urgently need.

The Secretary-General's report illustrates that
there is still much work to be done to ensure the
effective protection of civilians in armed conflict. In
this regard, there are three thematic areas which New
Zealand would like to cover.

First, with respect to peacekeeping mandates,
New Zealand strongly supports the inclusion of civilian
protection activities in the mandates of United Nations
peacekeeping operations. This approach is an important
and evolving practice of recent years and one means
for the United Nations to help address the serious
problem of civilian casualties in armed conflict.
Paragraph 16 of resolution 1674 (2006) was an
important step in this regard, as were paragraphs 125
through 128 of the report of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations, the latter of which reflected
important agreement by Member States relating to the
protection of civilians.

However, improvements need to be made in the
clarity and specificity of these mandates, in order that
all parties - the Council, peacekeepers and civilians -
may have a common understanding and shared
expectations. Little progress has been made towards
developing the necessary capacities and doctrines that
need to accompany protection of civilians mandates in
order for them to be effectively implemented. Like
others who have spoken, we encourage the United
Nations Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO) to address this as a matter of priority and we
look forward to the findings of the independent study
commissioned by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and DPKO.
Secondly, with regard to the deliberate targeting
of humanitarian workers, the increasing incidence of
intentional attacks on humanitarian workers in conflict
zones is deeply disturbing. In addition to threatening
the safety of these unarmed civilian workers, the
attacks constrain the effective delivery of humanitarian
assistance, including that offered by the United
Nations. New Zealand welcomes the Secretary-
General's strong recommendations in this regard, and
we look to the Security Council to assist in their
implementation.

New Zealand urges parties to armed conflict to
respect international humanitarian law, in particular the
duty to respect and protect humanitarian assistance
personnel. A related concern for New Zealand is the
rising frequency of attacks on journalists and members
of the media in conflict areas. Journalists have an
important role to play in the monitoring of conflicts
and in ending impunity for serious crimes.

Thirdly, it is imperative for the protection of
civilians that impunity be ended for those who attack
civilians and humanitarian workers. Impunity allows
those responsible not to be held to account for their
actions, denies justice to the victims of these actions
and their families, and sends the message that the
international community is not prepared to take action
even when serious crimes occur.

New Zealand supports the International Criminal
Court, which has an important role to play in bringing
the perpetrators of war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide to justice. We have worked closely with
others to encourage widespread ratification and
implementation of the Rome Statute. It is in the
interests of all States that there be accountability. We
urge all countries that have not yet done so to become
party to the Rome Statute and to take steps within their
own jurisdictions to combat impunity.

In conclusion, New Zealand recognizes the critical
importance of the protection of civilians agenda, and
we welcome the Secretary-General's recommendations
in his latest report. New Zealand stands ready to work
with other Member States, the Council and the
Secretariat to ensure that progress in protection of
civilians becomes a reality for those on the ground.

