Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. Lowcock for his briefing.

Various delegations have been constantly calling
on us to report to the Council on the implementation
of resolution 2401 (2018). Let me oblige. In the context
of the implementation of resolution 2401 (2018),
Russia, in coordination with the Government of Syria,
has undertaken unprecedented efforts to improve the
situation in eastern Ghouta, where illegal armed groups,
with external support, have held the civilian population
hostage for several years. After lengthy and intensive
negotiations, those militants who are unreconciled
have been evacuated from the area and bloodshed has
been prevented. The process of returning the evacuated
population is under way, and some 60,000 people have
already returned.

On the whole, the situation in eastern Ghouta
is stable. In order to maintain law and order, prevent
provocations, protect civilians and provide them with
humanitarian and medical aid, joint efforts have been
organized between Russian military-police units and
Syrian law-enforcement bodies. Issues related to the
restoration of infrastructure in the towns of eastern
Ghouta are being discussed. Rubble is being cleared
in Douma with the help of construction equipment
provided by Russia. Water and electricity supplies
are being re-established. Daily bread deliveries have
started. Rebuilding eastern Ghouta will require
focused cooperation on the part of the international
community, including through the United Nations and
its specialized agencies. We call on our colleagues to
join these efforts.

However, the situation in Raqqa is disastrous. The
coalition expelled the terrorists of the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant more than six months ago and has
occupied the territory since then, practically speaking.
It has done nothing to restore the city, which was
destroyed by aerial bombing. People are returning at
their own peril and risk and are frequently being blown
up by mines and improvised explosive devices.

Nobody really knew what was going on in Raqqa.
Until very recently, no efforts had been made even
to have the United Nations assess the population's
humanitarian needs. Only recently, thanks to our
persistent pressure, has one such mission, albeit a
very short one, taken place. Even in the space of a
few hours, however, the specialists were able to see
with their own eyes that Raqqa lies in ruins. There is
literally not a single whole building standing. There are
still piles of bodies under the rubble. People are being
blown up by mines every day. There is no electricity,
water or basic social services. Not a single school or
hospital is functioning. The so-called local council,
contrary to the coalition's assurances, began work only
this month, and it has become clear, and not just to us,
that they are totally incompetent. Where did they get
these impostors? Whom do they represent? How can
they be entrusted with people's lives and safety? As we
understand it, there have already been several protests
against the American occupation, which has done the
residents no good. The only effective way out of the
situation in Raqqa will be to restore the functioning of
Government structures there.

Another grey area is the Rukban displaced persons
camp, which is near the United States military base
at Al-Tanf. It is important to say once again that the
mere fact of its existence is a gross violation of Syrian
sovereignty. It is a continuing cause of concern for
Syria's neighbours in Jordan. The coalition forces
blocked access to the area for a long period of time,
and it took a great deal of effort to get them to issue
an official permit with security guarantees. The Syrian
authorities gave the green light immediately after that,
but so far we have seen no practical steps to provide
humanitarian assistance.

The situation in Raqqa and Rukban should be
constantly monitored by United Nations humanitarian
personnel. It is vital that sustainable access be provided
to them. Now we have a question for the coalition
countries. What are they doing to implement resolution
2401 (2018)? What are they doing to ease the situation
in Raqqa, Rukban and besieged Fo'ah and Kafraya?
And they need not bother taking the discussion to a so-
called broader format. They should have the courage to
answer our questions and not try to change the subject.

However, I do now have a few words to say in a
broader context. We have been quite startled by the
hypocritical behaviour of the United States, Britain
and France in the past few days. Less than a day after
the missile attacks, their organizers started coming up
with peculiar political initiatives, despite the fact that
every element in their proposals was already present
in the existing relevant resolutions, which simply had
to be implemented. Through their act of aggression,
the troika of the United States, Britain and France
and those who supported or welcomed their actions
declared their solidarity with one party to the conflict.
An aggressor does not have the moral right to create
international legal documents regarding the victim
of that aggression. Russia is working with every side
in the Syrian conflict. Our position has always been
based on the importance of implementing resolution
2254 (2015) and returning to the Geneva talks, without
preconditions, and above all without making them
conditional on so-called regime change.

Before the missile attacks, we could see that the
Syrian Government was ready to hold talks in Geneva.
Now those efforts have suffered a major setback. It is
hard to imagine that after all that has happened, the
Syrian authorities are enthusiastic about talking about
a political settlement in their country on the Western
troika's orders. If the aim is to bomb the President of
Syria into sitting down at the negotiating table, present
that as a victory over him - because according to
them he understands only force - and through those
negotiations to remove him and put him on trial as a
so-called war criminal - as Washington, London
and Paris have directly threatened - then the aim is
unachievable. They should have no illusions. First they
have to repair the damage that they themselves have
done to the prospects for a political settlement.

However, the Western capitals are encouraging
bellicose pronouncements by the radical opposition,
which has set up Al-Assad's departure as a precondition
for its participation in the Geneva consultations, and now,
inspired by the 14 April missile strikes, is demanding
that the coalition start a war with Damascus in direct
repudiation of the principles of resolution 2254 (2015).
What is needed is for the so-called Riyadh opposition to
abandon its destructive position and begin to implement
the Security Council resolution, which it has already
drifted far away from. And their sponsors should also
drop their belligerent rhetoric about the lawfully elected
President of Syria, since they themselves insist on the
importance of rejecting preconditions.

The idea of creating a mechanism to establish who
is responsible for the use of chemical weapons no longer
makes any sense when Washington and its allies have
already identified the perpetrators and, essentially,
appointed themselves their executioners.

Apparently the impression has been created
that * encouraged by the Western troika's oh-so-
encouraging air strikes and the new lot of sanctions
that Washington has promised us - Russia will have to
change its position. It is time that the West understood
that this logic has never worked in the past with regard
to Russia and will not work in the future either. The
British and French delegations hastened to set up plans
for Syria a few days ago. We too have a plan. We do not
claim it to be exhaustive, but permit me to acquaint the
Council with it.

First, there can be no military solution to the Syrian
conflict. We are all familiar with the political basis
for a settlement. We must work together to implement
resolution 2254 (2015), which the negotiations in the
framework of the Astana process and the results of
the Syrian National Dialogue Congress in Sochi are
designed to assist. We urge the United States and its
allies to end their aggressive actions and threats to use
force against the sovereign State of Syria, in violation
of the Charter of the United Nations and international
law. They serve only to make the prospects for peace
more distant.

Secondly, we urge them to halt all efforts to create
new realities in Syria, undermining its sovereignty and
territorial integrity, working to maintain the foreign
occupation of parts of Syria and its further division,
plundering natural resources and inciting hostility
between various sectors of the country's population.

Thirdly, we urge all States and Syrian opposition
groups to cease their aggressive and hateful rhetoric
directed at Syria's legitimate authorities and at Russia,
and to stop taking steps intended to bring about a
violent overthrow of power.

Fourthly, we call on States that wield corresponding
influence to work to finally and irrevocably separate the
armed groups from terrorists and to embark on genuine
international cooperation in combating terrorism,
without double standards.

Fifthly, we urge the international community to
join the efforts to bring Syria humanitarian assistance
without delay and to reject any manipulation of the
issue for political purposes.

Lastly, we call on opposition entities to immediately
abandon any incitements to external aggression through
provocations using chemical weapons, and on their
Western sponsors not to exploit such provocations.

