Mr. Abulhasan (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I
wish at the outset to express our appreciation for the
outstanding role you have assumed, Mr. President, in
steering the work of the Security Council, given the
very difficult circumstances in the Middle East. We
appreciate your efforts in this area.

We had great hopes that the international
community would be able to convince the Government
of Israel to listen to the voice of reason and justice and
fully implement Security Council resolutions through
the complete and immediate withdrawal of its forces
from the Palestinian territory and the end of crimes
committed against the Palestinian people.

Regrettably, however, these efforts have not
convinced Israel to comply with international demands
to put an end to this crisis, the impact of which is
causing it to escalate into a humanitarian crisis, the
dimensions of which the world has never before
witnessed.

As Israel implements its systematic policies of
destroying the infrastructure of the occupied
Palestinian territories, killing innocent civilians,
isolating the population and laying siege to it, as well
as destroying all elements of life there, it justifies the
maintenance of its security under the pretext of fighting
terrorism, an international trend. Israel is condemning
itself and its policies because it was Israel that planted
and expanded terrorism in the region through policies
of brutal repression and the use of undeterred force.
Israel basically considers resistance to occupation a
form of terrorism. What other occupation could be as
cruel as the Israeli occupation? It produces in people
hatred and anger. Hence, the natural and legitimate
response of the repressed Palestinian people.

Kuwait strongly condemns the gross violations
carried out by Israeli forces against Palestinian
civilians, particularly in the Jenin refugee camp. Many
news reports and reports of humanitarian organizations
have informed us of the magnitude and brutality of the
massacres that have been carried out by the Israeli
security forces.

What makes us really sad and pained are the
images of Palestinian children who are now
experiencing the worst period of their lives. It is ironic
that Israel intends to participate in the work of the
upcoming special session of the General Assembly on
children - Israel, whose record includes the killing of
innocent children indiscriminately. In this connection,
Kuwait calls upon the international community,
through the Council, to make those responsible in the
Israeli Government accountable for these crimes that
contravene the most basic humanitarian values and
principles and international humanitarian law.

Kuwait expresses its support for the demands of
the Palestinian people and for the Council to continue
to fulfil the responsibility entrusted to it by forcing
Israel to immediately implement relevant Security
Council resolutions, particularly resolutions 1397
(2002), 1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002), and to lift the
siege imposed by it against Palestinian towns and holy
sites in them and against the legitimate leadership of
the Palestinian people.

We take into account the proposals made by
Secretary-General Kofi Annan to the Council today
concerning the dispatch of a multinational force with
the aim of restoring stability, protecting civilians and
ensuring the implementation of resolutions of
international legitimacy and the agreements signed
between the two parties and the resumption of
negotiations. Kuwait once again salutes this role
assumed by the Secretary-General, and we encourage
him to continue to carry it out.

We also welcome the efforts made by Secretary
of State Colin Powell and the members of the
"quartet". However, it is regrettable that the Israeli
Government continues to reject all such efforts, thus
causing their failure, and insists on destroying
everything left in the occupied Palestinian territory. In
this connection, we call upon the "quartet" and the
international community to continue their efforts to
pressure Israel to respect resolutions of international
legitimacy.

In conclusion, we wish to draw the Council's
attention to the fact that it is wrong to ignore the
extreme anger of the Arabs. Peace in the region will be
threatened if the Council continues to disregard this
Arab rage.

