Mr. Menkerios: I should like at the outset, since
this is the first time the Committee is formally meeting
with the entire Council, to thank the Secretary-General
and the Council for the confidence they placed in me
and in my colleagues to come up with
recommendations on this very important issue. I should
like also to thank Ambassador Valdivieso and
Mr. Stephanides, as well as their offices, for the
valuable support and guidance they have given without
interfering with the process of the work of the
Committee. I should like also to thank the relevant
Missions, particularly the United States and the
Russian Federation - which were the sponsors of the
resolution - for their contribution, collaboration and
advice in the process of our work.
Having said that, I will not repeat once again an
introduction of the contents of the report, which has
been adequately presented by Ambassador Valdivieso.
If you will allow me, Sir, I will only try to elucidate on
some of the questions that were raised by the various
delegations in their comments.

I should like to say that we feel, of course,
rewarded by the comments that we have heard -
comments which we believe have done service to the
recommendations we have made. A few of the
questions that have been raised I believe are pertinent
and need to be explained.

There was one question regarding the extent to
which the Committee consulted with the countries
bordering Afghanistan with regard to their readiness
and willingness to cooperate with the placement of
people on the ground. I should like to say from the
outset that if we had one shortcoming, it was the fact
that we were not able to do this - first, because of the
shortage of time, and, secondly, because, as was
explained by the Chinese Ambassador this morning,
the Chinese border is a very short sort of border, and
no problems have been reported that would require
deeper investigation. But, basically, it was because of
the shortage of time that we were not able to visit
China. But that does not mean that we did not hold
discussions with representatives here at the Mission
and also in the field with Ambassadors.

We tried as much as possible, when we
generalized as to what the views of the countries
bordering Afghanistan were, to mention the countries
we visited and to exclude China, simply because we
may not have known, with respect to those particular
comments, what the Chinese position would be.

That is what we have done. We have provided a
framework - a framework based on our discussions
with those countries, all of which welcomed support in
these areas. We did not discuss the placement of
personnel on the ground, simply because that issue had
not been finalized when we were holding discussions
with them. But we understood that all of the countries
we visited do have support teams, or technical support
from the United Nations or other international
organizations, as well as bilaterally with friendly
countries - technical support with personnel on the
ground.

Therefore, we did not feel there was any
particular reason that they would in fact reject such a
move; and in general terms they welcomed it. So we
put it in the form of a general recommendation - to be
based, however, on an assessment visit to all those
countries to establish need in any or all of those areas
and to determine their readiness to accept this. A
concrete suggestion would then be made to them on the
basis of the assessment mission. So if there is a feeling
that there is no need, that would be taken note of at the
time of the assessment visit.

Concern was voiced by the representative of
Tunisia that some of the general recommendations had
not been widely discussed at the international level and
had not been the object of final agreement. That is true.
These are recommendations which have on the whole
been accepted, for instance, by members of the
Wassenaar Arrangement. Others have been viewed
positively on a general level. But they are still
proposals, and as such they will be presented at the
forthcoming United Nations Conference on the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in all its
Aspects, to be held from 9 to 20 July.

We, however, see value in our recommendations,
given the need to create a more effective monitoring of
the illicit movement of small arms. The
recommendations we have included in this draft text
would prove positive if adopted on a wider scale.

There was a concern voiced both by Ireland and
by Norway about fuels that are used for military
purposes: that our recommendation is that regard
should not harm the humanitarian effort. That is a very
valid point. We have come to learn that some of the
fuels and, especially, the lubricants that are used for
military hardware are not used for flights that are
required for humanitarian purposes. These could be
identified, especially the lubricants that are needed for
heavy military machinery, which are not required for
humanitarian efforts. If there are any fuels that could
be used by both - since a precedent has already been
established by which flights are banned but by which
particular consideration is made for humanitarian
flights - fuels used for military purposes could be
banned, and then, if there is a need for humanitarian
flights, the same procedure for allowing flights to take
place could be used to allow the use of such fuel for
humanitarian purposes. We feel that is easier than
completely opening it up and enabling military
equipment to use these necessary fuels and lubricants.

Another question raised, again by Norway, was
whether it would be advisable to place monitoring
support teams in offices with other United Nations
agencies that are operating in Afghanistan, rather than
locating them outside Afghanistan. These technical
teams would be going to the neighbours of Afghanistan
to support their efforts. I think this remains to be seen.
The efforts of these teams need to be seen within what
we have tried to establish as an overall view of this
matter: that the sanctions must not be viewed in
isolation from all the other efforts that the United
Nations is making to resolve the problem in
Afghanistan. If they are seen as part and parcel of the
effort towards a political solution, of humanitarian
relief efforts and of economic support, then there will
be a greater need for all the various agencies involved
in the area to coordinate in terms of what they are
doing, rather than seeing them as one aspect of a
United Nations effort completely isolated from other
efforts being made.

We heard this when we were in the field also: we
tried to learn the views and opinions and to secure
information from the various United Nations agencies
operating there. Some said, "Look, we do not want to
say anything; we are engaged in a humanitarian effort,
and we do not want to have anything to do with the
sanctions business, because that is going to jeopardize
what we are doing on the humanitarian front". So the
concern is understandable, and it has been raised there
too. But we feel that this could change; it needs to
change. It all needs to be seen as a package, with each
component important to the operation of the others.

Moreover, most of these teams would be working
with the various ministries and agencies of the
countries themselves. If we were to send a team to a
particular country, it would be working directly with
the customs officers and with the ministry of the
interior that polices the borders, or perhaps with the
army, in trying to make their capacity to control their
borders more effective. Thus, it would not be a
committee that would sit in judgement and try to
oversee what the country is doing; rather, it would be
engaged with the country's activities, so we do not feel
it would be seen in a negative way, as some described
it in our discussions there. We hope this will minimize
any negative view of these bodies.

Those in my View were the questions that needed
to be addressed. Our task was to come up with
recommendations that would be helpful to members of
the Council when they take decisions on this issue. We
are very glad that we could be of service.

