Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): I would like to thank you very
much, Madam President, for convening this open debate
on a subject of profound contemporary significance.
I also thank you for the deeply analytical concept
note (S/2015/306, annex) that you have provided as a
compass for our deliberations. I would like to express
my deepest appreciation to the Secretary-General for
his briefing as well his detailed report on Small Arms
and Light Weapons (S/2015/289). Our appreciation also
goes to Prince Zeid Ra'ad Al Hussein, United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, for his soul-
searching briefing, as well as to Mr. Karamoko Diakite
for stirring our moral conscience.

The world today is witnessing mindless killings and
despicable violence occasioned by terrorist groups such
as Boko Haram, Al-Shabaab, Al-Qaida, the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant and the Al-Nusra Front. We
all know that what drives and sustains their mindless
behaviour is the unbridled proliferation of small arms
and light weapons. The pervasive misuse of weapons in
conflicts worldwide is also an immediate driving factor
in fostering the displacement of peoples. That can be
seen in conflict dynamics in various theatres of war
where such weapons are readily available. I believe
that we must employ a more dynamic approach to the
elimination of the illicit proliferation of small arms
and light weapons and ready access to ammunition.
The illicit supply of small arms and light weapons to
non-State actors has been a major factor of political
instability and insecurity in Africa. That is precisely
why we deem it a vital necessity for the Security
Council, and indeed the international community,
to take strident, concrete and effective measures to
prevent non-State actors from acquiring weapons.

The Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects remains the key United
Nations initiative with a comprehensive approach
aimed at addressing the scourge that the illicit transfer
of small arms and light weapons has become. It needs
to be emphasized, however, that the realization of the
full potential of the Programme of Action lies in the full
synergy of its trilateral implementation mechanism.

Nigeria has remained consistent with regard
to the need for a regional approach to combating
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons.
The adoption of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) Convention on Small Arms
and Light Weapons, Their Ammunition and Other
Related Materials, signed in Abuja in June 2006, and
the ECOWAS 1998 Moratorium on the Importation,
Exportation and Manufacture of Small Arms and Light
Weapons in West Africa are significant responses
forged by regional contributions to the global challenge
that is posed by the proliferation of illicit small arms.
The fact that an estimated 8 million small arms are in
circulation in the West African subregion, of which
about 80,000 are estimated to be held by insurgent
groups and other non-State actors, underscores the
need for ECOWAS member States to work relentlessly
together to deal with the problem of small arms and
light weapons.

Nigeria shares the View of the Secretary-General
that the diversion of small arms is a major problem
across the world, which contributes to insecurity and
is linked to the activities of mobs terrorizing people's
homes, rebel attacks on civilians and peacekeepers,
organized crime and terrorism. It is therefore crucial that
attention be paid to the factors causing the diversion of
small arms, including improper controls, unauthorized
retransfer, thefts from poorly secured stockpiles,
handouts to armed groups and other non-State actors
in barter exchanges involving, in particular, natural
resources.

Nigeria believes that the support of the Security
Council for the United Nations Programme of Action
to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects
should be reflected in the adoption and implementation
of practical measures to eliminate illicit small arms. In
addition to the measures envisaged in resolution 2117
(2013), the Council should continue to pursue genuine
efforts to prevent conflicts and support the pacific
settlement of disputes in order to remove or, at least,
minimize the risk of armed conflict.

There is also a need to support the creation of a
political atmosphere that is conducive to harmonious
relationships at the national, subregional and regional
levels. It is particularly important to foster a sense
of belonging among people in countries that are
susceptible to political instability. Nigeria urges
the Security Council to aim for and encourage, with
greater intensity, structures and processes that promote
democracy, human rights and the rule of law where they
do not exist, and their consolidation in unstable political
environments where they already exist. Above all, the
international community should vigorously address,
in an integrated manner, the economic, security and
developmental challenges faced by countries that are
vulnerable to armed conflict. Such measures would, in
our view, obviate the recourse to the illicit acquisition
of small arms and light weapons in order to pursue
political goals.

Nigeria welcomes the entry into force of the Arms
Trade Treaty on 24 December 2014. As one of the first
countries in Africa to ratify the Treaty, we are firmly
committed to meeting our obligations under it. We are
of the belief that it could make a vital contribution to
international peace and security and the stability of
nations, including the reduction of human suffering.
We urge more States, in particular large exporters
and importers of conventional weapons, to ratify and
accede to the Treaty, which would bring us closer to the
overall objective of its universalization.

Nigeria reiterates its commitment to participate in
all initiatives at the subregional, regional and global
levels aimed at addressing, in a comprehensive manner,
the illicit transfer and trafficking in small arms and
light weapons.

