Mr. Patriota (Brazil): Let me congratulate the
Republic of Korea for assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of February. I also thank
you, Sir, for having convened this timely and important
high-level debate on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict.

I would like to greet Her Excellency Mrs. Louise
Mushikiwabo, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Rwanda,
and His Excellency Mr. Elmar Mammadyarov, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Azerbaijan, and thank them for
their contribution to this debate.

I am equally grateful to Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his very informative briefing, as well as to
High Commissioner Navi Pillay and Mr. Philip Spoerri,
of the International Committee of the Red Cross, for
their remarks.

As we gather to discuss this crucial item on the
Council's agenda, our point of departure must be the
acknowledgement that, as indicated by the Secretary-
General in paragraph 2 of his latest report (S/2012/376),
the state of affairs regarding the protection of civilians
is "abysmal".

Civilians continue to be injured, displaced and
killed in great numbers and subjected to all kinds of
hardships in many parts ofthe world. It is our collective
moral and political responsibility to confront this
situation and offer improved prospects to civilians
facing actual or potential risks.

The difficulties that have prevented us from
adequately discharging our responsibilities in the
area of the protection of civilians do not stem from
differences on the fundamental ethics underlying the
concept. They stem from differences that prevent us
from translating our common ethics into agreed policies
leading to coherent and effective results.

The use of force in the protection of civilians stands
out as an issue that divides opinions, compromises
efforts towards the peaceful settlement of disputes, and
distances us from dealing with the multifaceted issues
surrounding protection.

As regards the use of force, a Brazilian concept
paper on "responsibility while protecting" (S/2011/701, annex) was shared with the Security Council in 2011.
In our View, resort to military action should always
be an exceptional measure, after all peaceful means
have been exhausted and only upon the authorization
of the Council. If force is authorized, it must be
judicious, proportionate and limited to the objectives
established by the Council. We must be careful not
to worsen situations that put civilians at risk and
thus involuntarily contribute to further violence and
instability. Furthermore, the Council should assure the
wider membership that military action is monitored
and resolutions are interpreted and implemented in a
way that guarantees that the responsibility to protect
is observed. Events in the recent past make us ponder
whether direct military intervention and support for
armed groups have led to improved circumstances for
civilians or to further instability and violence.

However, even as we ponder past experience, we can
easily agree on the notion that the most effective way to
protect civilians is to prevent armed conflict and, should
such conflict arise, to display a real commitment to its
resolution by peaceful means. The Charter provides
a basis for associating the maintenance of peace and
security with the promotion of socioeconomic and
institutional development, as well as respect for human
rights. I had the opportunity to highlight this aspect
in the debate under Brazil's presidency of the Council
in February 2011 on the interdependence of peace,
security and development (see S/PV.6479).

It is arguable that promoting sustainable
development, poverty eradication and food security
contributes to the promotion of peace and security
by creating a more stable environment for civilians.
Conversely, it is regrettable that the world spends
enormous resources on the development of weapons
and military budgets while we are still short of meeting
official development assistance targets, as agreed on
in the 2002 Monterrey Consensus. This disturbing
situation was described by Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon in a powerful article published last August.
As he said, the world is overarmed and peace is
underfunded.

If we are to seriously commit to the protection of
civilians, and if we all agree that the primary way to
achieve that is by avoiding the emergence of conflict,
we must seek to reverse that trend. As the Secretary-
General said today, the upcoming conference on an
arms trade treaty offers us an opportunity to take a
meaningful step and to agree on rules that will help
spare civilians the consequences of poorly monitored
flows of arms.

On the nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation
front, consistent and balanced progress needs to be
made. We cannot afford to leave this agenda unfinished.
In that context, let me state that the Brazilian
Government condemns the new nuclear test carried out
by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. We urge
that Government to fully comply with all the relevant
Security Council resolutions on the matter. Brazil also
associates itself with the statement to the press read out
earlier this morning by the President of the Council.

In the same vein - approaching the protection of
civilians as a means to avoid conflict - the Council
should fully assume its responsibility regarding the
plight of those who are victimized on a daily basis
in protracted conflicts, such as that between Israel
and Palestine. The protection of civilians must be
implemented in a universal and non-selective manner.
Civilians should be equally protected against threats
of violence, be they in Horns or in Gaza, in Kandahar
or Timbuktu. Multilateral efforts should be in line
with international human rights law and international
humanitarian law, including in the context of the fight
against terrorism. In that context, Brazil welcomes
the announcement by the United Nations Special
Rapporteur on Counter-Terrorism and Human Rights
concerning the launch of an inquiry into the civilian
impact and human rights implications of the use of
drones and other forms of targeted killing for counter-
terrorism and counter-insurgency purposes.

We welcome the increased participation of
regional organizations, such as the African Union, in
efforts towards mediation and conflict resolution in
coordination with multilateral efforts, in accordance
with relevant provisions of the Charter. At the same
time, we must recognize that coordination between
the regional and the multilateral has not always been
satisfactory, and that improved governance will be
required to deal effectively with situations of instability
in which civilians are placed at risk.
The complexity of the challenges involved requires

inclusiveness in decision-making and in implementing
decisions. In that respect, a word on the long-overdue
reform of the Security Council is also justified. A more
representative and legitimate Council can, and in my
opinion will, help lead to decisions and strategies that
contribute to avoid conflict and protect a greater number
of civilians worldwide. Negotiating and building
common ground is the Council's fundamental task. In
that regard, diplomacy is of the essence and should not
be equated, as it sometimes is, with a lack of resolve.
The phrase "there is no military solution" is being
increasingly used and may reflect the recognition that
we are entering a phase of greater openness to dialogue,
negotiation and diplomacy - a tendency that Brazil
would definitely support. Syria certainly comes to
mind, and Brazil agrees with those who are of the view
that there is no military solution to the Syrian crisis
and that the Council should firmly and unequivocally
rally behind the efforts of Joint Special Representative
Lakhdar Brahimi, on the basis of the Geneva plan of
action, which clearly opposes militarization.

I believe that, after recent experiences in the use of
force for the protection of civilians, the international
community can now better appreciate the value of
conflict prevention and the peaceful settlement of
disputes, including as tools to ensure the safety of
those whom it wishes to protect. In conclusion, let me
emphasize the importance of strategies that protect
civilians in situations of conflict through non-military
efforts. First, we see the need for a broader awareness
of the importance of dealing with the prevention of
conflict by peaceful means, including through the
promotion of social and economic development,
intensified efforts towards the full implementation of
disarmament and non-proliferation commitments and
by seriously confronting crucial challenges such as that
presented by Israel and Palestine, among others. At the
same time, in situations where conflicts do break out,
we see the urgent necessity of placing more emphasis
on diplomacy and dialogue as the primary tools for
addressing them.

