Mr. Hamer (Netherlands): During its presidency of
the Security Council in September of last year, the
Netherlands organized a special meeting to help the Council
focus more closely on the daunting issues facing Africa at
the outset of what we hoped would be the "African
century". Surely the current "month of Africa", so
energetically sponsored by you, Mr. President, is an
auspicious first step at the start of this new century.

We were impressed by the attendance at this debate of
so many heads of State from the countries most
immediately involved in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Surely this bodes well for the future of that troubled
region. In particular, we hope that further talks will produce
a realistic timetable for the implementation of the Lusaka
Agreement.

We have before us a very thoughtful and
thought-provoking report of the Secretary-General
(S/2000/30). It makes the point that the international
community's intensified involvement in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is predicated upon the renewed and
strengthened commitment of the parties to the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement. It makes it just as clear that there is
no realistic alternative to the Lusaka Agreement. It is
therefore all the more distressing that the Agreement is
being violated systematically. We urge the signatories to
end all military action in violation of the Agreement.

Priority attention needs to be accorded to improving
the disappointing performance of the Joint Military
Commission (JMC). The Netherlands supports the JMC
financially; in fact, international financial support for the
JMC is such that lack of resources cannot credibly be said
to be an obstacle to the JMC's taking the key role foreseen
in the Agreement. The JMC needs to meet more frequently
to monitor the numerous ceasefire violations. The opening
of a permanent JMC secretariat should be considered in
order to facilitate a more hands-on approach. We call on all
-V "Mu-MMJ A-tuvv

 

parties and the Organization of African Unity to renew
their efforts to improve the JMC's effectiveness and
credibility. Without a reinvigorated JMC, the efforts of
the United Nations will fall on barren soil.

A new political arrangement is necessary inside the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, including the
development of democratic and accountable State
structures which address the problems of multi-ethnicity
and power sharing. While we regret that the national
dialogue in the Democratic Republic of the Congo has
taken so long to get off the ground, we look forward to
early results from President Masire's endeavours as the
facilitator of this process. I would second the United
Kingdom Minister's view that a starting date for this
dialogue should ideally be announced this week. The
Netherlands firmly pledges its financial support to the
process.

A key threat to the Lusaka Agreement is constituted
by the Interahamwe and former Rwandese Armed Forces,
whose activities, past and present, are at the root of the
conflict. Their disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration into society, though a monumental task, will
be a crucial step in the peace process. The restoration of
the territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo will need to go hand in hand with the
accommodation of the legitimate security needs of its
neighbours. In fact, such is the involvement of regional
Powers in this conflict that in due course, an international
conference will need to address the question of peace,
stability, democracy and development in the Great Lakes
region as a whole.

The purpose of our current debate is twofold: apart
from reaffirming the parties' commitment to Lusaka, it
will serve to inform the Council's response to the
Secretary-General's recommendations for the second
phase of the United Nations operation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Despite the obvious risks of
deployment in an environment of instability, the
Netherlands supports the dispatch of 500 observers, as
proposed in the Secretary-General's report, if adequate
protection can be ensured. We must get it right this time,
and we must be willing to adopt the right mandate with
matching resources. The success of your efforts, Mr.
President, to bring the United States Congress on board
will, of course, be crucial to our ability to find these
resources.

The conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has only aggravated the misery caused during a
 

long history of human rights Violations. All over the
country, the parties to the conflict have been involved in
such Violations. We call on the parties to respect human
rights and ensure the punishment of those who violate
them.

Finally, there are two important aspects that directly
and indirectly fuel the conflict: the arms trade and the
exploitation of natural resources.

The Council, in September last year under the
Netherlands presidency, devoted a special session to small
arms and called for measures to discourage arms flows to
countries in conflict. The Council, on that occasion, also
referred to the possibility of voluntary and regional
moratoriums to facilitate reconciliation. These
recommendations apply very specifically to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in view of the large quantities of
weapons on its soil. As a first step, we would call on
United Nations Member States that have not done so yet to
adopt the policy and the guiding principles of the European
Union Code of Conduct and refrain from arms exports to
the Great Lakes region.

The exploitation of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo's economic resources by several parties helps to
continue the conflict, enabling them to finance military
expenditures. We need to redress this situation quickly and
prevent the illegal exploitation of these resources. Perhaps
it would be feasible for the Secretary-General to report
back to the Security Council on this aspect on the basis of
findings of a panel of experts, similar to the approach that
has been followed in the case of Angola. We support
wholeheartedly the very sensible suggestions made to this
effect by the ministers of France and, on an earlier
occasion, the United Kingdom.

