Lieutenant-General Prakash: It is an honour for
me, as Force Commander of one of the largest United
Nations peacekeeping missions - the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) - to be given an
opportunity to address the Council this morning on the
conditionality policy and its impact on operations.

The policy has been in operation in MONUSCO
for just over 18 months, and we now have a reasonably
good feel for what it can do and the associated issues.
These I will elaborate on a little later, but before doing
so, it might be helpful if I started by talking about what
the policy actually entails and how it is being
implemented by MONUSCO.

Protection of civilians in support of the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
remains the primary focus of our work. Among the
other tasks with which the Mission is charged, we are
mandated to support the efforts of the Government in
bringing ongoing military operations against the Forces
Democratiques de Liberation du Rwanda (FDLR), the
Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) and other armed groups
to a completion, specifically by supporting the Forces
armees de la Republique democratique du Congo
(FARDC) through jointly planned operations. But, as
stated in resolution 1925 (2010) and carried through its
current mandate - resolution 1991 (2011) -
MONUSCO support for the FARDC is strictly
conditioned on compliance by the FARDC with
international humanitarian and human rights law, and
refugee law. This caveat is what is now referred to as
the conditionality policy, and it governs the way in
which the Mission approaches the task of supporting
the FARDC and other Congolese authorities.

The policy has been translated into a detailed
mission standing operating procedure, setting out very
clear requirements that need to be met in order for
support to the FARDC to be provided. The nature of
the support includes primarily fuel, rations,
transportation, fire support, expert advice and casualty
evacuation. Certain ongoing FARDC actions against
the armed groups, such as Operation Amani Leo and
Operation Iron Stone, inter alia, are being carried out
with considerable support from MONUSCO. That
support is conditional on there being sufficient joint
planning of operations, particularly with respect to
protection of civilians. Support is limited to units and
commanders with acceptable human rights records.
Implicit is the requirement for adequate screening of
key personnel and visibility of FARDC actions in the
field. Support is denied at the planning stage to units or
commanders believed to have committed grave human
rights violations, including mass rapes and the
employment of child soldiers.

In this regard, a thorough screening process is in
place. Even after the support is provided, if at some
stage non-compliance with the conditionality policy
comes to light, support can be withdrawn after due
notification to the authorities of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and if they then fail to take
appropriate action, as was the case when serious
human rights violations were committed by one of the
battalions recently. The standard operating procedure
remains the subject of fine-tuning.

The implementation of the conditionality policy
is regularly reviewed by the senior management group,
in consultation with representatives of the
humanitarian community, including the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. The impact of
the conditionality policy is now visible.

There are, of course, some positives. In certain
areas, the policy has had a positive impact on the
conduct of operations by the FARDC. It has brought
the MONUSCO Force and FARDC closer to jointly
planning operations and developing operational
concepts that are applicable to the unique conditions
that prevail in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Both sides have learned from each other, and, as a
result, operations have become much more
sophisticated in their design and implementation.
Importantly, protection of civilians has been factored in
at the start of the planning process, as inputs are sought
from a large number of stakeholders, including the
Joint Human Rights Office within the Mission. The
Mission's efforts and those of the FARDC are now
much better coordinated, with obvious benefits in
terms of what can be achieved on the ground. The
requirement for MONUSCO is to closely scrutinize the
distribution of logistics support, which has its obvious
operational benefits. It has helped to ensure that our
support gets to the troops in the field as intended, to
ensure that they are properly fed and sustained, thereby
contributing to individual morale and motivation.

The very existence of the conditionality policy, as
well as President Kabila's "zero-tolerance" policy, has
reminded Commanders of their personal
responsibilities in exercising effective command and
control over their own troops in operations. For their
own sake, as well as for that of the unit, they have had
to pay more attention to what is being done by the
troops in their name.

By and large, the recent behaviour of
MONUSCO-supported FARDC units has been
satisfactory, and the conduct of most joint operations
has not been impacted by adverse publicity. In an army
made up of professionals, ex-rebels and Mayi-Mayis,
which has attracted criticism for preying off the local
population, we now have started seeing encouraging
signs of improvement in personal discipline and human
values.

There are certain issues. Despite certain obvious
benefits, the policy presents certain issues and
challenges for the Mission. The limited resources
available to the Mission to implement the
conditionality policy, in addition to other
commitments, means that there is a restriction on the

number of FARDC units that it can support. At a
certain point in time, we run out of military observers
and contingents to carry out the monitoring functions.
We also run out of civilian staff to conduct the
necessary screening checks. In addition to this,
experience has shown there are many commanders who
do not meet the criteria. So, one of the consequences of
our own conditionality policy is that our capacity to
reach and influence all parts of the FARDC order of
battle is not as great as we would want it to be.

That having been said, even if we had sufficient
resources we would still find ourselves in the situation
where there is no longer a strong appetite within the
FARDC for conducting joint operations, particularly in
the Kivus. They argue, with some vindication, that
operational surprise and security are lost due to the
protracted preparations and wide consultation. The
trend is therefore away from joint operations towards
unilateral FARDC operations, over which the Mission
has limited oversight or influence.

It is a fact that we have been breaking new
ground with the introduction of a conditionality policy.
We had nothing to fall back on in terms of tried and
tested guidance for implementing the policy. Only as
time has passed have we become more confident about
the best ways of operationalizing the policy. There
have been stresses and strains along the way, including
with our FARDC partners, who have complained about
inadequate consultation and engagement, particularly
in the early days when considering withdrawal of
support to offending units. Requests for changes of
commanders have aroused feelings of intrusion into
areas of national sovereignty.

Our own troops have also faced the dilemma of
trying to work out where to place priority -
monitoring supported FARDC or countering
anti-Government forces? This has not been easy,
particularly for junior field commanders, who are
trained more to deal with clarity than ambiguity. Who
is on which side? When should they act, and how?
Conditionality has certainly added to the burden on
such officers and made the operational landscape more
blurred and challenging.

Let me make some recommendations. Having
sketched out some of the ways in which the
conditionality policy can impact on operations, I would
now like to make a few suggestions on how it might be
enhanced for future missions. First and foremost, the

conditionality policy cannot stand on its own for long-
term gains; it must be simultaneously followed up and
supported by broader military reforms, such as proper
integration, and security sector reform.

Secondly, while it is desirable to make the
screening system broad and deep, apart from being
resource-intensive, it tends to reduce the number of
commanders and units available for operations that can
be supported by MONUSCO. The extent to which the
exercise is undertaken needs to be looked at again. We
need to find a balance between what is desirable and
what is feasible, in order for the policy not to become
so invasive that it conflicts with the achievement of our
overall mandate.

Thirdly, where possible we should seek to
introduce this policy at mission start-up rather than
further downstream. It is easier to implement when
everything else is new, and the impact could potentially
be much greater.

To conclude, conditionality policy has had both
positive and negative impacts on operations. There are
certain broader issues and human values at stake. To
my mind, this policy is there to stay, but there is scope
for further development and refinement. If the policy
were seen as jointly owned by our national partners,
this would be of great help. While it would still be a
vehicle for safeguarding the United Nations image and
reputation, it could also create an opening for the host
nation to influence and take informed decisions on
what and who is supported.

