Mr. Impagliazzo (spoke in French): I would first
like to thank you, Mr. President, for your invitation to
address the Security Council.

The Community of Sant'Egidio, over which I
have the honour of presiding and which is an advisory
member of the Economic and Social Council - is an
international institution that is present in more than
70 countries and has long experience in mediation
and dialogue for peace all over the world, especially
in Africa, starting with the General Peace Accords for
Mozambique, signed in Rome 25 years ago in 1992.
Sant'Egidio is itself partly African, since it has several
thousand members in some 30 African countries. We
have an exceptional long-standing relationship with
the United Nations, with whom we have just signed
an agreement in the form of an exchange of letters of
intent to strengthen our collaboration in the areas of
peace, conflict prevention and crisis stabilization.

The Central African Republic is a priority for
Sant'Egidio, which has been involved with the country
since 2003, in the promotion of peace and dialogue
among its various components. I would like to briefly
mention our recent initiatives, such as the November
2013 republican pact, which the Council described in
resolution 2127 (2013) as

"a credible framework to promote an inclusive
national dialogue between all political, social and
religious parties of the country" (resolution 2127 (2013), para. 7).

The Council went on to request the transitional
authorities to implement it.

In line with the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic, that initiative aimed to
extend the authority of the State, maintain its territorial
integrity and foster the promotion and protection of
human rights as well as disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation (DDRR). Moreover, in
2014, Sant'Egidio worked to foster dialogue between
religious communities, in particular to end the isolation
to which the Muslim community was subjected after the
fall of the Seleka regime. During 2015, an awareness-
raising campaign was carried out for the political forces
to support the electoral process and to encourage the
acceptance of the election results. Sant'Egidio also
facilitated Pope Francis' visit to Bangui in November
2015, and, in particular his meeting with representatives
of the armed groups present in the capital at the time,
by asking them to voluntarily strengthen security in the
neighbourhoods that the Pope was scheduled to visit.
As noted, that visit had a strong positive impact on the
stability of the country and on ending the isolation of
the Muslim community, and a new impetus was given
to the process of national reconciliation.

Since President Touadera's election in January 2016,
all of Sant'Egidio's efforts have been aimed at enabling
the democratically elected authorities to exercise their
mandate throughout the country. In that regard, since
November 2016, with the authorization of the Head
of State of the Central African Republic, and while
informing Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Onanga-Anyanga, at every stage - whom I
would like to commend and thank for his interesting
briefing - representatives of the 14 armed groups
visited Rome at various times - both those who had
joined the DDRR process and those who opted out, in
particular the Front populaire pour la renaissance de la
Centrafrique (FPRC).

The meetings remained confidential and did not
encroach on the other consultations under way. It
should be noted that sanctions were not imposed on
any of the participants in the meeting in Sant'Egidio
between representatives of the FPRC and the Unite pour
la paix en Centrafrique fighting for control of Bria. In
some cases, the Government of the Central African
Republic itself facilitated the travel of representatives
to such meetings, which are supposed to assist, support
and complement the efforts of the Government of the
Central African Republic and its President.

That endeavour spawned a positive dynamic. In
the coming days, Sant'Egidio intends to bring together
representatives of all 14 armed groups and envoys of
the Central African Government tasked by President
Touadera to analyse the critical points of the DDRR
process andthepoliticaldialogue. Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Onanga-Anyanga will also be
present at that meeting. It is through those meetings
that the international community will be able to reap
the benefits of efforts that are confidential and that
are compatible with and complement other ongoing
initiatives that can finalize the ceasefire and ensure
that all groups take part in the DDRR process. It will
be possible to work on critical points on the issue of
transitional justice and on guarantees governing the
access and protection of humanitarians, in accordance
with the mandate of the United Nations in the Central
African Republic.
Based on our experience, we believe that, first,
direct dialogue between the presidency and its
Government, on one hand, and the representatives of
the armed groups, on the other, is absolutely necessary
and a part of African ownership of the process. In that
regard, the full implementation of the African mediation
initiative could further assist in advancing that process.

Secondly, reaching consensus on the final terms of
DDRR, restoring sovereign functions to the State and
ending the isolation of institutional actors are absolutely
urgent, in particular following the spate of violence in
recent weeks.

To that end, the aim of the meetings is to help to
rebuild trust among Central Africans, in particular
non-institutional actors - the armed groups.
Our experience in the field and our methods of
complementarity, confidentiality, flexibility and direct
dialogue have met with proven success. As underscored
last Friday by Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey
Feltman, over the years, Sant'Egidio has demonstrated

"its ability to bring non-governmental actors and,
in particular armed groups to the negotiating table".

Finally, this exercise could help break the deadlock
in the national dialogue and accelerate United Nations
operations as a whole.

