Mr. Tsymbaliuk (Ukraine): At the outset, I would
like to thank the President for convening this open
debate, which allow us to keep track of the current
situation in the Middle East and to facilitate the process
of finding ways for settling conflicts and tensions in
the region.

While Ukraine has aligned itself with the statement
of the observer of the European Union, I would like to
add a few words in my national capacity.

Ukraine is committed to a balanced and impartial
position on the Middle East issue and is willing to
develop stable and constructive relations with both
Israel and Arab States. We have consistently support
the Middle East peace process, and we believe that
peace in the region can be achieved only if viable
mutual concessions are on the negotiating table.
Recalling recent efforts aimed at resolving the conflict,
such as convening another round of peace talks, we
cannot ignore the fact that significant progress in the
settlement of the situation in the Middle East has still
not been made. On the contrary, recent events testify
to the escalation of tensions between the sides, which
does not contribute to finding a way out of the political
deadlock.

My country's policy is based on the official
recognition of the right of the Palestinian people to
self-determination and its aspirations to create an
independent Palestinian State. At the same time,
the proclamation of the Palestinian State should be
contingent on an outcome of the Palestinian-Israeli
peace settlement. In that respect, we fully support the
United States-led peace efforts, as well as respective
United Nations initiatives, and hope they will result
in comprehensive agreement between the parties to
the conflict. Therefore, we call on political leaders
from all sides to work together through visible actions
to de-escalate the situation. We believe that direct
negotiations between the parties is the only way to
reach a peaceful solution, and any unilateral steps will
not solve the key problems of the peace settlement.
Ukraine is convinced that the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict can be solved only on the basis of the two-
State solution. We reiterate our position that a Israeli-
Palestinian peace agreement lies within the framework
of the unconditional fulfilment by the parties to the
conflict of the relevant Security Council resolutions,
the Madrid principles, including land for peace, the
road map, the agreements previously reached by the
parties and the Arab Peace Initiative of 2002.

With regard to the situation in Syria, Ukraine
reaffirms its commitment to the universal principles
and basic norms of international law, in particular strict
observance of human rights, territorial integrity, the
inviolability of borders and State sovereignty. Ukraine
strongly condemns the ongoing violence and systematic
human rights violations in Syria perpetrated in particular
by the regime and terrorist groups. The indiscriminate
and excessive use of force by the army against the
civilian population, as well as intolerable violence by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and other
terrorist groups operating on the ground, contributes
to the considerable human sufferings in Syria. In that
respect, we reiterate our full support for the mission
of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria and other international initiatives brokered by
international organizations - such as the United
Nations, the League of Arab States, the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons * aimed at
a strategic de-escalation on the basis of the Geneva
communique of 30 June 2012 (S/2012/522, annex),
including an inclusive political transition. We continue
to stand for an immediate end to the bloodshed and call
for the maximum use of political and diplomatic means
to resolve the conflict, in line with respective Security
Council resolutions, in order to maintain the country's
unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity.

Ukraine remains deeply concerned about the
activities of ISIL and other associated terrorist entities
in the Middle East. The negative impact of their
presence in the region, violent extremist ideology and
destabilizing actions must not be tolerated and should
be duly addressed by the international community. We
strongly condemn the crimes and acts of mass violence
that ISIL commits against civilians, including the most
vulnerable minorities, which may amount to crimes
against humanity.

While fighting against foreign-backed terrorists on
its soil and facing direct foreign aggression, Ukraine
shares the view that activity of such terrorist groups,
as well as their violent ideology, constitutes a threat
not only to the Middle East region, but also to the
international community. We support all efforts aimed
at the decisive fight against terrorism regardless of
where and in what form it takes place.

