Mr. Munoz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to start by thanking the President for convening
this important open debate on peacebuilding in
societies emerging from prolonged internal conflict.

We concur with the concept paper prepared for
this occasion to the effect that the first six to twelve
weeks following the signing of a ceasefire or peace
agreement are crucial for internal stability.

In this critical phase, the international community
has a vital role to play. The United Nations system
must provide integrated, coherent and efficient support
in this first stage in order to establish the basic
minimum required for medium- and short-term
peacebuilding.
However, we have observed that, in some cases,
the response from the multilateral system, including
the United Nations and other international
organizations and entities, tends to encounter two great
obstacles in the field that create impediments to
properly tackling the challenges of peacebuilding. I am
referring to the lack of coordination and, often, the
inefficacy of aid.

Generally, once a ceasefire or peace agreement
has been signed, the international community reacts
enthusiastically by providing various types of
cooperation and aid to the society emerging from
conflict without waiting for a body or institution to
adequately channel this initial enthusiasm. This lack of
coordination augments the duplication of functions. In
some cases, it further complicates subsequent efforts at
medium- and long-term peacebuilding.

An integrated office endowed with ample
authority to address all aspects linked to peacebuilding
following a ceasefire, including peacekeeping activities
and activities related to development and the
strengthening of the rule of law, would, in Chile's
View, facilitate an integrated approach that allows for
the creation of national capacities from the start and
the creation of a rational process of medium- and long-
term peacebuilding.

We believe that an integrated approach would
facilitate coordination, and it is here that the
Peacebuilding Commission plays a decisive role. In
almost two years of operation, the Commission has
demonstrated the advantages of collectively examining
the aspects of security with matters connected to
development and rule of law in societies emerging
from conflict. We should take advantage of the
experience acquired by the Peacebuilding Commission
and not repeat the mistakes of the past.

Another problem that emerges in the weeks
following a ceasefire or peace agreement is that a large
quantity of aid begins to arrive at a time when the
capacity to absorb it adequately in the field is
insufficient. Then, when an assistance network is
finally in place to channel the aid, the media have
usually left and the flow of aid decreases drastically.

In order to circumvent this paradox, we should be
capable of acting swiftly in areas identified as
priorities in the first stage of peacebuilding. Here,
again, the activity of the Peacebuilding Commission
and the Peacebuilding Fund can play a crucial role by
providing rapid aid through coordinated quick-impact
projects and by collaborating with the national
Government to identify its priorities.

The Fund should not, however, be seen as just
another source of funding for development. I would
like to conclude my statement by making a call for us
to consider the Peacebuilding Commission as the organ
that can respond to the majority of questions and
difficulties in post-conflict societies. The Commission
has the appropriate tools and mandate, and we should
feel confident that its integrated approach can face
these challenges, alongside the States involved and
from the perspective of so-called national ownership.

