Mr. Mellbin: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States. The
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Iceland, Serbia, Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Norway, Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova, Armenia
and Georgia align themselves with this statement.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive report (S/2013/535), Special
Representative Jan Kubis for his briefing and
Ambassador Tanin for his encouraging remarks.

The EU acknowledges and supports the important
work of Special Representative Jan Kubis and the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) in building a constructive relationship
with the Government of Afghanistan. The political
role of UNAMA in advising and assisting the Afghan
Government is of central importance, especially in the
context of the upcoming elections and in support of the
peace and reconciliation process.

We reiterate our firm commitment to Afghanistan
and the Afghan people and the long-term partnership
agreed between the Government of Afghanistan and
the international community in Chicago and Tokyo
last year. In the context of that long-term partnership,
the EU is working to finalize the negotiations on the
EU-Afghanistan cooperation agreement on partnership
and development. The EU and its member States
currently give more than €1 billion ayear in development
assistance to Afghanistan.

The full implementation of the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework remains paramount to
achieving a successful transition in Afghanistan.
Good progress has been made in some areas, notably
in establishing a legislative framework for the
forthcoming elections. But more needs to be done
to tackle corruption, promote economic growth,
strengthen the rule of law and safeguard human rights.
The United Nations has a critical leadership role to play
in enabling the international community to work ever
more effectively together and with the Government to
fulfil commitments made in Tokyo. In our statement
today, we want to focus on the important role
Afghanistan's institutions have to play in safeguarding
progress to date and providing the platform for growth
and development.

The presidential and provincial elections in April
2014 will mark a historic moment in Afghanistan. It
will be the first time that there has been a democratic
transition of power. Progress in establishing the
legislative framework for the elections has been
impressive, and we commend the relevant Afghan
bodies for the steps taken.

We welcome the selection and appointment of the
new members of the Independent Election Commission
and of the Independent Electoral Complaints
Commission. Those institutions will be important in
embedding democratic processes in Afghanistan. It is
vital that the needed technical and logistical elements
be put in place to guarantee their effective and
autonomous workings.

We urge the Afghan authorities to continue to
give priority to the preparations for presidential
and provincial elections. In particular, we stress the
importance of appropriate measures, both to ensure
security for voters and officials and to promote women's
participation. Those elements will be instrumental for
inclusive and transparent elections with a legitimate
outcome. The European Union and its member States
will continue to engage fully with the process over the
coming months. Financial and technical support is being
provided through the United Nations Development
Programme's electoral assistance programme, ELECT
II..

The EU believes that the rule of law is critical to
Afghanistan's development. We are supporting the
creation of an effective justice system underpinned by
a civilian police force and other rule of law institutions.
Recently, the EU's police mission, European Union
Police Mission in Afghanistan, was extended until the
end of 2014 and will continue supporting the Afghan
national police. But it is impossible for the institutions of
justice to contribute to the rule of law if the most senior
positions are occupied by officers whose terms have
long expired. We therefore call upon the Government of
Afghanistan to take action to appoint the Chief Justice
and other members of the Supreme Court, in line with
the provisions of the Constitution.

The rule of law is also critical to the full
implementation of the statutory provisions relating to
human rights, and, in particular, the rights of women.
It is imperative that the Government of Afghanistan
address widespread discrimination against women and
girls.

Institutions have an important role to play in
promoting human rights. The Afghan Independent
Human Rights Commission is an important institution
in that respect. We welcome the commitment of the
Afghan Government to retaining the "A" status,
and trust that the Government will take appropriate
action based on the advice of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, provided during her
recent visit to Afghanistan, and the recommendations of
the upcoming review by the International Coordination
Committee of National Human Rights Institutions.

Making effective Government evident to all Afghans
is vital to retaining and increasing support for the State.
The transparent flow of public funds at the national
and local levels is the backbone of a functioning State.
Afghanistan needs to take action to both implement the
constitutional framework of Government at all levels
across the country and to clarify the responsibilities
of different levels of the State where some doubt
exists. This process is particularly important as the
provincial reconstruction teams gradually hand over
their responsibilities. Addressing these issues offers
the chance of strengthening the accountability of the
Government to the Afghan people and increasing local
peoples' participation and involvement in all layers of
the State.

In addition to strengthening State institutions, we
all recognize the opportunity that would be provided by
an inclusive peace and reconciliation process. We call
on all regional Governments to use their influence to
encourage all groups to support an Afghan-led peace.
Increased regional cooperation has a key role to play
in supporting peace. We reiterate our support to the
Istanbul Process on Regional Security and Cooperation
and continue our active support to the Heart of Asia
process. We look forward to the Heart of Asia senior
officials meeting here in New York on Monday.

With the fifth and final tranche of the security
transition, Afghanistan formally assumed lead security
responsibility nationwide. The AfghanNational Security
Forces have managed to retain control of key areas,
but gains are fragile and come at a price. The Afghan
National Security Forces have sustained considerable
losses in 2013 and still experience high attrition rates.
We emphasize the importance of the ongoing efforts to
develop and put in place a mechanism which ensures the
financing of the Afghan National Security Forces after
2014. Such a mechanism must be coherent, transparent,
accountable, sustainable and effective while at the same
time fulfilling the principle of Afghan ownership and
sovereignty. We urge all parties, international partners
and the Afghan Government alike, to embrace and
advance this crucial work.

Afghanistan's institutions have a critical role to
play in ensuring that the transition is successful and
that the progress made is safeguarded and forms a
basis for Afghanistan's future peace, security, growth
and development. The EU and its member States will
continue to support this process in order to promote the
emergence of a fully self-reliant, peaceful, democratic
and prosperous society for the benefit of all Afghans.

