Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): I have the honour to
report on the portion of Security Council trip that dealt
with the issues of Somalia and Sudan. As you have
already stated, Mr. President, I had the honour to
co-lead that segment with my colleague, the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom.

To start with my own conclusions on the Somalia
trip, the people of Somalia had an opportunity that is
not readily available: to be able to put their case before
the members of the Security Council, who are
continuously considering the issue of Somalia.

We met with the Somali parties in Djibouti
because that was where the delegation of the
Transitional Federal Government was meeting with the
opposition groups, including a group called the
2
Alliance for the Re-Liberation of Somalia, to try to
agree on a way out of the difficulties that their country
has been engaged in for the past 18 years.

We began our meeting in Djibouti by being
honoured by the presence of the Prime Minister of
Djibouti, who came to welcome the Security Council,
on behalf of the Government and people of Djibouti, to
his country for those meetings. Regarding our Somali
meetings, we began meeting with the President of the
Transitional Federal Government of Somalia, who
stressed to us his willingness to find a way out of his
country's difficulties. The President of Somalia made it
very clear that his Government was willing to engage
in dialogue and reach agreement with all the parties in
Somalia.

After that, we met with an African Union
delegation, which also represented the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), led by the Peace and
Security Commissioner, Ambassador Lamamra. They
also told us that they were committed to assisting the
people of Somalia in getting out of the situation they
are in.

It became very clear, after meeting also with
representatives of the opposition parties and others,
that the primary issue in Somalia was bringing about
security in the country and a political process that
could move the situation forward. But they said that, at
the heart of the parties' difficulty was the presence of
the Ethiopian troops. Of course, what was made very
clear by the President of the Transitional Federal
Government, who had invited the Ethiopian troops,
was the fact that the Ethiopian troops were playing an
important role of maintaining security in Somalia.

However, both the Government and the
opposition parties foresaw a time when those troops
would leave, after the security situation in Somalia had
improved. The debate was over whether the troops
should leave before the security situation stabilized, or
after there had been a political agreement among the
parties and security was established. The Government
was adamant that there had first to be a political
agreement among the parties so that there would be no
vacuum. The opposition party and civil society
representatives we met with were arguing the opposite.

But the good news is that, in the end, we learned
after we had left that both parties had reached an
agreement. They realized that they first had to create a
security environment in Somalia that was guaranteed,
08-38934
so as to allow all the other foreign troops to leave the
country. But we were struck by the commitment of all
the people we talked to, whether it was the Alliance for
the Re-Liberation of Somalia, civil society or even the
United Nations country team, in their hope that
Somalia was at a different stage than at any other time.
That is because there appeared to be a willingness
among the majority of the parties to find a political
way out of the situation that they found themselves in.

We met with the country team, which gave us
insights about other issues that are very urgent in
Somalia. For instance, we were told by the country
team that the Somali shilling had collapsed and that
this has had a very adverse impact on the economy.
Additionally, three years of drought and the global
food crisis had not helped the people of Somalia, but
had increased the strain in the humanitarian situation.
And, of course, the lack of security, even for
humanitarian workers in Somalia, was also an urgent
matter facing the people.

However, all in all, the people have realized that
the way out for Somalia is, first, to establish a political
process involving as many groups and parties as
possible so that the security situation could improve.
Once the security situation has improved, they realize,
their situation and their livelihoods would, indeed,
improve as well.

We left Djibouti very encouraged that the
delegations of the Government and civil society and
the opposition parties that were there would find a way
out of this dilemma. Indeed, after we left Djibouti it
was reported that they had reached agreement. Of
course, this was not an agreement among all the parties
and groups in Somalia, so those who were outside the
agreement criticized it. But, one thing cannot be
denied: for the first time, there appears to be a critical
mass of Somali parties and groups that want peace to
emerge from the situation.

Thus, we are monitoring the situation in Somalia
and are looking forward to receiving a further report
and update from Mr. Ould Abdallah, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, who was our
host for these meetings, and to seeing whether this
situation continues.

The Security Council reiterated the intention that
is contained in the resolution, namely, that if there is an
improvement in the security situation in Somalia and if
the parties come together on a political agreement, and
08-38934

once there is an indication that the situation on the
ground has improved, the Security Council would then
consider a mission that could take over from United
Nations Operation in Somalia (UNOSOM).

I think that this is a very encouraging goal that
the Somali people have clung to, and I think that the
meetings they have had have really shown that they are
committed to that.

Finally, none of these meetings are possible
without the anonymous people who assist us in
everything we do: the Secretariat, the security people,
the country teams and the other people on the ground,
who always make these trips possible. I want to
conclude paying tribute to them and saying that we
could not do our work as well as we try to do it without
their assistance.

I am sure that the Permanent Representative of
France, when he speaks, will also mention other people
who were unexpectedly involved in our trip. The
Government of Rwanda, for example, was helpful to us
when we ran into some logistical problems. I just
mention this in order to thank all those men and
women who serve the United Nations throughout the
African continent in the most difficult situations and all
of those who assisted us and all of the Governments
that were there to assist us as well. To them, I would
like to say that we appreciate their efforts.

