Mr. Sul Kyung-hoon (Republic of Korea): I should
like to join other speakers in thanking the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Abou Moussa,
for his informative briefing.

The Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) remains a major
threat to peace and security in Central Africa. More than
440,000 people have been displaced across the region.
Unless collectively and systematically addressed, the
atrocities committed by the LRA, including murder,
torture, maiming and sexual slavery, as well as the
recruitment of child soldiers, will continue.

It is of particular concern that children continue to
come under attack by the LRA. In 2012, about 25 per
cent of the LRA's Victims were underage boys and
girls. Last month, the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict concluded that the LRA-affected
countries must make further efforts to bring LRA
perpetrators to justice. The role of the Governments of
the region is also critical in executing the International
Criminal Court's arrest warrants for Joseph Kony and
his accomplices, who are still at large.

The LRA is known for funding its activities through
poaching and the illegal ivory trade. It is also regarded
as a serious perpetrator of transboundary trafficking
in illegal materials. Its activities pose a fundamental
threat to the rule of law in the entire region, and the
international community must therefore deal with them
as such.

Last month, the United Nations prepared an
implementation plan for the United Nations regional
strategy to address the threat and impact of the activities
of the LRA. That document (S/2013/240) provides
a holistic action plan to eradicate the LRA through
a division of labour as well as thematic and country-
specific coordination among the relevant United
Nations agencies working in the region. That represents
a meaningful step forward towards strengthening the
system-wide efforts of the United Nations for regional
coordination. All players under this scheme should
promptly share any information regarding the LRA's
movements so as to provide early warning and enhance
the leaflet-dropping campaign and radio-broadcast
capability, with a view to encouraging LRA defections.

With regard to the African Union's counter-LRA
operation, however, the African Union Regional Task
Force's activities have been suspended following the
Seleka's seizure of Bangui. We hope that the Task
Force's operation will be fully resumed as soon as
possible.

In another worrisome development, an LRA base
is reportedly located in the border area between the
Central African Republic, South Sudan and the Sudan.
We urge the transitional authorities of the Central
African Republic to actively participate in the region's
joint efforts in order not to provide a breeding ground
for the LRA.

Let me briefly touch upon the issue of maritime
piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf of Guinea, which
is another security concern in the Central African
region. Since 2011, the multinational military exercises
held have greatly contributed to enhancing maritime
safety in the Gulf of Guinea. We expect that the regional
summit scheduled to be held in Cameroon next month
will bring about substantial progress in addressing the
issue of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea.

Lastly, we commend the continued efforts of
Special Representative Moussa and his staff, who are
working in a challenging environment. We also support
today's presidential statement drafted by the United
Kingdom.

