Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Like the Permanent Representative of Chile, I am
sorry, Sir, that this should be the first Security Council
meeting for the month of October, at which we express
our pleasure at seeing you assume the Council
presidency. Yet we express to you our confidence and
support. Further, our thanks go to Ambassador Emyr
Jones Parry of the United Kingdom. He had just joined
the Council, but he conducted our work most
effectively, wisely and prudently.

Let me begin by conveying my country's
condolences to the families of those who lost their lives
in the suicide bombing that took place yesterday in a
seaside restaurant in Haifa. Nothing can justify such an
attack against innocent civilians. It was yet another
expression of extremism that contributed nothing to
furthering the Palestinian cause. And yet again the
Council is obliged to condemn such acts and appeal to
the Palestinian Authority genuinely to work to combat
and prevent such attacks.

The reprisals taken by Israel in consequence of
that attack are equally reprehensible. Israel gains
nothing by such reprisals; they only contribute to the
spiral of violence of which Israel and its citizens are
the victims. The Israeli attack on Syrian territory was a
clear violation of the United Nations Charter; it was a
grave act that endangers international peace and
security.

In that connection, my delegation notes with
optimism Syria's decision not to respond militarily to
the aggression. It is our expectation that, as this matter
has been brought before the Security Council, it will
follow a course permitting the easing of tension. We
also appeal to Israel to channel its own legitimate
indignation into the appropriate course, as set out in the
Charter. The Security Council must be the forum in
which to ease and resolve disputes that threaten peace.
We hope that prudence, moderation, reason and
international law will prevail and that this escalation
will not lead to an even more serious spiral of violence.
The consequences for the region and the rest of the
world would be horrific.

We support the efforts of the Quartet and urge its
members to redouble their efforts to secure peace in the
Middle East. Once again, my country considers that it
is only the establishment of a Palestinian State can lay
a firm foundation for peace in the Middle East.

