Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): I was
just saying to my neighbour and friend, Ambassador
Franco, that he took the words right out of my mouth. I
wanted to congratulate you, Mr. President, for having
organized this morning two debates that are two
important symbols of the role that the United Nations
can play in helping peoples in dire straits to affirm
their rights and achieve their aspirations. It is fortunate
that we had these debates one after the other this
morning. I do not want to extend this parallel further,
because Ambassador Franco said this in Spanish and
made the point better than I could in French.

I, too, would like to say how much we
appreciated the presence of Prime Minister John
Howard at this table, and I pay tribute to the role that
Australia has played throughout this great adventure in
East Timor since the very first days of the International
Force in East Timor (INTERFET). As was the case in
previous meetings, I would like to warmly welcome
Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, and I thank him for his
usual clear, precise briefing. It has perfectly covered
the outstanding work done by the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
under his effective, inspired guidance.

I would also like in the most warm and friendly
way to once again welcome to this table our friend Jose
Ramos-Horta, the East Timorese Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Cooperation. The success of the transition
to independence owes a lot to him; it was he, in fact,
who was, and remains, the architect of the integration
of the future independent East Timor into the regional
environment. In the space of just a few months, he has
successfully presided over the normalization of
relations with the Government of Indonesia and, in
particular, relations with President Megawati.

Later in this debate a statement will be made on
behalf of the European Union. France fully supports
that statement, and as we are one of the last speakers in
this debate, I will limit myself to just a few comments.

Today's debate is occurring at a turning point in
the history of Timor. UNTAET will continue its
mandate until 20 May, independence day. A resolution
will be adopted tomorrow for that purpose. UNTAET
will thus confirm what has been unanimously
welcomed as one of the great success stories in the
history of the United Nations.

UNTAET has, in exemplary fashion, discharged
the various elements of its mandate. The political and
administrative transitions are taking place smoothly;
security has now been established throughout the
territory; the process of reconciliation is well under
way; and, finally, the conditions for economic revival
are now present, and the first figures attest to this fact.
But the history of East Timor does not stop there, of
course. Another success story remains to be written:
that of the post-independence period. The logic of this
will be different, as the Secretary-General stressed in
paragraph 101 of his report:

"it is important that international assistance to
East Timor revert to a normal development model
as soon as feasible".

The form of the future international presence has
been largely drafted. It seems satisfactory, with a two-
year time frame, a civilian presence geared towards
some key needs of the Timorese Administration, and a
military presence which will be gradually reconfigured
in order best to meet the needs of the Timorese: 5,000
men on independence day, and after that it will be
undoubtedly between 2,500 and 3,000.

All these issues will be addressed in the next
report of the Secretary-General, scheduled to be issued
in April following the Timorese presidential elections.
After that, our Council will adopt a resolution that will
be of particular importance because it will establish the
integrated United Nations mission. In this context, we
deem it desirable for our Council to hold its next
debate in the presence of representatives of the United
Nations Development Programme, the World Bank and
the International Monetary Fund, as it has done
repeatedly in the past.

A threefold partnership should be established,
first, among the United Nations bodies, in which the
General Assembly would have an important role to
play in formulating peace-building strategies; secondly,
between the Security Council and the troop
contributors, which must be properly consulted, in
accordance with the innovative formula contained in
resolution 1353 (2001), in private meetings with the
Council; and, finally, between the Security Council and
the other stakeholders, including such international
financial institutions as the International Monetary
Fund and the World Bank; such regional organizations
as the Association of South-East Asian Nations and the
Asian Development Bank; bilateral donors and private
corporations. We must establish global partnerships,
pursuant to the wishes of Secretary-General Kofi
Annan.

In a word, in conclusion, we must all together
pursue our efforts to ensure that independent East
Timor is and remains a fine example of the successful
establishment of a State in accordance with the wishes
of its people and with the decisive support of the entire
international community.

