Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to express my
sincere appreciation to you, Sir, for convening an open
debate on the timely topic of peace operations facing
asymmetric threats. I would also like to thank the
briefers for their insightful briefings.

United Nations peacekeeping operations are a
key pillar in the maintenance of international peace
and security. As a member of the troop-contributors
committee, Japan contributes personnel, as do many
other Member States. The expectations for United
Nations peacekeeping are high, and its roles and
responsibilities have expanded and diversified over the
years. In that context, asymmetric threats have become
one of its major challenges.

Asymmetric threats in the form of physical
attacks against peacekeepers make the implementation
of peacekeeping mandates far more difficult for a
number of peacekeeping missions. One such mission
is the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), where
troops have been a target of attacks by terrorist groups.
Japan co-sponsored resolution 2295 (2016), which
requested MINUSMA to move to a more proactive
and robust posture in carrying out its mandate.
Furthermore, the resolution prioritized the protection
of civilians and the stabilization of areas where
civilians are at risk, including against asymmetric
threats. That includes improved intelligence capacities,
training and equipment to counter explosive devices,
secured logistical supply routes and improved medical
evacuation procedures. The resolution also clarifies the
Mission's mandate with a View to ensuring the security
of personnel. Japan strongly hopes that those measures
will bring tangible results in improving the Mission's
security and its capacity to implement its mandate on
the ground.

Japan concurs with the view expressed in the
Secretary-General's report that United Nations peace
operations are not an appropriate tool for military
counter-terrorism operations (see S/2015/446). The
question, then, is how can we best enable missions to
implement their mandates in complex environments
where asymmetric threats exist? Certainly, the Security
Council should give a sufficiently robust mandate to
peacekeeping missions enabling them to ensure the
security of their personnel. Beyond that, however, how
robust a mission's mandate should be for the protection
of civilians against asymmetric threats will have to
be studied on a case-by-case basis. It should take into
account the capacity of national security forces and
the presence and capacity of other international forces
complementing the national security forces, in parallel
to the United Nations mandated mission.

In the light of asymmetric threats, enhancing the
capacity ofpeacekeepers becomes more important than
ever. Insufficient capacity not only undermines the
ability to implement peacekeeping missions' mandates,
but can also expose them to great risks. Communications
is an area where capacity could be improved. We
are currently supporting the United Nations Signals
Academy in Uganda in order to provide peacekeepers

with communications training that will enable them to
better gather and share essential information, which
is necessary for their own security and the effective
implementation of their mandates.

Even more important is the capacity-building of the
countries suffering from internal conflicts. As Foreign
Minister Fumio Kishida pointed out in the July open
debate (see S/PV.7750), the training of domestic police
forces is necessary to eradicate violence and terror. In
complex environments with asymmetrical threats, peace
is not achieved solely through peacekeeping operations
or their military components. In that understanding,
Japan has provided training for more than 20,000 police
officers of the Democratic Republic of the Congo over
the past 12 years, in collaboration with the police
forces of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Japan, together with the international community, will
continue to support institution-building in such sectors
as security, the judiciary and border control.

Furthermore, improved exchange of information
among the relevant institutions, including counter-
terrorism institutions, could lead to reduced risks for
peacekeepers. We believe that efforts, when combined,
could contribute significantly to the containment of
asymmetrical attacks. The efforts I have described
fit into Japan's policy of seeking to contribute more
proactively to international peace, in line with
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. Japan will continue to be a strong
partner of United Nations peacekeeping operations
through our personnel on the ground and our support
for capacity-building.

In closing, I would like to express my sincere
appreciation to all field personnel serving in United
Nations peace operations and offer my deepest
condolences to the families of those who have made the
ultimate sacrifices in their lines of duty.

