Mr. Cazeau (Haiti) (spoke in French): My delegation
congratulates you, Sir, on your country's assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of October and wishes you every success. We would
like also to express our gratitude for the presentation
of the report (S/2012/678) of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH). We would also like to thank all the
members of the Council and the Secretariat for their
contributions.

My delegation would like to take this opportunity
to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and the Special Envoy, Mr. Mariano Fernandez
Amunategui and Mr. William J. Clinton, respectively,
for their dedication, and the troop-contributing
countries for their continued support. Along those
lines, we would also like to commend the openness
and expertise demonstrated by the Assistant Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Edmond
Mulet.

The report presented to the members of the Council
focuses on salient aspects ofthe Government's activities
that are priorities for it, given that it views the economic
and social development process as indispensable to the
stabilization of the country. Indeed, the President of the
Republic, His Excellency Mr. Michel Joseph Martelly,
presented, in the framework of his 5 "E's" formula,
the pillars of his five-year plan: environment, energy,
education, the rule of law and employment.

As is made clear in report, the past six months
have been characterized by noteworthy political, legal
and socio-economic achievements that have helped to
stabilize the country. In May, the Parliament approved
the appointment of Mr. Laurent Salvador Lamothe as
Prime Minister.

During that same period, the Government was
able to publish corrected constitutional amendments,
finalize arrangements for the Superior Court, establish
the Superior Council of the Judiciary and put forward
the names of six of the nine persons who will make
up the Permanent Electoral Council. It should be noted
that the Superior Council of the Judiciary was created
under laws adopted in 2007 that are in keeping with the
spirit and the letter of the Constitution with respect to
the independence of the judiciary.

The Superior Council, as set out in the Haitian
Constitution, must be composed of nine members from
the executive, the legislative and the judiciary, in equal
numbers. However, given the very nature of democracy
and the absence of 10 senators whose terms concluded
on 12 May, the Parliament has not yet appointed its
three representatives. To resolve the situation, the
Government, the Parliament and other relevant actors
have engaged in an inter-Haitian dialogue aimed at
achieving consensus.

The initial actions taken by the Superior Council
will include the holding of partial legislative elections
so as to fill the Senate seats that have been vacant since
8 May. Preparations are moving ahead to ensure the
success and the credibility ofthe forthcoming elections.
The Government is grateful to the Secretary-General
for having promised in his report the support of the
United Nations for the electoral process.

The nomination on 15 August 2012 of Mr. Godson
Orelus as Director General ad interim of the Haitian
National Police (HNP), replacing Mario Andresol,
whose mandate had ended, is clear evidence of the
Government's intention to ensure that the national
police does not experience an institutional vacuum.
The selection of Mr. Orelus, the former Director of
the judicial police, was ratified by the Senate of the
Republic.

The cholera epidemic remains a primary concern
of the people and the Republic of Haiti. As noted by
the Secretary-General, the number of cholera deaths
is estimated by the Minister of Public Health and
Population, at more than 7,440. The number of people
affected by the epidemic is also worrisome. From the
time the epidemic began, in October 2010, through
July 2012, 580,947 cases were reported. During the
seven-month period from January 2012 to August 2012,
35,000 additional cases were reported.

Since the outbreak of the epidemic, the Government,
with the assistance of United Nations agencies working
in Haiti and many friendly countries, has taken measures
that include the establishment of 16 treatment centres,
149 treatment units and 1,270 oral rehydration points.
The Government has also ensured the distribution of
chlorinated products to more than 2.2 million people.

In October, the Republic of Haiti and the Dominican
Republic will hold a meeting at the United Nations,
jointly with the Pan American Health Organization and
the World Health Organization, on the issue of cholera.

In spite of the progress made thanks to the United
Nations Development Programme and the United
Nations country team in support of the Government,
much remains to be done at the humanitarian level to
improve the living conditions of the most vulnerable
segments of the population. For example, following
the earthquake of 2010, more than 1.5 million people
were living in tents; today, that number totals less than
400,000. However, while that number has decreased by
two thirds, many people, including children, women,
pregnant women, newborn infants and elderly persons,
are still living in tents.

The Government is also working tirelessly to create
employment throughout the country, in particular
through measures aimed at attracting foreign direct
investment and reinvigorating the tourism sector.
The Government is proud to announce the upcoming
inauguration of the Caracol industrial park, which
should create 60,000 jobs, and of the international
airport in Cap-Haitien.

The Government thanks the Secretary-General for
having recognized the justified nature of its efforts
to accelerate the development process in Haiti. It is
grateful to him for having understood and clearly
stated that, with respect to the incident wherein the
Government expelled former members of the military,
and persons claiming to be such members, from the sites
that they were illegally occupying, the Government was
combating a threat to public order.

The Haitian authorities are encouraged by the
mention in the report of the National Police's capacity
for intervention.

On another aspect, we would underscore that,
more and more each day, the Government is seeking
to impose respect for the country's laws. It does not
claim to have achieved that to a satisfactory level yet,
but it can commend itself on the fact that the situation
is improving rather than sliding backwards. That is in
part due to Government measures to strengthen public
institutions and to promote a culture of the rule of
law. The Government is listening to the people and is
determined not to stop half way and to spare no effort in
achieving consensus with all the country's stakeholders

so as to support the stabilization and development
process.

While a number of society's demands have still
not been met, it is not because of the lack of political
will but because the means are cruelly lacking. The
Government is nevertheless striving to respond
progressively to socioeconomic demands, including
those of former soldiers rightly calling for severance
pay, parents claiming a better life for their children
and people living in tents demanding safe and secure
housing.

Acknowledging that "Haiti is once again setting
its sights on longer-term stabilization and development
goals and has made important strides in strengthening
its political and rule of law institutions" (S/2012/678, para. 47), the Secretary-General's report is very
encouraging. It bolsters my Government's resolve to
spare no effort to achieve the country's reconstruction
and sustainable development goals.

The Government welcomes the consolidation plan
for MINUSTAH, by which the military component of
the United Nations structure gradually gives way to the
police component until the Haitian National Police can
replace it and can itself assume full responsibility for
security in the country. As the report shows, that plan
is already being implemented in four of the country's
departments. The Government welcomes with
satisfaction the Secretary-General's recommendation
to the Security Council to reduce the military and
police components of MUNISTAH from 7,340 to 6,270
troops and from 3,241 to 2,601 personnel, respectively,
between now and June 2013. That measure also seeks
to focus the police component more on the training of
National Police officers than on operational activities
and recognizes that the National Police have attained a
certain maturity in action and intervention.

Finally, the Haitian people and Government would
like to thank the Secretary-General for recognizing the
progress made to date in expressing his confidence in
the will and the ability of Haitian leaders to rebuild the
Haitian nation and to ensure progress and sustainable
socioeconomic development. That is possible only with
the assistance of Haiti's partners, in the North and the
South, and of international, regional and subregional
bodies.

