We thank Her Excellency Rula Ghani, First Lady of Afghanistan, Her Excellency Ms. Hasina Safi, Minister of Women's Affairs of Afghanistan, Dr. Habiba Sarabi, member of the negotiations team, Ms. Deborah Lyons, Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan, and Her Excellency Ms. Alya Ahmed Saif Al-Thani, Permanent Representative of Qatar, for their statements. We have listened closely to their recommendations and experiences, and I want to emphasize that they can count on us to support their efforts. In the past 20 years, Afghan society has made progress in realizing the rights of women, as guaranteed by Afghanistan's Constitution. I want to commend the Afghan Government for its dedication and efforts. Women leaders are demonstrating today, across all sectors of society, why a country should never exclude half of its talent. All eyes are currently focused on the intra-Afghan peace talks to be launched in Doha. I reiterate the importance of the full and meaningful participation of women of diverse and representative backgrounds in peace talks. The current female participation should be scaled up and any future agreement must guarantee the human rights of women and girls. We join the call of the vast majority of Afghans, both men and women, who will not accept turning back the clock to darker times. The level of violence in Afghanistan remains alarmingly high. We call on all sides to immediately end this unacceptable suffering and stress the importance of accountability. Sometimes women are specifically targeted, such as in the recent atrocious attack on a maternity ward in Kabul, which the Council condemned in the strongest terms. We also condemn violence against women-led non-governmental organizations and women educators, health workers, journalists and human rights defenders, including the killing of Fatima Khalil. Furthermore, we are concerned about reports of an increase in domestic and gender-based violence as a result of the coronavirus disease pandemic, and urge for the response and policies to be inclusive and gender-sensitive. The conflict in Afghanistan is the world's deadliest for children. We are deeply concerned about the scale and severity of grave violations of children's rights in Afghanistan. Protecting girls and boys should be at the centre of our work. We urge all parties to swiftly implement the recommendations agreed by the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict. From our side, we are supporting the implementation of the National Action Plan on resolution 1325 (2000), together with UN-Women. We are also a proud member of the Group of Friends of Women in Afghanistan. The European Union (EU) is working to prevent and end violence against women in Afghanistan through the joint Spotlight Initiative with the United Nations. As outlined in the latest EU Council Conclusions on Afghanistan, any expected future support from Belgium or its EU partners will be conditional upon their continued commitment to promoting and protecting the rights of women and girls. The promotion of women's rights in Afghanistan falls squarely within the mandate of the Council, which will soon renew the mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. We expect the promotion of women's participation and women's rights to remain at the centre of its work.
