We thank the Permanent Mission of France for convening today's open video-teleconference on children and armed conflict. Canada welcomes the focus on resolution 1612 (2005) as we mark the fifteenth anniversary of this important milestone for the children and armed conflict agenda. The mechanisms established by resolution 1612 (2005), namely, the monitoring and reporting mechanism and the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, are essential to our collective efforts to protect children and hold perpetrators of grave violations to account. Canada welcomes the efforts of the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, particularly during this unprecedented period of social distancing. The systematic implementation and follow-up of the Working Group's conclusions are essential. Canada will continue to forge links between the Working Group and the Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict to support this. Canada emphasizes its strong support for the impartiality and independence of the monitoring and reporting mechanism on children and armed conflict and for the need to apply clear, consistent and evidence-based criteria in the listing and delisting of parties responsible for grave violations against children in the Secretary- General's annual reports on children and armed conflict. Anything less undermines the effectiveness of these important tools and threatens the credibility of the children and armed conflict mandate. The Secretary-General's annual report (S/2020/525) paints a grim picture of the plight of children affected by conflict. Canada condemns the unacceptably high number of grave violations committed against children during 2019. The report presents what is a clear and alarming disregard for the life and safety of children in too many armed conflicts. This picture is all the more startling due to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. COVID-19 and its related mitigation measures are exacerbating the risks already facing children affected by armed conflict. Disruptions to education, life- saving health care, humanitarian assistance and protection services will compound these risks. The significant progress made in recent decades to protect children and promote their fundamental rights will be at risk unless there is a concerted effort to place children at the centre of the COVID-19 pandemic response. Canada therefore fully supports the Secretary-General's appeal for a global ceasefire in the light of the pandemic. Armed conflict must be put on lockdown to ensure that children are protected and their humanitarian needs met. The Security Council must overcome the deadlock and fully endorse this appeal. At the same time, the Security Council, Member States, the United Nations and regional organizations must prioritize the protection of children in armed conflict and work together to prevent and end the six grave violations against children. A major focus of Canada's efforts is strengthening the child protection mandate in United Nations peace operations. Canada is supporting the Department of Peace Operations in standardizing and delivering training in English and French for United Nations peacekeepers to ensure that they are better prepared and equipped to protect children. Canada also supports UNICEF and the Romeo Dallaire Child Soldiers Initiative to build African peacekeeping capacity for child protection, including through improved training and policies with the African Union, the Democratic Republic of Congo and Somalia. The Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers, a set of 17 political commitments focused on peacekeeping and the prevention of the recruitment and use of children by armed forces and armed groups, also remain a priority for Canada. There are now 96 endorsements of the Vancouver Principles from all regions of the world. Canada congratulates Morocco, Kuwait and Ecuador on their recent endorsement of the Principles. Canada calls on all Member States to endorse the Principles without delay. The work does not stop with endorsements. That is why Canada launched the Implementation Guidance for the Vancouver Principles, which serves as a practical resource for military, police and civilian organizations engaged in United Nations peacekeeping operations. Canada has been making progress at the national level. For example, the Canadian Armed Forces have developed child-soldier content in predeployment training and incorporated child-soldier scenarios into several major exercises, and they provide courses on children affected by armed conflict in professional military education programmes. Canada will continue to work closely with its partners to implement the Vancouver Principles and end the scourge of the recruitment and use of child soldiers. This is also a testament to Canada's commitment to the Optional Protocol to the Convention of the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict, adopted 20 years ago. Since 2006, Canada has been proud to chair the Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict in New York, which has grown to 45 members from all regions. Canada also proudly chairs or co-chairs a number of the local Groups of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict that have been established, including in Colombia, the Philippines, South Sudan and the Sudan. In addition to their direct advocacy to prevent and end grave violations against children, these local Groups of Friends can also be important platforms for country task forces on the monitoring and reporting mechanism, as well as for the Security Council Working Group in following up on its conclusions. Canada looks forward to engaging with and through these local Groups of Friends to leverage our collective commitment to preventing and ending grave violations against children wherever they occur.
