Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): Ijoin earlier speakers in
thanking you, Sir, for convening this debate, which
we consider to be pertinent and timely. We also thank
you for your helpful concept note (S/2016/102, annex),
which provides a useful guide for our discussion today.

We are also pleased to have Ambassador Carlos
Olguin Cigarroa of Chile and Ambassador Olof Skoog
of Sweden joining us today. We listened to their
respective briefings very carefully and with much
interest. They have certainly brought much insight to
the topic at hand.

We also appreciate the presidency's reaching out
to States affected by sanctions for the purposes of
today's debate. In this connection, we welcome the
participation of the delegations of the Central African
Republic, cote D'Ivoire, Eritrea, Iran, Libya and the
Sudan. We believe that their participation could offer a
broader perspective to the discussion.

Malaysia takes this opportunity to reaffirm the
long-standing position of the Non-Aligned Movement
that the application of sanctions by the United Nations,
as authorized by the Security Council, must be fully in
accordance with the provisions stipulated in the Charter
and only as a measure of last resort.

Given the fact that the bulk of the Council's
subsidiary bodies are sanctions committees that
undertake important functions - including
implementation, implementation monitoring and the
assessment of the various sanctions regimes - we
support the presidency's focus on this theme with the
aim of making the work of such committees more
streamlined, coordinated and effective. Since much
ground has been covered by earlier speakers, I wish
to focus my intervention on Malaysia's experiences
as Chair of two subsidiary bodies - the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict and the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya - in order to contribute to the
discussion.

At the outset, Malaysia wishes to acknowledge and
express appreciation to the preceding Chairs of the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict. They
have built a solid foundation for the promotion and
protection of the children and armed conflict agenda
in the Council, which has allowed us, as the current
Chair of the Working Group, to continue emphasizing
the centrality of that agenda as a key component of the
larger protection of civilians agenda in the Council.

Malaysia assumed the chairmanship of the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict with
keen interest in ensuring the buy-in and co-ownership
of concerned countries. To that end, we sought to
introduce certain innovations, such as reflecting the
views of the concerned States in their entirety in the
Working Group's conclusions or outcome reports.
We firmly believe that such measures contribute to
the overall outcome, whereby interested partners are
afforded easy access to the views of all concerned
parties on any given situation. We are grateful that the
introduction of these measures has been supported and
accepted by all Council members.

Another aspect of innovation in the work of the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict relates
to better coordination and cooperation between the
Working Group and the sanctions committees. Given
the cross-cutting themes addressed by the Working
Group and the sanctions committees, in 2015 we
worked with Lithuania to hold joint meetings between
the Working Group and the Committees established
pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014) and resolution 2127
(2013). We believe that such joint meetings provide
a wider perspective to the members of the Working
Group and the sanctions committees alike, which is an
important exercise, particularly when assessment has
to be made of the effectiveness of the sanctions regime,
including possible unintended consequences, especially
for children but also, more generally, for civilians in
conflict situations.

With regard to our work as Chair of the 1970 (2011)
Committee, we share many of the views expressed
by earlier speakers concerning their role as chairs of
sanctions committees. That said, we would emphasize
the role of the chair in undertaking outreach activities,
including the dissemination of information on the work
of the sanctions committees to as wide an audience
as possible. Better understanding of the work of the
committees could support better and more effective
implementation. On this note, we also see scope for
better coordination among the chairs of the subsidiary
organs of the Council, especially those with related
themes or geographical scope.

With respect to the transparency and inclusivity of
the work of the Council's subsidiary bodies, we share
the view that such principles must apply from the very
start of the process, including on the appointment
and selection process. This year presents an excellent
opportunity to revisit these and other procedural aspects
of the selection and appointment issue, given that the
General Assembly will be electing non-permanent
members of the Security Council in June. The lead
time afforded to delegations elected to the Council
should also be used to adequately prepare them for
their eventual role as chairs of the various subsidiary
bodies. In this regard, Malaysia supports the proposal
for consultations on chairs to start as soon as possible
in order to allow time for sufficient preparation, with
the full involvement of the newly elected members
and taking into account their views and preferences, if
any. Improving the transparency of the selection and
appointment process for chairs of subsidiary bodies
would greatly enhance the legitimacy of the process,
particularly in the eyes of the elected members.

On transparency in general, Malaysia welcomes
the proposals calling for more open briefings to wider
membership on the work of sanctions committees.
Nevertheless, we are equally mindful of the fine
balance between transparency and confidentiality.

In conclusion, we wish to express our appreciation
to the presidency for initiating the draft note on the
working methods of the subsidiary organs. We look
forward to engaging constructively with other Council
members on it. We support proposals concerning
burden-sharing among all Council members on chairing
the subsidiary bodies. Additionally, we are also open
to consider reviving the 2000-2006 Informal Working
Group on General Issues of Sanctions, to review and
improve the effectiveness of sanctions committees.

