Mr. Amorim (Brazil): Five months ago, during the
open debate on the letters dated 20 and 23 December
1991, from France, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland and the United States of America,
the Brazilian delegation expressed its hope that the
international community, with the cooperation of the
Government of Libya, would be able to ensure that, in a
fair and transparent way, responsibility for the terrorist
attacks against Pan Am flight 103 and UTA flight 772
would finally be established by means of a fair trial.

Recent developments have brought us closer to that
moment. We praise the Governments of the United States
and of the United Kingdom for the flexibility which they
have shown in accepting one of the compromise solutions

 

supported by a great number of Member States and by
several organizations, whose efforts also deserve our
recognition. The Government of the Netherlands is also to
be commended for providing assistance in a creative way
to enable a foreign court to exercise jurisdiction in its
territory. We hope that, in the same spirit, the Government
of Libya will offer its full cooperation in the next steps that
are required. We note that Libya has already announced its
acceptance of the development in the positions of the
Governments of the United States and of the United
Kingdom and has confirmed that it would deal positively
with it.

It is important to note that diplomatic efforts,
including consultation and dialogue, have proven to be
essential tools for the devising of a solution which, being
acceptable to all parties involved, has the best of prospects
of being implemented.

The performance by Libya of actions specifically set
out by Security Council resolutions, including the one
which we are about to adopt, will allow sanctions to be
suspended with a View to their being lifted. Paragraph 8 of
the draft resolution before the Council, which refers in turn
to paragraph 16 of resolution 883 (1993), is clear in this
respect. We stress also the role of the Secretary-General
specified in the draft resolution, notably in paragraphs 5, 6
and 8. Like others, we strongly hope that the intention
expressed in paragraph 9 need not materialize.

Five years ago we indicated our conviction that the
imposition of sanctions must always be linked to the
performance of limited, concrete and specific acts that are
required as essential by decisions of the Security Council.
Such acts must be specifically set out by the Council so
that the State on which sanctions are imposed may be able
to know in advance and beyond all doubt that the sanctions
will be lifted as soon as those specific requirements are
met. It is with the same conviction that we will vote in
favour of the draft resolution before us.

We take this opportunity to reiterate our strong
condemnation of terrorist acts of any kind, committed for
whatever reason, as well as our commitment to international
cooperation to eradicate this scourge, in accordance with
the principles of the Charter and in the framework of
international law. Finally, we would also like to reiterate
our deepest sympathy to the families of the Victims, who
have the legitimate right to expect that justice should be
done.

 

