The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Georgia in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Alasania
(Georgia) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Ms. Elizabeth Spehar,
Director of the Americas and Europe Division and
Officer-in-Charge of the Department of Political
Affairs.

It is so decided.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Wolfgang Weisbrod-Weber, Director of the Asia
and Middle East Division and Officer-in-Charge of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations.

It is so decided.


The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in response to a
letter dated 22 August 2008 from the Permanent
Representative of Georgia to the United Nations,
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
contained in document 8/2008/587.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Ms. Elizabeth Spehar, Director of the
Americas and Europe Division and Officer-in-Charge
2
of the Department of Political Affairs, and
Mr. Wolfgang Weisbrod-Weber, Director of the Asia
and Middle East Division and Officer-in-Charge of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations.

I now give the floor to Ms. Spehar.


