Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Mr. Menkerios, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Sudan
and head of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan
(UNMIS), and Mr. Mkapa, Chair of the Secretary-
General's Panel on the Referenda in the Sudan, for
their briefings.

The referendum in Southern Sudan has been
completed smoothly with the joint efforts made by the
North, the South and the international community. This
is an important step towards the full implementation of
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA), which
China welcomes. China also welcomes the
contributions made by such regional organizations as
the African Union, the League of Arab States, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
African Union Mission in the Sudan and the Secretary-

General's Panel on the Referenda in the Sudan. We
thank them for their efforts, which contributed to the
smooth holding of the referendum.

The referendum in Southern Sudan is not an end
in itself. The ultimate goal of implementing the CPA
remains that of attaining sustainable peace, stability
and development in the Sudan. Regardless of the
outcome of the referendum, it is imperative to ensure
long-term peace and stability in the Sudan and the
wider region. We hope that the North and the South
will continue to engage in dialogue and consultations
in order to reach an early agreement on such issues as
Abyei, wealth-sharing and border demarcation so as to
further promote the North-South peace process.

China donated $500,000 to assist the Southern
Sudan Referendum Commission in the holding the
referendum. We also provided the Southern Sudan
Referendum Bureau with support in kind and sent a
team of observers to the Sudan. We are ready to work
with the international community and the parties
concerned and to continue to play an active and
constructive role in promoting the long-term peace,
stability and development of the Sudan.

China supports a peaceful and comprehensive
settlement of the Darfur issue, in particular by
addressing the root causes of the conflict. At present,
the security situation in Darfur is very fragile and the
humanitarian situation is facing a number of
difficulties. The root cause is the lack of a strong and
widely supported political agreement in Darfur. China
therefore calls on the Security Council and the
international community to strengthen their support to
the political process in Darfur and to urge the rebel
groups there to join the peace talks without conditions
or delay. We also support the continued efforts of
UNMIS to promote the political process in Darfur in
accordance with resolution 1935 (2010).

