Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank our four
briefers very much. I do not think that I have ever
heard a more powerful set of briefings and pleas in the
Security Council than those we heard from today. I think
that their words and requests will reverberate around
the Council. So far, the Council has been very united
in its support of the United Nations work in Yemen,
and we expect that to continue. I think, as well, that
there is obviously a very clear joint partnership among
the three United Nations Heads, which is also very
important. If there is any light to be found in this awful
crisis, it lies in their willingness to speak out and work
really closely with one another. Their dedication and
that of their teams and civil society to help the people
of Yemen must be one of the things that the members of
the Council have at the forefront of their minds.

As they described, it is a truly appalling situation
on the ground. The severity of the humanitarian
catastrophe cannot be overstated. Regardless of the
hard work that is needed to redouble efforts in response
to the humanitarian need - and we take into account
everything that was just said about the commercial
needs in order to keep Yemen functioning - it is also

clear that we, and they, will not succeed without an
equal effort and commitment on the political track. It
bears repeating once again that only a political solution
will actually bring this dreadful conflict to an end.
We heard about some small positive steps from Martin
Griffiths today, in particular concerning the Central
Bank and the exchange of prisoners. We heard some
good news concerning the United Nations conference
next year. I think that that is very important. But we
have to bear in mind the very sobering descriptions that
David Beasley gave us of what life is like for ordinary
people, including children.

I would like to take this opportunity to say that we
very much agree with what the Special Envoy said about
bringing the parties together without preconditions.
We need the words that we heard to be translated into
concrete action. We need the parties to engage with
the Special Envoy to take part in the consultations that
Martin is setting up and engage constructively so that
ultimately he can pave the way forward towards the
resumption of formal negotiations. What the Special
Envoy said about bringing his framework back to the
Council is very welcome and important. I am sure
that all members of the Council will want to express
their support for all three of his strands of work for the
United Nations, in particular for the political track. It
is obviously vital that talks are inclusive and women
are properly included. The women's technical advisory
service is a very good step in that direction. It is good
that he is searching for modern ways to put that into
practice. The messages from Rasha Jarhum have been
incredibly important today, and I thank her for taking
the time to come and explain to the Council how it looks
from the perspective of the citizens of Yemen.

My Foreign Secretary was in the region earlier this
week because, like Martin and everyone else here, we
believe that there is a window of opportunity to tackle
this man-made crisis in Yemen. I want to emphasize
the "man-made" aspect by saying that men can resolve
what they have created. I therefore believe that that is
another reason for all possible effort to be put into the
political track. David Beasley exhorted us to act now.
I do not think that there is anyone who can have failed
to have been moved by what David and Rasha told us.
Jeremy Hunt, my Foreign Secretary, has announced
that we will work with Security Council partners.
Mark Lowcock provided us with a very important state
of play with regard to his five asks. Speaking for the
United Kingdom, we support all of them. Secretary

Hunt has therefore asked me to say that, as penholder,
we will provide the text of a draft resolution to partners
on the Security Council on Monday, with the intention
of including Mark's five asks, which all members have
endorsed. I think that it is a very important point, to
include all of Mark's five asks into practice.

