Germany reiterates its support for the Government of Prime Minister Mustafa Al-Kadhimi. Prime Minister Al-Kadhimi and his Government have the right intentions and are seeking to address the legitimate demands of the Iraqi people. We acknowledge the measures that have been undertaken so far and call upon the Iraqi Government to continue along the path of substantial reforms. Together with the European Union, Germany stands ready to support the Iraqi-led economic reform process as co-Chair of the Iraqi Economic Contact Group over the course of the next six months. We have taken note of the request of the Iraqi Government to strengthen the role of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) with regard to the upcoming early elections. We welcome UNAMI's support, advice and technical assistance to Iraq in the field of electoral preparations. Germany will contribute a total of €6 million to UNAMI's effort, including to strengthen the capacity of the Independent High Electoral Commission. In addition, we would welcome UNAMI or United Nations engagement to conduct electoral observation. It is essential that elections be held in a free, fair, inclusive and transparent manner in order to ensure their integrity, credibility and legitimacy. We remain deeply concerned about reports of ongoing arrests, forced disappearances and acts of violence and intimidation against protesters, civil society activists, human rights defenders and journalists. We urge the Iraqi Government to ensure the protection of all peaceful protesters, civil society activists and human rights defenders and their fundamental rights and reiterate the importance of concrete steps to provide accountability for violence, crimes and human rights violations. We are concerned about the short-notice consolidation and closure of camps for internally displaced persons (IDPs), which precluded necessary consultations with key stakeholders and risks leading to secondary displacement. We are committed to working with the Government of Iraq to ensure durable solutions for IDPs. We stand ready to work with the Government of Iraq and the United Nations towards facilitating returns and ensuring the safe, dignified, voluntary, informed and sustainable movement of all IDPs. We support the call of the Secretary-General with regard to Baghdad and Erbil to step up mutual dialogue efforts in order to reach a long-term sustainable agreement on all outstanding issues, including natural resources, revenue-sharing and security arrangements. We remain concerned about the impact of regional tensions on Iraq and call for continued de-escalation and restraint by all regional and international actors. All differences must be resolved through diplomatic means. Iraq's sovereignty and territorial integrity must be respected by all its neighbours, as well as by regional and international partners. Iraq should neither be dragged into nor become an area for regional confrontation. At the same time, it is essential that the continued attacks against diplomatic missions and personnel cease immediately and that the State strengthen its control over all weapons in the country. As the fight against terrorism, namely, the so-called Islamic State, is not over, cooperation between the Government of Iraq and its international partners must continue. Otherwise, both Iraq and the international community will face a higher risk of a resurgence of the so-called Islamic State. In this context, we are alarmed by reports of renewed mass executions of individuals convicted of terrorism-related crimes. While we condemn in the strongest terms the criminal actions for which these individuals were sentenced and express our sincere condolences to all victims and their families, we oppose the use of capital punishment under any circumstances. We call on Iraqi authorities to refrain from any future executions, declare a de facto moratorium on the use of capital punishment and pursue a consistent policy towards the abolition of the death penalty. In conclusion, we welcome the ongoing cooperation between Iraq and Kuwait in the search for missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals, which enabled the most recent progress. We encourage the Government of Iraq to continue its efforts to resolve all outstanding issues.
