Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
organized the debate that has brought us together
today. Last week, the General Assembly held its annual
debate on the report of the Peacebuilding Commission
(S/2007/458-A/62/l37) and the report of the Secretary-
General on the Peacebuilding Fund (A/62/138). You
yourself, Sir, have been elected a Vice-Chairperson of
the Commission. I see this as an example and a
welcome sign of good cooperation between the
Commission and the two organs upon which it relies.

Like our Italian colleague, we regret that it has
not been possible for the European Union and other
important speakers to participate in this debate.

I turn now to the activities of the Peacebuilding
Commission over the past year, as described in its
report. Thanks to the Chairman and other officers of
the Commission and the coordinators of the two
country-specific configurations, our colleagues from
Norway and the Netherlands, a milestone has been
achieved: that of establishing the Commission in the
administrative and institutional sense. That was not
easy because of the unavoidable delays, rivalries and
misunderstandings which occur when coordination
mechanisms are created. That hampered the beginnings
of the Commission to be sure, but today everyone
seems to have understood that it was in no one's
interest, and especially not in the interest of the
countries under consideration, to continue along that
path.

The establishment of the Peacebuilding
Commission and, in its wake, the Peacebuilding

Support Office and the Peacebuilding Fund, should
enable countries under consideration to emerge quickly
and genuinely from crises in which they find
themselves and to return to path of sustainable
development. It is by that very concrete criterion that
we would like to see the Council measure the
Commission's progress.

The Peacebuilding Commission has started its
activities by focusing on two countries that have been
on the Council's agenda for many years, with the goal
of strengthening their strategies for emerging from
conflict. These countries have been in terrible conflict
for many years. These two examples have clearly
shown that theory often comes up short when tested
against reality in the field. This, however, must not
slow our efforts, because we represent an institution
whose fundamental role is both to stabilize the
emergence from conflict and to prevent the
reoccurrence of conflict. It is important to France that
the Commission is an essential instrument for conflict
prevention and thus for the implementation of the
responsibility to protect, a key concept that the
Security Council needs to put into practice, as our
heads of State or Government decided in September
2005 (see General Assembly resolution 60/1).

Through these two first cases, the Commission
has established a process that brings together all of the
actors and establishes the basis for a strategy that
brings together their efforts.

We would like to welcome the work done to
produce the Strategic Framework for peacebuilding in
Burundi with a limited number of priorities and
commitments in keeping with the crucial issues of
peacebuilding in that country. The document was
developed in close contact with the Government, but
also - and this is an important element - with the
political parties, civil society and all parties on the
ground. The Commission now needs to advance to the
operational stage and guide the implementation of the
Strategic Framework. This means supporting necessary
actions and projects, following progress and ensuring
that the timelines are met, together with making use of
locally established mechanisms.

We hope that similar work can rapidly be made
on Sierra Leone. We look forward to Ambassador
Majoor's return from his visit to Freetown, where a
new, democratically elected Government has just
begun work.

As my delegation had the occasion to reaffirm

last week in the General Assembly, France believes

that the Commission should now be hitting its stride.

Discussions have already started regarding the possible

extension of the agenda to new countries. I hope that

all of this reflection will enrich the Council's

discussions, as well as those of the other principal

organs, and that it reflects an appetite for action,
something I view as important.

The issue of expanding the Commission's agenda
is indissolubly linked to that of strengthening the
Commission. We hope that the Commission will
develop its activities and offer the Council its Views on
new cases, as needs become apparent, and that the
Commission will have the capacity to do so. In any
event, there is no single solution as the cases of
Burundi and Sierra Leone have shown. The Council
will continue to examine this issue, and I have no
doubt that the Council will enjoy a transparent and
effective working relationship with the Chairman of
the Commission, Ambassador Takasu.

In conclusion, I would like to stress that the
purpose of establishing the Peacebuilding Commission
goes far beyond establishing a bureaucracy. It is to
ensure an appropriate and coordinated response by the
international community to post-conflict situations, and
to ensure a return to lasting peace. We need to ensure
that the Commission continues to be a flexible and
responsive mechanism, bringing together all actors and
their actions on one single road map.

In September 2005, heads of State or Government
committed themselves to help the countries most
affected by serious crisis alleviate their extreme
poverty. Today, 17 October, the World Day to
Overcome Extreme Poverty, we must renew that
commitment, as I do on behalf of France.

