Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, my country would like to thank the Permanent
Representative of Poland, President of the Security
Council this month, for holding today's constructive
dialogue. We wish Poland every success in presiding
over the Council this month.

We would also like to thank the Permanent
Representative of Peru for the judicious manner in
which he steered the work of the Council last month.

We would also like to thank Ms. Virginia Gamba,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict; Ms. Henrietta Fore,
Executive Director of UNICEF; Ms. Mariatu Kamara
and Mr. Majok Peter Awan for their valuable briefings.
In that regard, allow me to present our observations
on the report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/509) of
20 June.

Iraq commends the role of United Nations offices
in my country. However, we also urge international
organizations, independent experts and special
rapporteurs to work within their mandates to provide
accurate information in their reports and to verify
the sources of that information. Unreliable sources
continue to be used to compile reports that reflect
inaccurate information. We also regret the fact that the
Secretary-General's report does not take into account
the observations and recommendations submitted by
Iraq in note 238 of 10 May.

Furthermore, paragraphs that were added were not

shared with my country's delegation and their accuracy
was not verified. In paragraph 71, the report notes that
the Iraqi Federal Police recruited five boys to protect
a security checkpoint. We looked into the matter and
determined that that information was inaccurate. That
begs the question: Do Iraqi security forces, which
have waged a fierce war against terrorism, need five
children to protect a security checkpoint? At the
time, the Council and many United Nations officials
had commended the professionalism of every rank of
the Iraqi security forces during military operations
against terrorists, while prioritizing safeguarding and
protecting civilians and civilian infrastructure.

Terrorist organizations enjoy both the means and
the ability to wage attacks on civilians everywhere,
including schools and hospitals, which has been
demonstrated by incidents throughout the world. The
content of paragraph 76 of the report of the Secretary-
General therefore does not correspond with what took
place on the ground. Furthermore, that information
dates back to 2016 and 2017, and we do not see the need
to mention it in a report covering 2018.

We are deeply concerned about the report's
description of what transpired in Iraq as issues between
parties to the conflict. On many occasions, Iraq has
demonstrated that what happened in our country was
not a conflict between parties. It was a war waged by
the State against a terrorist organization that had little
regard for humankind and territorial sovereignty. It
perpetrated the most heinous crimes against the Iraqi
people, as corroborated in dozens of Security Council
resolutions and reports.

The Iraqi judiciary exercises its independence in
rendering its judgments, and the justice system in Iraq
conforms to international norms. The Government
in Iraq is clearly making an effort to ensure just and
transparent trials, while guaranteeing the rights of all.
We are making the necessary adjustments to rectify
the legal status of children as victims of terrorism.
Our delegation reaffirms our full support for all
United Nations efforts to provide a safe environment
for children.

We urge the relevant United Nations Offices to
verify the accuracy of the information contained in
their reports, to provide evidence and to cooperate with
the Iraqi Government. The Iraqi Government will spare
no effort to hold accountable those who violate the law.
The approach used in the annual report of the Secretary-
General to ascertain information, however, is nothing
other than an additional burden on a country trying to
recover from the fierce attack waged against it.

In conclusion, we are commemorating today
Saddam Hussein's invasion of the friendly country
of Kuwait, which was a crime and has no relevance
whatsoever to the morals of the Iraqi people. Since the
fall of that dictatorship, Iraq has been working hard
to build good-neighbourly and mutually beneficial
relations with Kuwait, based on mutual respect.

