The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement and for being with
us for today's discussion on such an important issue.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister of Europe and Foreign Affairs of France.

First of all, I too would like to say a few words as a
tribute to the villagers who were massacred on Saturday
in Ogossagou in a reprehensible, cowardly attack. That
tragic incident reminds us that we must take action to
support Mali. France firmly condemns the attack. I call
on authorities to do their utmost to find and prosecute
those responsible for that horrendous crime and to
disarm the militia groups that are sowing fear in central
Mali. Such attacks are a betrayal of Mali's tradition of
secularism and tolerance.

The Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in
Mali was finalized in Algiers in 2015. We meet today
to assess its implementation and to underscore the
critical role being played on the ground by the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). The agreement involves
all stakeholders in seeking a settlement to the conflict.
The peacekeeping mission tasked with supporting
the process and other security forces deployed in the
country to shore up stabilization and development
efforts are two key components of the peace process
in Mali.

The peace process has accelerated over the
past six months - and it was high time. Last June,
Council members raised the alarm about the persistent
delays in implementing the main provisions of the
agreement, expressed their impatience and called
on all Malian parties to make a genuine and spirited
effort. The Council set specific goals in resolution 2423
(2018), encouraging the Government and signatory
armed groups to reach them within six months of the
President's inauguration. The report of the Secretary-
General (S/2019/262) provides an overview of efforts in
that regard and gives a clear idea of the progress made
and of the work that remains be done. The facts are
clear and can be verified. The spirited effort sought by
the Security Council was made. Presidential elections
took place in satisfactory security conditions, even
in northern Mali. At this juncture, I would like to
commend the decisive efforts of MINUSMA to support
the elections, as well as the resumption of the national
dialogue between the authorities and the opposition.

The security mechanisms outlined in the agreement
have gradually become stronger in Gao, Kidal and
Timbuktu, bringing together hundreds of soldiers from
the Malian army in those three areas and combatants
from the signatory armed groups and launching the
demobilization, disarmament and reintegration (DDR)
process. With the return of a few deserters, nearly
2,000 members of those groups have already laid down
their weapons and will join the Malian army following
a period of training. The fact that former rebels are now
poised to join the national army attests to the progress
made and demonstrates the growing trust among
the parties. It is a major step forward that should not
be underestimated.

Consultations on a reconstituted army are under
way, thanks to agreement among the Malian parties
on the criteria for the integration of combatants, which
were announced in a decree signed in early March. The
establishment of a counter-terrorism unit, as called for
in the peace agreement, has also been planned. The
decentralization process is also under way in Kidal,
Menaka and Timbuktu. New interim administrations
have been installed at the regional and district levels
and financial and human resources are gradually
being transferred. An important decree was issued a
month ago for the transfer of competent services. With
regard to development, a trust fund has been set up and
legislation to create a development zone in the north of
the country is under consideration.

To date, the level of women's participation in the
peace process has been negligible but is now on the rise.
Prime Minister Maiga's Government is now includes
11 women, in line with goal set by Malian legislation.
Women have also been appointed to posts within the
interim authorities and, with the help of MINUSMA,
a greater number of women will be involved in the
Agreement Monitoring Committee.

Lastly, the parties are engaged in regular dialogue
with greater trust, in particular thanks to the new
Ministry of Social Cohesion, Peace and National
Reconciliation. I commend its head, Minister Bouare.

I congratulate the Malian authorities, President
Keita and Prime Minister Maiga, whose presence here
today demonstrates the importance he attaches to the
agreement. I commend his efforts. I also commend
all parties to the peace process, who have managed
to find the resources and determination needed to
demonstrate that spirited effort. Today, however, that
effort must continue and be sustainable. We expect all
parties to pursue their efforts. The DDR process must
be completed and the establishment and redeployment
of reconstituted units must occur in accordance with
a precise timetable. Decentralization must continue
following inclusive consultations and, on the ground,
development must be achieved to the benefit of
the people.

With regard to development, I recall that France
and Germany are determined to take action in the
region, working alongside our partners in the Alliance
for the Sahel. The time for inaction and the status quo
is behind us. All parties must honour their obligations
and, if necessary, new sanctions should be envisaged
for those who might hinder the implementation of the
agreement. To confirm the Council's determination,
new designations may be required under the sanctions
regime established by resolution 2374 (2017).

I would like to inform our Malian friends that the
attention of the Security Council shall not flag. We
will set new specific goals to implement the agreement
that will be based on specific criteria and, if possible,
accepted by all Malian parties. I encourage them to
work to develop a new road map that takes into account
the progress already made and the work that remains to
be done, as a token of their renewed commitment to the
implementation of the agreement. The Security Council
resolution that will renew the MINUSMA mandate in
June could be used to formalize those goals.

MINUSMA has played a decisive role in helping
the Malian parties to make considerable progress. I
underscore the outstanding work done by Mr. Mahamat
Saleh Annadif, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Mali. I also commend the commitment of
all its civilian and military components and pay tribute
to the soldiers who have died in service of peace in
a demanding and dangerous mission. MINUSMA is
making every effort to adapt to operational needs and
to the dynamics of the peace process by securing the
launch of the DDR process in northern Mali.

It has also demonstrated its responsiveness to the
deterioration of the security situation in the centre,
where circumstances require resolute action to put
an end to the violence. Let us be clear ~ the primary
responsibility for stabilization must be assumed by
the Malian authorities, but we must also note that
MINUSMA is the only international presence in that
region and the one best able to support the efforts ofthe
Malian authorities.

With troops from Operation Barkhane, France will
continue to support the Mission, as often and as long
as necessary. Not long ago, we provided air support in
attacks on the Timbuktu, Ber and Aguelhok camps,
and when necessary, Operation Barkhane's health
service cares for peacekeepers wounded in combat.
These examples show that, both operationally and
logistically, MINUSMA and Operation Barkhane are
closely interlinked and mutually reinforcing in the
performance of their respective functions and missions.
While each has its own mandate and stance, it shares
the same objective - the implementation of the
peace agreement.

Thanks to the stabilization efforts of MINUSMA,
its support for intercommunity reconciliation and the
redeployment of the State in the centre of the country,
Operation Barkhane can now focus on counter-terrorism
and combat the territorial control of jihadist armed
groups. This is a long-term and difficult mission, but,
as Council members know, we have already achieved
significant victories recently.

A new dynamic has begun in the implementation of
the peace agreement. Six months after the inauguration
of President Keita, we can only welcome this
momentum. Without the support of MINUSMA, this
process could not have begun or continued today. I am
pleased to see that we are moving in the right direction,
but there is still a long way to go, whether it is in the
political, security or development field, whether it is for
the Malian parties or in terms of international support.
I think it is now important for everyone to pursue their
efforts in this direction in a concerted and coherent way.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I now call on the Federal Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Germany.

