Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I thank you, Sir, for
presiding over this open debate and for your presence
among us. I also thank the Deputy Secretary-General,
Mr. Jan Eliasson; Mr. Christopher Deloire, Director-
General of Reporters Without Borders; and Ms. Mariane
Pearl, representative of the Daniel Pearl Foundation.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela condemns
in the strongest possible terms acts violence against
journalists covering armed conflict, and calls for
full respect for the international humanitarian law
that protects them as civilians, in accordance with
the provisions of the Third Geneva Convention. In
recent years, particularly given the proliferation and
strengthening of terrorist groups in various regions of
the Middle East and Africa, we have witnessed how
the practice of journalism has become more dangerous,
claiming the lives of many and, in some cases, with a
brutality that has served to instil fear. We need only
recall the perversity of the beheadings committed by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham and its media
savvy to understand the danger facing humankind,
including journalists. This practice is a reality that we
regret and repudiate, and we call for those responsible
for such heinous acts to be brought to justice.

Journalists in armed conflicts incur significant
risks by denouncing the atrocities perpetrated by the
warring parties, which in many instances makes them
the military targets of non-State and State actors, in
violation of international humanitarian law. During the
51 days of the Israeli military aggression in the Gaza
Strip in 2014, 2,220 civilians were killed, of whom
17 were journalists - 16 Palestinians and an Italian
photographer.

Resolution 1738 (2006) helped to address this
issue in the framework of the protection of civilians,
including journalists. We believe that international
humanitarian law provides an appropriate platform
for the protection of professional journalists in armed
conflicts, in their civilian capacity. Our country will
continue to advocate tirelessly for the construction of
a democratic environment in journalism with a social
service orientation, denouncing the manipulation of
information and emphasizing ethics and responsibility
in communications as essential foundations for
achieving world peace. In that regard, the protection of
journalists is our priority.

Venezuela reaffirms the position expressed on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement at its ministerial
meeting in Algeria in May 2014, in which it called
for the responsible use and treatment of information
by the media in accordance with codes of conduct
and professional ethics in all their forms. It should be
recalled that the world has lived through sad episodes
like that in Rwanda, where the irresponsible and
politically motivated use of the media fueled mass
hatred against other ethnic groups and the radio was
used as a tool to accelerate the genocide against the
Tutsi under fallacious and discriminatory arguments
that only amplified the logic of death.

In 1980, UNESCO published the report entitled
Many Voices One World, also known as the MacBride
report, which set out the basic elements for creating a
new world order of communication and information.
Its recommendations are now more relevant than ever.
They include adherence to ethical principles, the facts
and the transmission of truth above the interests of
the owners of the media, which are guided more by
economic and political interests than by respect for the
responsibility to report.

It should be noted that seven global corporations
control over 80 per cent of communications throughout
the world. This being so, the balanced distribution
of information is hindered beyond conflict zones
where the interests of the corporate media respond
to or coincide with those of major Powers involved
politically or militarily in the conflict. In recent
history, the corporate media have blatantly distorted
reality by making tendentious use of facts in order to
influence public opinion on behalf of the political and
military interests of certain countries. In the case of
Iraq, I recall the resort to the excuse of the existence of
weapons of mass destruction that proved in time to be
non-existent, and the role of such corporations to justify
the invasion of that country in 2003. Unfortunately, that
practice has not changed. Today, the same patterns of
misinformation are being trotted out in the treatment of
conflicts afflicting the Middle East and Africa.

I wish to draw a clear distinction betweenjournalists
and the corporate media. We pay tribute to the honest
and dangerous work done by professional journalists
who risk their lives in conflict situations for the right
and duty to report.

Finally, the work of journalists in conflict zones
is key to describing the evolution of events in which
civilian lives are subject to the actions of armed actors.
Journalists are called on to contribute with the truth
to the building of world of peace. Society requires
journalism to be practiced in a balanced and impartial
manner. We must protect and guarantee the physical
safety and lives of journalists so that they can play their
full roll in society.

