First of all, we wish to express Peru's warm greetings to the Foreign Minister of Indonesia and thank the presidency of the Security Council for convening today's debate. We would also like to thank the briefers for their enlightening briefings. Based on its own experience, and with a view to addressing the links that can occur between terrorism and organized crime more effectively, Peru recognizes the need for a deeper understanding of those links. We are pleased to have promoted this issue during our recent membership in the Security Council and from the platform of our chairmanship of the Counter-Terrorism Committee. We are particularly proud that these efforts led to the adoption of the pioneering resolution 2482 (2019) under the Peruvian presidency of the Council. We note with satisfaction that we are among a significant number of States that have adopted concrete measures for the effective implementation of resolution 2482 (2019), as reflected in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/754). We hope that these measures will contribute to making tangible progress in the identification, prevention and dismantling of the links between terrorism and the various forms of organized crime, including illicit trafficking in drugs, arms, natural and mineral resources, persons and cultural goods. Terrorism can benefit from forms of organized crime for nefarious purposes, including for its financing, and undermining the rule of law and human rights as the foundation of peaceful, inclusive and prosperous societies. In the light of this, we emphasize the importance of recognizing the differentiated regimes established for these crimes and adopting approaches that allow, inter alia, for the exchange of information to support additional investigations and the gathering of empirical evidence, the further development of police and prison intelligence, and mechanisms or centres of intelligence and effective coordination. At the domestic level, we consider it essential, among other aspects, to strengthen financial intelligence units and control entities, with a view to preventing and combating money-laundering for the purposes of financing terrorism. The Government of Peru has been directing important efforts to this end within the framework of its National Multisectoral Policy to Combat Terrorism 2019-2023, with results that we hope to share soon. It should be noted that, in 2019, the National Multisectoral Policy to Combat Organized Crime was also adopted, which allows for the development of distinct actions and the strengthening of specialization in the fight against these crimes. The global crisis caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic requires States to direct their greatest attention and efforts towards this fight. At the multilateral level, it is also necessary to strengthen the institutions that will enable this challenge to be tackled collectively. Therefore, in order to prevent terrorist and criminal actions from taking advantage of the current situation, international cooperation is required to strengthen the exchange of information and good practices in particularly vulnerable areas. Accordingly, it is gratifying to share that, at the third Hemispheric Ministerial Conference on the Fight against Terrorism, held in Bogota in January, Peru and 17 other countries undertook to strengthen cooperation in the physical and digital spaces, with a view to combating transnational crime and terrorism in an effective and coordinated manner. Finally, we highlight the valuable work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee and its Executive Directorate, as well as of the Office of Counter-Terrorism and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, in assisting States Members of the United Nations, and we urge these entities to redouble their efforts in capacity-building and technical assistance in order to strengthen the response to these scourges and their links.
