Mr. Ryan (Ireland): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The acceding
countries Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovakia
and Slovenia, the candidate countries Bulgaria,
Romania and Turkey, the countries of the Stabilization
and Association Process and potential candidates
Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, the Former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Serbia and
Montenegro, and the European Free Trade Association
countries Iceland and Norway, members of the
European Economic Area, align themselves with this
statement.

The European Union wishes to express its
appreciation for the briefing provided to us this
morning by Ambassador Arias, Chairman of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC). The European
Union attaches real importance to these periodic open
debates of the Security Council in which we review the
work and progress of the CTC. Today's debate is of
particular significance, as members' views and
suggestions will provide valuable, concrete input into
the revitalization process, including in the Council's
ongoing deliberations on the draft resolution on this
matter. Such a transparent debate will contribute to a
key goal of the reform: that is, to maintain and,
hopefully, to strengthen the CTC's general acceptance
by - and perceived legitimacy with - all members of
the United Nations family.

The European Union welcomes the report of the
CTC on its revitalization (S/2004/124, annex). No
organ is immune from the passage of time and its
effects. Responding to the changing nature of this
global threat requires agility and flexibility in our
thinking and in our structures. In formulating this
report, the CTC has expressly recognized this reality
and has responded in a considered and constructive
way. It is our sincere hope that a revitalized CTC may
play an even more prominent role in the fight against
terrorism.

The European Union fully supports the CTC in
discharging its mandate. The report recommends a set of
measures - in particular the establishment of a
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate -
that would enable the CTC to fulfil its mandate of
monitoring the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001), facilitating technical assistance to Member
States and promoting closer cooperation and
coordination with international, regional and subregional
organizations. We consider those functions to be crucial
to the fight against terrorism and to the central role that
the United Nations has in this regard. The European
Union takes this opportunity to reaffirm its commitment
to cooperate with the CTC, and urges those Member
States that have not yet done so to submit their reports to
the CTC at the earliest opportunity.

We are all familiar with the contents of this
report. I do not propose, therefore, to engage in a
review of all of its aspects, but instead will focus on
certain components that the EU believes deserve
particular mention.

First, the revitalization report makes clear that
this proposal does not modify Security Council
resolution 1373 (2001) or other existing relevant
resolutions. The Security Council is not embarked,
here, on an overhaul of the substantive provisions of
those resolutions. The current reform mainly concerns
structural issues.

Secondly, any proposal to establish new bodies or
structures within the United Nations system is often
met with a degree of hesitancy or resistance. While
there are often many reasons for this, one of those
reasons, as we are all aware, is that such committees or
structures, once set up, are often difficult to dissolve or
disband, even when their original raisons d'etre or
utility have ceased to exist. This report is perhaps
mindful of that fact, in making clear that the new
structures put in place will not be a permanent
arrangement and in expressly incorporating sunset and
review clauses, and is to be particularly commended.

Also, as the envisioned new Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate involves both the
Security Council and the Secretariat, it is imperative
that both United Nations organs cooperate closely in its
establishment and functioning. Such a new structure
may be adequate in view of the special nature of global
counter-terrorism efforts, but, as the report rightly
underlines, it should not set a precedent for other
Security Council bodies. The EU wishes to emphasize
that the integrity of the Secretariat and role of the
Secretary-General as the chief administrative officer of
the Organization must be preserved at all times.

Thirdly, the European Union is also gratified to
see provision made in the report for direct liaison
between the proposed Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and
other human rights organizations in matters related to
counter-terrorism. For this purpose, we would
recommend, as others have, the recruitment of a human
rights expert. We look forward to receiving regular
updates in relation to the liaison activities mentioned.
The European Union, like others, has consistently
stressed that counter-terrorism measures must at all
times be accompanied by a respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms and, more generally, by
respect for the rule of law and legal certainty,
especially for individuals. There can be no trade-off
between protecting human rights and effective counter-
terrorism measures.

Fourthly, the European Union is reassured by the
fact that the projected increase in staffing requirements
will be quite modest. The impulsive hiring of
additional staff, tempting as it may seem to some as a
quick-fix solution, is not a sine qua non for rendering
existing operations more effective and efficient. Rather,
we should ensure the optimal utilization of available
expertise and examine critically the current
arrangements, reconfiguring accordingly and
amplifying staff numbers only where absolutely
necessary. The CTC has wisely adopted this latter
approach.

Fifthly, the Executive Director, as envisaged in
the report, will be responsible for numerous important
tasks. Facilitating the provision of assistance
programmes to States in order to further the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) continues to
be an essential challenge. A lot of work is still required
of the CTC in this field. The EU therefore welcomes,
among other things, the recognition contained in the
report of the need to strengthen contacts with States,
relevant international, regional and subregional
organizations and other bodies of the United Nations
system, including the Al-Qaida and Taliban Sanctions
Committee, the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime and the United Nations Development
Programme. In reporting on the progress of States in
their participation in the relevant international-
terrorism-related conventions and protocols, the need
for close cooperation by the Executive Director with
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime should
also be noted here.

The report on revitalization of the CTC is the
culmination of many months of intensive deliberation
among Committee members. We are grateful to them
for the long hours spent in the quest for agreement on a
final text. Given those concerted efforts and their
successful outcome, it is our genuine hope that a draft
resolution reflecting the contents of the report may be
agreed upon as soon as possible.
