Mr. Granovsky (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We associate ourselves with the words of
gratitude addressed to the Secretary-General and to his
Special Representative for their important statements.

The situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo evokes mixed feelings on our part.
Unquestionably, it is gratifying that the parties are
continuing to comply with the ceasefire regime.
Progress is evident in the implementation of plans for
the disengagement of the opposing forces. Some of the
foreign forces have left the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Preparations are under way for the beginning of
the inter-Congolese dialogue.

Of course, not everything is as smooth as we
would like. In particular, we are concerned about
delays in the withdrawal to agreed positions of the
forces of the Mouvement pour la liberation du Congo
(MLC) in Equateur Province and the unacceptable
attempts by the leadership of that movement to
condition the implementation of the plan for the
disengagement of forces on political demands. But, I
reiterate, on the whole we are satisfied with the course
of the implementation of the Lusaka Agreement,
which, in our View, has acquired a definite positive
dynamic. We place particular hope here on the dialogue
that has begun between the leaders of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and neighbouring States on the
problem of ensuring mutual security. We support this
process and wish it every success.

It is specifically with this process that we link the
prospects for a solution to the problems of
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
resettlement or repatriation of members of armed
groups, whose actions are increasingly becoming a
serious destabilizing factor and thereby jeopardizing
the ceasefire.

While Russia is in favour of the strictest
compliance by all parties to the Lusaka Agreement
with the demand for the cessation of support for armed
groups, it emphasizes the need for all issues within the
framework of the process of disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and resettlement or
repatriation to be resolved solely on a voluntary basis.
Within the framework of the existing mandate and to
the extent of its ability, the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) will assist in this process.

Russia also supports the holding of consultations
with the leadership of international monetary and
financial institutions, with a View to securing funds for
the resolution of questions linked to disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation or
resettlement in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We believe that, in the long term, success in this area
directly depends on the casing of ethnic tensions and
on the democratization of political life in all countries
of the Great Lakes region.

I should now like to comment on the issue of
greatest concern to us in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. More than a year after the adoption of
Security Council resolution 1304 (2000), containing a
demand for the demilitarization of the city of
Kisangani - which was then reaffirmed in Security
Council resolution 1355 (2001) - the leadership of the
Rassemblement Congolais pour la de'mocratie (RCD) is
stubbornly refusing to implement it. Moreover, the
leaders of the RCD have chosen a course of active
resistance to the implementation by MONUC of its
mandate in that city, which, due to a number of factors,
is of key significance to the entire peacekeeping
operation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

In our view, this situation is absolutely
unacceptable. It represents an open challenge to the
Security Council and to the entire international
community. We believe that the situation has reached a
point at which the Security Council, in accordance with
the provisions of the resolutions previously adopted,
must consider additional measures in order to ensure
the demilitarization of the city of Kisangani. We
believe that the first step in this direction could be a
ban on the issuance by Member States of entry visas to
the leadership of the RCD. Russia is ready to discuss
other measures as well.

While reaffirming our support for MONUC and
our readiness to consider, in a constructive manner, the
recommendations of the Secretary-General for its
further development, we would like once again to
emphasize that, for us, the decisive factor in this issue
is the consistent demonstration by the parties to the
conflict themselves of political will for its peaceful
settlement. We call on them to carry out in good faith
their obligations under the Lusaka Agreement and
subsequent agreements and in accordance with the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council.

In conclusion, allow me to express our gratitude
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mr.
Morjane, who is leaving his post, for his outstanding
contribution to the cause of a settlement of the conflict
in the Congo. Under his leadership, a breakthrough has
been achieved in the quest for peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, where the logic of the search
for agreement has replaced the logic of war. Although
he is leaving his post at a time when his efforts are
only just beginning to bear fruit, we have no doubt that
his successor and his colleagues in MONUC will
successfully conclude the work he has begun. Allow
me, on behalf of the Russian delegation, to wish him
great success in his future work.

