Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes today's meeting, which is devoted
to the latest developments in the situation in Darfur
and the implementation of the mandate of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID). It thanks Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant
Secretary-General for Africa, Department of Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs and Peace Operations, for
her comprehensive briefing following her successful
visit to the Sudan.

After the outbreak of sociopolitical unrest leading
to loss of life and material damage, Cote d'Ivoire calls
on all parties to exercise restraint and encourages the
Government of the Sudan to continue its efforts to
find solutions to the root causes of this crisis in order
to preserve the gains of the ongoing political process
in Darfur. It also urges all Sudanese stakeholders to
work in a consensual manner to create conditions of
transparency and credibility for the elections scheduled
for 2020.

With regard to the security situation, my country
welcomes the relative stability that Darfur has
enjoyed for several months. However, it deplores the
resumption of clashes between Government forces and
those of the Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid in
Jebel Marra. This situation is at the root of population
displacements, loss of human life and persistent sexual
violence against women and girls. Cote d'Ivoire calls
on the warring parties to give priority to dialogue as a
means of resolving their differences. In this regard, it
supports the Secretary-General's call on Abdul Wahid
to join the peace process without delay in order to bring
the crisis to a definitive end.

In this context, my country notes with satisfaction
the signing, on 6 December 2018, of a pre-agreement
between the Government and two movements that are not
signatories to the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur,
as a prelude to the forthcoming peace negotiations. It
welcomes these achievements facilitated by President
Thabo Mbeki, head of the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel, and hopes that they will help to
create the conditions for a final settlement of the crisis
in Darfur.

My delegation also welcomes the significant
decrease in intercommunal violence thanks to the
combined efforts of national and local authorities,
UNAMID and the United Nations country team. In
this respect, it underlines the need to seek adequate
solutions to land issues and difficulties related to
access to basic social services. On the humanitarian
front, Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the improvement in food
security thanks to favourable weather conditions during
the period from June to September 2018.

With regard to human rights issues, my country
commends the remarkable work done by the Sudanese
police forces, which have replaced UNAMID police
elements, in securing some internally displaced persons
camps. However, it notes with concern the Secretary-
General's report's observations of repeated acts of
violence against civilians, particularly in the Jebel
Marra area, and the increase in sexual violence against
women (S/2019/44). In this context, Cote d'Ivoire
believes that it is important to ensure the strengthening
of the capacities of judicial institutions in order to help
establish the rule of law.

With regard to the transition process in Darfur, my
country would like to support the sustained efforts of
national and regional State actors, UNAMID and the
United Nations country team to ensure a successful
transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding in
Darfur. It also welcomes the multifaceted support
provided by UNAMID and the United Nations country
team to the Government of the Sudan, particularly in
the areas of strengthening the rule of law and access to
justice. In the light of its own experience, my country
reaffirms the need to establish strong institutions that
guarantee the rule of law and to promote national
ownership of the issue, with a view to peacebuilding.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire invites the international
community and development partners to provide the
necessary support to ensure that the transition is funded
and that Darfur's development needs are met.

