Mr. Listre (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to thank you most particularly, Mr.
President, for having chosen the topic of today's open
debate. This shows the importance that you and your
country have always attached to matters related to
peacekeeping operations throughout the consideration
of this issue in the Council. We believe also that this
debate is very timely.

While the requirements for establishing a
peacekeeping operation have undergone analysis in
terms of doctrine and have been underwritten by over
five decades of practice in this Organization, the exit
strategy for any peacekeeping operation has thus far
been less explored. We believe, nonetheless, that the
exit strategy of an operation is just as important a
matter as its establishment, because both of them
equally affect the success of the operation.

The decision to put an end to an operation is more
complex than it appears in principle. We believe that
there are two reasons for this. First, the exit strategy
must not be necessarily determined by pre-established
timetables but rather by the objectives to be attained,
and the latter vary according to the nature of the
conflict. Secondly, the objectives may have been only
partially attained. In that case, the Security Council
would have to evaluate carefully the relationship
between the human and financial cost of maintaining
any operation and the political consequences of the
pullout of such a mission for the States directly
involved, as well as for the stability of the region
concerned.

In a conventional armed conflict between States,
such as, for instance, one involving a territorial or
border dispute, the objectives are better defined:
compliance with the ceasefire by the parties or
patrolling a border. In those cases, the exit strategy
would appear to be more foreseeable and easier to
define.

In practice, however, it may happen that while no
significant ceasefire Violations are recorded, the
conflict remains latent. Here the rationale for keeping
the operation intact would be stabilization or
deterrence, to prevent the conflict from breaking out
anew. The problem we see with this scenario is that in
the long run, the stabilization function could lead to a
syndrome in which the parties become dependent on
the peacekeeping operation, thereby making it more
difficult for the Security Council to take the decision to
put an end to it.

With respect to the multidimensional
peacekeeping operations created after the end of the
cold war to deal with conflicts of a fundamentally
intra-State nature, the difficulties are greater still.
These operations include military, political, human
rights, civil police and judiciary components. Their
objectives are much broader given their very nature,
and as a result it is more difficult to evaluate their
performance. They run from truce supervision to the
building of institutions and the providing of public
services. As a result of the difficulty of determining a
priori when these goals have been met, it would be
necessary to carry out periodic evaluation with an
integrated approach to be able to progressively gauge
performance. In this sense, the Secretary-General's
reports, the missions of the Security Council and
interaction with other agencies of the United Nations
system constitute important tools.

In multidimensional operations, even more so
than in the conventional ones, the exit strategy is
directly related to the entry strategy. While the mandate
and plan of operations for a mission are being planned,
the objectives must be evaluated realistically and in the
light of the political, social and cultural circumstances
surrounding the conflict and in the light of the human
and financial resources available. There must also be,
above all, a political will to attain the objectives set.
Keeping that will alive throughout any operation is one
of the major challenges with which the Security
Council and the Secretariat must grapple.

In our opinion, in most of the operations since the
end of the cold war, the departure of a peacekeeping
operation cannot be separated from peace-building
activities. The humanitarian, institutional and
economic consequences of most of the current conflicts
have taught us that bringing about lasting peace and
reconciliation requires far more than a ceasefire. We
have to also create the conditions necessary for
sustainable development within democracy. That is
why it appears to us that any formalistic concept that
would give priority to the legal end of a conflict may
prejudice the essential goal of peace-building activities.
Without prejudice to the factors specific to each
conflict, it is appropriate to give thought to peace-
building activities before the conflict is formally
concluded, so as to achieve a transition from
peacekeeping to peace-building activities.

The existence of 15 peacekeeping operations -
some of whose mandates have been renewed over the
decades, others that have only partially attained their
goals and yet others that constitute United Nations
transitional administrations - shows the magnitude of
the challenge facing the Security Council. To meet this
challenge successfully, we must have the political will
of the parties to overcome the root causes behind any
conflict and to identify fully with the objectives of
rebuilding. We must also have the political will of the
Security Council to support these operations on the
path to peace and reconciliation. With this same
determination, the Council will have to point out to the
parties that peacekeeping operations are an instrument
needed to attain these specific goals and must not be
turned into an excuse for permanently putting off
resolving their own differences.

The reasons that I have given, the ones stated by
other delegations and those you expressed at the
beginning of this meeting, Mr. President, illustrate the
importance of thinking about and enacting exit
strategies for peacekeeping operations. They also attest
to the timeliness and importance of this debate.

