Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Haiti, Ambassador Sandra
Honore. I also welcome the presentation of the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2014/6l7) on the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
And I acknowledge the work of Ms. Honore and the
results that area being achieved, which contribute to
strengthening dialogue and institutions in Haiti.

Let me also acknowledge the presence of the
Permanent Representative of Haiti and his active
delegation. I would also like to express my thanks
for the work of Lieutenant General Jaborandy as
Force Commander of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti, as well as that of outgoing Police
Commissioner Luis Carrilho.

When the Council considered the situation in
Haiti in March (see S/PV.7147), we welcomed the
conclusion of a landmark agreement among Haitians
under the coordination of the Episcopal Conference.
The prospects for holding partial legislative and local
elections today seems less clear. We therefore trust
that all Haitian political actors will continue to work
towards building the necessary consensus to enable
free, fair and transparent elections to be held during
this calendar year.

With respect to the Secretary-General's report, I
would like to make two points that concern the renewal
of MINUSTAH's mandate, which the Council is required
to approve before 15 October. First, we are concerned
by the timetable for deciding the future of the Mission.
Until a few months ago, we were looking at a scenario
that included a peacebuilding plan with four indicators
that would be used to measure progress, as well as
five options presented by the Secretary-General to be
implemented beginning in July 2016. Yet the current
report abandons that scenario and proposes a different
option that would establish a new design for the Mission
beginning in March 2015. Our primary concern is that
this acceleration appears to bear no relationship to the
situation in Haiti, but rather to respond to external
factors and budgetary considerations. Otherwise, we
see no evidence of changes in Haiti that would lead to
a recommendation for speeding up the process in such
a manner. We find it particularly worrisome that the
Council should take a decision on Haiti in October
2014, before elections have been held.

We believe it is important to proceed with caution
and that all decisions should be made based on
conditions on the ground in order to ensure that the
sole peacekeeping operation deployed on the American
continent be successfully brought to a close. In our
View, the political and security situation in Haiti has
not visibly improved to an extent that would justify
an accelerated and abrupt troop reduction, as the
Secretary-General's report proposes. By the same
token, we are concerned by the shift in the Mission's
mandate as proposed in the report, since we do not wish
it to become an intervention brigade.

Along with other countries in our region, we
believe that the mandate of the Mission should remain
unchanged, and that we should explore options for
its modification starting in 2015. In that regard, we
believe that any decision on the future of MINUSTAH
should be closely tied to an effective improvement in
its operating capacities and an increase in the resources
of the Haitian National Police, which is, after all, the
force that should be in charge of security after the
international community withdraws.

This year marks 10 years since the Council
established MINUSTAH. The Mission, whose military
ranks are largely comprised of troops from countries
in our own region, has made an essential contribution
to the stability and security of our brother country.
Nonetheless, over the past 10 years, Haiti has faced
very difficult situations, including the devastating 2010
earthquake, which upended many of its achievements
and posed additional challenges to what would
otherwise have been a pace of uninterrupted progress.

We believe that MINUSTAH should not remain
in Haiti any longer than necessary, so long as it is
requested by the democratic Government of Haiti.
At the same time, we believe it is important to learn
from the lessons of the past and to bear in mind our
experiences with hasty retreats that forced us to return.
We are convinced that the Council will find the right
balance to prove that a peacekeeping operation of the
United Nations can succeed by working with the people
and the Government concerned to achieve their goals,
namely, democracy, human rights, security and peace.

