Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I welcome and thank Cote d'Ivoire for
its initiative to convene a debate on a subject that is so
crucial to the work ofthe Security Council in exercising
its responsibilities.
For Belgium, the importance of regional and
subregional organizations in conflict prevention is
irrefutable, particularly in Africa, where African
ownership of the continent's security challenges
has led to undeniable progress over the past decade.
Our observation and creed are simple and shared by
many - when a crisis looms on the horizon, or when
a crisis breaks out, neighbouring States, the subregion
and continent are often better placed than the United
Nations to act quickly and efficiently.

As a matter ofprinciple, Belgium supports regional
integration as the best way to resolve cross-border
issues consensually, unite regions and create solidarity.
I remain convinced that the European experience
is a success story. Indeed, the European Union has
enabled the longest period of peace in modern Europe.
Moreover, I would like to reiterate our commitment to
supporting the African Union in its efforts to strengthen
and implement its policies, procedures and capabilities,
as well as to making the financing of African Union-led
peace operations more predictable, sustainable and
flexible. For Belgium, that goal has been achieved, and
it is now a question of making practical arrangements
in that regard.

In the division of tasks and responsibilities among
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations, our approach is guided by two core
principles: complementarity and subsidiarity.

I will first broach subsidiarity. In The Gambia, we
recently saw a fine example of putting that principle into
practice, namely, the decisive action of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), under
the auspices of the African Union and the United
Nations, that has allowed for a transition towards
democracy in a largely peaceful manner.

Turning to complementarity, Guinea-Bissau
is a textbook example of the principle. True
complementarity is demonstrated on the ground in the

country, where the key commitment of the international
community in support of its crisis recovery is embodied
in the group of five international partners in Bissau,
which brings together the United Nations, the African
Union, the European Union, the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries and ECOWAS.

The success of an electoral poll sometimes makes
it possible to prevent or resolve a conflict. Electoral
processes are another example of complementarity.
Although the United Nations is sometimes involved in
the preparations for and the holding of a ballot, electoral
monitoring is regularly undertaken by the African
Union, the Southern African Development Community
or ECOWAS. Operational commitment, such as the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine, helps to reduce
tension by implementing independent observation
capacity, thereby complementing the political process.

Finally, with respect to mediation, regional
organizations can bring their local knowledge and
expertise to the field, while the United Nations offers
neutrality, as well as universal authority and norms.

Beyond those principles, we must also recognize
that each situation is different and ever-changing.
Pre-establishing strict rules is not effective. What
is certain is that different tiers each have their own
uses and legitimacy and must be used in concert and
combined in a coherent and effective way.

Regardless of the colour of the helmet, it is essential
that the basic rules of international humanitarian law
and human rights not be subject to any exception and be
fully upheld during operations. Personnel are deployed
with a view to seeking peace and a way out of the crisis;
as such, their conduct must be exemplary. Belgium
welcomes the efforts of the Secretary-General to fight
relentlessly against sexual violence in the United
Nations, and the Council should set equally stringent
standards for the regional operations that it authorizes.

Finally, I wish to reiterate our support for the work
of the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights and the Commission of the African Union in
establishing a compliance framework for the respect of
human rights and international and humanitarian law.

