Allow me at the outset, on behalf of the three African members of the Security Council and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, to thank Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), for his briefing as well as his tireless efforts and good offices role to help restore peace in the country, which is a prerequisite for achieving stability in the broader Sahel. The report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/223) indicates that, despite the persistence of violence due to continued attacks by armed groups and intercommunal conflicts, tangible progress has been made in the peace process in Mali, particularly since the holding of the inclusive national dialogue in December 2019. We particularly welcome the outcome of the inclusive national dialogue, which created an enabling environment for the Malian parties to refocus their attention on the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali of 2015. The inclusive national dialogue has helped to reduce tensions and mistrust between the signatories of the peace agreement and has generated a renewed willingness by the parties to move forward with the implementation of its conclusions. In that regard, we encourage the renewed cooperation among the parties in continuing with the implementation process, including by convening regular meetings of the Agreement Monitoring Committee. The organization of the legislative elections on 29 March amid the increasing threat of the coronavirus and the threat of terrorism clearly demonstrates to the world the commitment of the Malian people to democracy and the return of peace and stability to the country. We welcome the role played by MINUSMA in the redeployment ofa reconstituted unit of the Malian armed forces as well as the Prime Minister's visit to Kidal and other parts of central and northern Mali. These events bear witness to the progress, albeit gradual in some respects, in the redeployment of the administration of the Malian State and the restoration of its authority in these areas. We commend the Government's efforts to stabilize the areas in the centre of Mali through the policy framework for crisis management in central Mali. We welcome the series of meetings involving civil society and leaders of the central regions, which led to the signing of agreements for peaceful coexistence among the communities and the disarmament and dismantling of self-defence groups. Furthermore, we welcome the recommendations of the high-level national workshop organized by the Government, which called for concrete measures to increase the participation of women in the various mechanisms of the peace agreement to at least 30 per cent. We also applaud the decision of the Agreement Monitoring Committee to increase women's participation in the mechanism. We wish to underscore the importance of a holistic approach to addressing the challenges in Mali that includes not only military but also political, social and economic interventions. In that respect, we emphasize the operationalization of the northern development zone as an important initiative for the development of the northern regions. It is important for the international community to support this initiative, including by mobilizing resources for its funding. We reiterate that development and sustained security are interconnected and inextricable, and therefore encourage the authorities of Maliand MINUSMA to continue to pay due attention to the sustainable development aspects of the peace agreement. As indicated in the Secretary-General's report, soldiers of the armed forces of Mali, MINUSMA and the international forces continue to be the target of attacks by terrorist groups in the north and centre, often resulting in deaths and injuries. We would like to pay tribute to the valiant men and women who operate in this difficult and dangerous environment. We condemn these acts and we urge the Government of Mali to ensure that the perpetrators of these heinous crimes are held accountable. We believe that the current security situation, which is characterized by a persistent terrorist threat and violent extremism, calls for a stronger and more robust MINUSMA mandate, with its capabilities increased to cope with the terrorist acts and violent extremism, as well as the intercommunal violence that threaten the integrity of the Liptako-Gourma countries. We call on all Member States to contribute the required capabilities and to match MINUSMA's mandate with adequate resources, in line with their commitments under the Action for Peacekeeping initiative. We are encouraged by the development of the MINUSMA adaptation plan for central Mali towards the achievement of secondary mandated tasks of resolution 2480 (2019). However, we note with concern the implementation of the plan without the requisite resources. In that regard, we urge the Council to favourably consider support for the required additional financial resources to assist the effective implementation of the plan. At the regional and subregional levels, we commend the continued efforts of the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) in discharging its mandate in cooperation with international forces, including the French Operation Barkhane, under challenging circumstances. We reiterate the need for adequate, sustainable and predictable support for the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. In March 2020, the G-5 Sahel Joint Force has launched a large-scale operation in the central region, in coordination with Operation Barkhane and the national armed forces, aimed at dismantling the armed groups in the region. Thus, an operation carried out last month in the area of the three borders by the forces of the G-5 Sahel, those of partner countries and the Barkhane Force led to the neutralization of several terrorists of the Islamic State in the Greater Sahara and to the freeing, on 17 March 2020, of five young girls and a woman, who had been held hostage. We welcome the joint meeting of the African Union, the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the G-5 Sahel held in Niamey, on 16 March 2020, which decided to deploy an African force of 3,000 troops to support the countries of the Sahel in their fight against terrorism. The meeting followed the decision of the Heads of State and Government of the African Union taken at the thirty-third ordinary session of the Assembly, held last February in Addis Ababa, and the ECOWAS decision taken in September 2019 to contribute to financing the fight against terrorism with up to $2.3 billion over five years, including $1 billion from its own resources. With regard to the human rights situation, we remain concerned about the increase in violence against civilians due to the resurgence of attacks by terrorist groups and intercommunal conflicts. We encourage the Government of Mali to continue its efforts to reconcile communities and ensure justice for victims. The support of MINUSMA through its good offices is crucial in that regard. We also express our grave concern regarding the recruitment and use of children by the signatory armed groups and deplore the increasing number of such incidents. More efforts must be made to prevent the recruitment and use of children and MINUSMA must play an active role in that regard. On the humanitarian front, and at a time when the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is spreading throughout the whole world, the already precarious humanitarian situation in the region is likely to worsen due to food insecurity caused by the effects of climate change; hence the urgent need to support the humanitarian response plan, which is only 49 per cent funded, according to the latest report of the Human Rights Council of January 2020. We are also concerned that all these factors combined could have a devastating impact on civilian populations, including internally displaced persons, the majority of whom are women and children. The COVID-19 pandemic will undoubtedly have a negative impact on the operations of MINUSMA and international forces engaged in Mali in terms of the safety, security and health of troops, their rotation and the logistics chain. We are greatly concerned that four French soldiers from Operation Barkhane have tested positive for COVID-19. In that context, we conclude by expressing our full support for the appeal launched by Secretary-General Antenio Guterres on 23 March for an "immediate ceasefire, everywhere in the world" in order to protect the most vulnerable civilians from the rapid spread of COVID-19, especially in countries in conflict.
