Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): I would first like to
welcome His Excellency Mr. Aristides Gomes, Prime
Minister of Guinea-Bissau, as well as to join other
speakers in congratulating Special Representative Jose'
Viegas Filho on his appointment as Head of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-
Bissau (UNIOGBIS) and assuring him of our full
support in discharging his responsibilities. We would
also like to thank him for his briefing on the situation
in Guinea-Bissau and the activities of UNIOGBIS over
the past six months. We believe that the mission should
be provided with all the support it needs to carry out its
mandate effectively.

We would like to thank Ambassador Mauro Vieira,
Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, and Ambassador Antolio
Ndong Mba, Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2048 (2012), for their useful
briefings on the basis of their engagement with various
stakeholders during their recent visit to Guinea-Bissau.
We also thank Ms. Elisa Tavares Pinto and all the
Bissau-Guinean women for their important advocacy
work for peace.
We welcome the progress made in resolving the
political and institutional crisis in Guinea-Bissau
and commend the country's political stakeholders
for implementing the 2016 Conakry Agreement
and demonstrating their commitment to respecting
the country's Constitution. The adoption of a new
Government programme and State budget is a step in
the right direction towards ending the negative impact
of the political crisis on the people of Guinea-Bissau.
Nevertheless, we also recognize the challenges that
must be addressed in terms oftackling the root causes of
Guinea-Bissau's problems, and the fact that the situation
in the country still remains fragile, thereby emphasizing
the importance of sustaining the recent gains. The
Bissau-Guinean stakeholders should continue to act in
unity. The current developments in the country should
be followed closely, and we take note of the report
of the Secretary-General and its recommendations
(S/2018/771). We also appreciate the briefing by
Ambassador Anatolio Ndong Mba on the outcome of
his recent visit, which sent a very good message about
the Council's active and continued engagement.

The holding of timely and credible legislative
and presidential elections in accordance with the
Constitution and the national law of Guinea-Bissau is
crucial to consolidating sustainable peace and national
reconciliation. We underline the need to provide
assistance to strengthen the capacity and independence
of key institutions in order to support the electoral
process. In that context, we commend UNIOGBIS
for extending capacity-building programmes to
Guinea-Bissau's security, law-enforcement and
defence institutions.

The increasing threat caused by transnational
organized crime and drug trafficking is a matter of
serious concern that undermines the peace and stability
of the country. In that regard, we stress the need for the
concerted efforts of the relevant bodies at the national,
regional and international levels in order to address
the challenge.

Finally, we appreciate the continued support and
engagement of the Economic Community of West
African States, the African Union, the European Union,
the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries and
all the other international partners working to find a
lasting solution to the crisis in Guinea-Bissau. Their
coordinated role remains Vital to ensuring sustainable
peace and development in the country.

