Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I thank Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Yemen; Mr. Mark Lowcock,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator; Mr. David Beasley,
Executive Director of the United Nations World Food
Programme; and Ms. Rasha Jarhum, Founder and
Director of the Peace Track Initiative in Yemen, for
their briefings on the recent developments in Yemen.

In my statement I will underscore two key
issues: developments in the political and security
situation and developments in the humanitarian and
economic situation.

With regard to the political and security
developments, we listened carefully to the briefing by
Mr. Griffiths, who spoke of positive indicators towards
the revitalization of the political track to address the
Yemeni crisis. He said that perhaps an agreement
will soon be reached between the Government and
the Houthis to release prisoners and detainees, a step
which we welcome. It would be an important step
for confidence-building among the Yemeni parties.
In that regard, we welcome the announcement about
the upcoming resumption of political consultations
in Stockholm. We thank the Kingdom of Sweden for
hosting those consultations. At the same time, we hope
that all Yemeni parties will commit to participating
in good faith and without any preconditions in that
round of consultations to allay fears of a repetition
of the consultations in Geneva last September. The
Security Council and the international community, in
particular the coalition States, all supported Geneva
consultations, and those States ceased their military
operations at that time to facilitate the unhindered
participation of Houthis. Unfortunately, the Houthis
failed to participate in the consultations, which left
negative consequences and deepened the catastrophic
crisis at the humanitarian, economic and political levels.

The announcement of the upcoming round of
consultations to be held in Stockholm resulted from
the interest of the coalition States in supporting the
political process with a view to ensuring Yemen's
security, stability, unity and sovereignty. That comes
despite major security challenges confronting certain
coalition States by the Houthis, such as threats to
security and safety of the United Arab Emirates and
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, which has been struck
by 206 ballistic missiles and more than 68,000 other
projectiles, resulting in the deaths of 112 persons and
hundreds of wounded among the civilian population.

Concerning the latest military operations in
Al-Hudaydah, I recall resolution 2216 (2015), which
in paragraph 1 calls on the Houthis to withdraw from
cities under their control and refrain from any actions
that are the prerogatives of the legitimate Government.
We hope that the upcoming round of consultations will
lead to a political solution based on the three previously
agreed terms of reference, so as to end the crisis and
restore security and stability in Yemen.

With regard to the humanitarian and economic
developments, we are deeply concerned about the
humanitarian situation in Yemen, as Mr. Lowcock and
Mr. Beasley briefed us, warning of food insecurity
soon, while 14 million of the brotherly Yemeni people
would be at risk of that threat. The reason is the failure
to implement the relevant Security Council resolutions
and the persistent armed conflict, which has created a
war-time economy, marked by the inability to disburse
citizens' salaries and deterioration in the buying power
of the national currency as a result of the unprecedented
collapse of the rate of exchange of Yemeni rial against
foreign currencies. The international community must
therefore shoulder a major responsibility to provide
the Yemeni Government with the needed assistance in
order to ensure the success of its policy to prevent a
further deterioration of the national currency and be
able to continue to pay salaries across Yemen.

In that connection, we commend the significant
and continuing role of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia,
which on several occasions has disbursed considerable
amounts of money to the Central Bank of Yemen,
totalling approximately $3.2 billion. In addition, The
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the Government of the
United Arab Emirates, in coordination with UNICEF,
have also made $75 million available to support the
payment of salaries for more than 135,000 teachers
across Yemen.

That economic assistance has made significant
improvement in the exchange rate of the Yemeni rial
against foreign currencies. Despite the constructive role
of the Yemeni Government in that regard, and given
the growing challenges, it has responded to the appeals
by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs by suspending the implementation of its Decree
75 of 2018 owing to its potential to hinder imports.
The Government has also confirmed its willingness
to continue to cooperate with United Nations agencies
and bodies.

The brotherly Yemeni people continue to bear
humanitarian suffering despite the great financial
and in-kind contributions from the international
community, which most recently included the holding
of a donor conference in Geneva in April. Kuwait
donated $250 million at the conference for United
Nations field agencies and international organizations
working in Yemen. That was in addition to the
flexible and cooperative role of the joint leadership
of the coalition States, which issued more than 67,000
permits to ensure aid delivery throughout Yemen.
The international community explains that the reason
for the continued humanitarian suffering in Yemen is
rooted in the deliberate attempts to block, seize and loot
such assistance. We welcome the Secretary-General's
determination, as stated by Mr. Lowcock in his briefing,
to convene a conference in February 2019 in order to
support the humanitarian situation in Yemen. Kuwait
looks forward to participating in that conference.

In conclusion, the State of Kuwait reiterates its
belief that there can only be a political solution to the
crisis in Yemen. We are keen to support the political
operation that will put an end to the suffering of our
brotherly Yemeni people. Kuwait has expressed its
readiness to provide logistical support to ensure the
participation of all in the round of consultations to be
held in Stockholm. We will also continue to support the
efforts of Special Envoy Griffiths and all other efforts
based on the three political terms of reference, namely,
the Gulf Initiative and its implementation mechanism,
the outcomes of the National Dialogue Conference and
the relevant Security Council resolutions, particularly
resolution 2216 (2015). That would ensure Yemen's
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity and
non-interference in its internal affairs.

