Ms. Amos: I will focus my remarks today on the
pressing need to ensure more effective protection for
civilians in the conduct of hostilities.

The deliberate targeting of civilians or other
flagrant disregard for their well-being in violation of
international humanitarian law during hostilities results
in hundreds being killed, injured, maimed and
traumatized every week. Recent events in Libya and
Cote d'Ivoire are the latest examples of this, but other
situations also demand our attention. This initial failure
to respect the law is almost always the precursor to
further violence, suffering and trauma inflicted upon
2
civilians, including massive displacement within and
across borders.

In the six months since my last briefing (see S/PV.6427), we have witnessed an unprecedented
series of crises in parts of the Middle East and North
and sub-Saharan Africa. I am concerned at the violence
levelled against civilians in Bahrain, Yemen and, more
recently, Syria, and at the loss of life and other human
rights violations. In Syria, reports of the deployment of
tanks and of the shelling of residential areas are
alarming.

Of particular concern, however, was the
deterioration of the situations in Libya and C6te
d'Ivoire into armed conflict. There have been serious
allegations of violations of the rules regulating the
conduct of hostilities in both these countries. As I
reported to the Council yesterday in my briefing on
Libya (see S/PV.6530), civilians continue to be killed
and injured by fighting between Government and
opposition forces, especially in Misrata and the
Western Nafusa mountains. Indiscriminate rocket and
mortar attacks on densely populated areas of Misrata,
as well as sniper attacks, continue to cause civilian
casualties. There are also concerns over civilian
casualties resulting from coalition air strikes.

The fighting in Misrata has limited the
population's access to food, water and other basic
commodities. Medical facilities are short of supplies
and trained personnel. This is particularly troubling
given the continuous heavy fighting in the city, as are
reports of attacks on ambulances transporting the
wounded to these facilities. The shelling and mining of
Misrata port is also hampering efforts to supply
urgently needed aid and to evacuate those, including
the sick and wounded, who want to leave. I will
continue to call upon all parties to agree to a temporary
cessation of hostilities in Misrata on humanitarian
grounds, to allow those who wish to flee to do so, and
to enable humanitarian personnel to comprehensively
assess the situation and bring more aid.

In Cote d'Ivoire, November's post-election crisis
degenerated into a conflict marked by increased
violence that seriously affected the civilian population.
Direct attacks against civilians, indiscriminate shelling,
sexual violence, and attacks against humanitarian
workers and peacekeepers have all been reported and
must be investigated without delay. There are still an
estimated 150,000 internally displaced people in
11-33032
western Cote d'Ivoire and a further 177,500 Ivorians
registered as refugees in several West African nations,
including nearly 160,000 in Liberia, though these
numbers change as people move back and forth across
the border.

At the height of the violence, humanitarian
workers experienced immense difficulty in accessing
people in need due to the fighting and to the
checkpoints and blockades established in Abidjan by
the parties to the conflict. These checkpoints and
blockades were often the scene of the harassment and
obstruction of humanitarian workers. The situation was
further compounded by attacks on United Nations
peacekeepers and the theft of humanitarian vehicles,
equipment and supplies. Humanitarian organizations
were forced either to limit their movements or to
suspend activities altogether. While the violence has
subsided, the humanitarian situation remains
precarious and our access to those in need in Abidjan
and elsewhere continues to be hampered by pockets of
instability due to violence by militias.

In Libya, the reported use of cluster munitions
and Grad rockets by Government forces in Misrata
marks the latest development in a broader pattern of
the use of explosive weapons in densely populated
areas by Government, as well as opposition and
coalition forces. In one incident alone on 14 April, an
attack involving Grad rockets reportedly killed a dozen
civilians and wounded many more as they queued to
buy bread. In Cote d'Ivoire, at least 25 civilians were
killed and more wounded in a single incident on
17 March in which a market was shelled in the Abobo
district of Abidjan.

Explosive weapons have an immediate and
indiscriminate impact, killing and injuring those caught
in the blast radius, including civilians, while the
damage to buildings and infrastructure hampers longer-
term reconstruction and development. I reiterate my
call on parties to conflict to refrain from the use of
these weapons in densely populated areas.

While Libya and Cote d'Ivoire have recently
occupied the headlines, civilians in other conflicts
continue to be killed and injured as the parties fail to
comply with their obligations in the conduct of
hostilities.

In Somalia, civilians continue to bear the brunt of
fighting between militants and forces of the
Transitional Federal Government and the African
11-33032
Union. During 2010, over 7,000 civilians reported
weapons-related injuries in Mogadishu - the highest
number of civilian casualties in a decade. Children
accounted for 20 per cent of those injured.

In eastern Democratic Republic of Congo,
conflict persists, with direct attacks against civilians by
foreign and Congolese armed groups. Some elements
of the national security forces continue to be
implicated in these violations. Sexual violence,
including rape, remains a defining characteristic of the
conflict. At the end of 2010, some 1.7 million people
remained internally displaced, 1.3 million of them in
the Kivus. In the north-east of the country, the Lord's
Resistance Army (LRA) continues to pose a grave
threat to civilian populations, as well as in
neighbouring Central African Republic and southern
Sudan. During the first quarter of this year, 107 LRA
attacks - which routinely include the killing, rape,
beating and abduction of civilians - were reported
across the three countries.

In southern Sudan, following the relative stability
of January's referendum, the security situation has
deteriorated sharply. Intercommunal conflict and
clashes between the Sudan People's Liberation Army
(SPLA) and increasingly active militia groups have
reportedly killed over 1,100 people, the majority
civilians, and displaced over 116,000. Reports indicate
that SPLA soldiers have targeted or fired
indiscriminately at civilians and burned and looted
homes. In Darfur, fighting between Government and
rebel forces remains a major source of insecurity and
displaced an estimated additional 70,000 people during
the first three months of this year.

In Colombia, civilians continue to be affected by
the armed conflict and the actions principally of
guerrilla groups and new armed groups that have
emerged following the demobilization process. These
groups continue to use landmines and improvised
explosive devices, with over 150 civilians killed or
injured by such weapons in 2010. Civilians have been
killed and injured in attacks against military units
located in and around homes and schools. The
Government estimates that over 111,000 people were
forcibly displaced last year due to the conflict, bringing
the total number of internally displaced persons to 3.6
million.

March and April of this year witnessed an
escalation in violence in Gaza and southern Israel, with
3
one Israeli child killed and three Israelis injured.
Fifteen Palestinian civilians, including six children,
were killed and 104 injured, 37 of them children.

In Afghanistan, over 7,000 civilians were killed
or injured in 2010 - an increase of 19 per cent over
2009. Anti-Government elements were reportedly
responsible for over 5,000 of those deaths and injuries.
Military operations by pro-Government forces
accounted for some 800 civilian casualties. Improvised
explosive devices and suicide attacks in civilian areas
continue to cause large numbers of civilian deaths and
injuries. The Taliban's declaration on 1 May of the start
ofa spring offensive is of great concern.

The recent report of the Secretary-General's
Panel of Experts on Accountability in Sri Lanka found
that some 40,000 civilians may have died in the final
stages of the conflict and that credible allegations
existed of human rights and humanitarian law
violations by both parties to the conflict. Some of those
violations may amount to war crimes and crimes
against humanity. International law requires that these
allegations be properly investigated.

When it comes to protecting civilians in the
conduct of hostilities, the picture is stark. It will
remain so in the absence of determined efforts by
parties to conflict to comply with the law. Clear and
binding rules regulating the conduct of hostilities exist.
It is the willingness of parties to conflict to respect and
ensure respect for those rules, including through the
rigorous pursuit of accountability, that is absent.

Enhancing compliance with international law,
particularly in the conduct of hostilities, is the first of
the five core challenges identified in the last two
Secretary-General's reports on the protection of
civilians (S/2010/579 and 8/2009/277). As those
reports made clear, aside from the fundamental
responsibility on all the parties to conflict themselves,
the Security Council too has a responsibility to
promote compliance: first, by using all available
opportunities to condemn violations and to remind
parties of, and demand compliance with, their
obligations; secondly, by applying targeted sanctions
against the leadership of parties that routinely violate
their obligations to respect civilians; and, thirdly, by
promoting accountability, including by mandating
commissions of inquiry to examine situations where
concerns exist regarding serious violations, with a view
to identifying the perpetrators and ensuring their
prosecution at the national level, or referring the
situation to the International Criminal Court (ICC).

The Council's responses to the crises in Libya
and Cote d'Ivoire have raised questions that need to be
addressed. First, in terms of consistency of approach,
resolution 1970 (2011) on Libya essentially followed
the course laid out by the Secretary-General in the
reports to which I have just referred. The Council
condemned the violations, demanded compliance with
the law, imposed the arms embargo and targeted
sanctions and referred the situation to the ICC. The
latter action in particular is believed to have prompted
some in positions of power in Libya to reflect on their
role in the violence and, subsequently, to defect from
the Government. It is not clear whether the imposition
of similar measures in regard to Cote d'Ivoire, and at
an earlier stage of the crisis, might have prompted
similar action by influential individuals and prevented
the further deterioration of the situation.

The adoption of resolution 1973 (2011) on Libya
and the authorization and subsequent use of force and
other measures to protect civilians has prevented
civilian deaths and injury. But it has also raised
concerns in terms of the potential undermining of the
protection of civilians agenda and its important role in
providing a framework for action in future crises. In
addition to complying scrupulously with international
humanitarian law, the implementation of the Council's
decision must be exclusively limited to promoting and
ensuring the protection of civilians.

The events of the past few months have provided
a compelling reminder of the fundamental and
enduring importance of the Council's protection-of-
civilians agenda. Moreover, they have underscored the
need to ensure that the commitments therein, as
expressed in the five thematic protection-of-civilians
resolutions and the aide-memoire (see S/PRST/2010/ 25), translate into concerted Council action in response
to violations of the law as we have seen in Cote
d'Ivoire and Libya, Afghanistan, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Somalia.

Demanding compliance with the law and
enforcing such demands through targeted sanctions are
critically important actions that the Council can take to
enhance compliance. The Council also has a key role in
promoting genuine accountability for serious
violations, the absence of which serves to encourage
rather than deter violations. The Council must be
11-33032
comprehensive and consistent in its approach and
consider all situations requiring attention and action.

