Mr. Akram (Pakistan): The Pakistan delegation welcomes this opportunity to discuss the situation in the Middle East. We listened carefully to the briefings by Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and Assistant Secretary-General Mueller (see S/PV.8706). The situation in the Middle East poses a grave threat to international peace and security. Even as old conflicts fester, new threats have emerged. Strategic rivalry in the region has assumed a sectarian hue. Competing and overlapping interests of regional and external Powers threatened to erode the foundations of peace and stability in the region and beyond. Civilian populations, including women and children, have become the principal victims of protracted violence and instability. As recent developments in the Gulf region have demonstrated, the threat of dangerous escalation in the region is never far off. The region cannot afford another conflict. In the wake of the recent tensions between Iran and the United States, Pakistan has sought to defuse those tensions. On the personal initiative of Prime Minister Imran Khan, our foreign minister visited Tehran, Riyadh and Washington in the past few days. We underscored the need for mutual restraint, including non-use of force and the recourse to dialogue for the settlement of all disputes. The positive reaction from all sides is encouraging and could serve as a first step towards broad-based regional engagement. Pakistan will continue to be a partner for peace in the region. There have also been diplomatic gains in other parts of the Middle East. Last week, the Security Council adopted resolution 2505 (2019), renewing the mandate of the United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement for another six months. That was a clear signal of the international community's commitment to a peaceful solution to the Yemen crisis. The full implementation of the Agreement will provide the requisite momentum towards peace in that country. In Syria, the establishment of the Constitutional Committee has rekindled hopes for an inclusive political settlement. We echo calls by the Special Envoy for Syria that the Committee needs to be nurtured and genuinely supported by the Syrian parties and the international stakeholders. The Berlin Conference on Libya must be followed by the fulfilment of the pledge by international powers to allow and enable space for a political reconciliation among the various factions within Libya. The tragedy of Palestine, which is at the heart of much of the turmoil in the Middle East, however, shows no signs of ending. As illegal Israeli settlements expand into the occupied Palestinian territory, the vision of a two-State solution is being systematically reduced intoa one-State reality. Unilateral actions on the status of Jerusalem and Israeli settlements have further dimmed the prospect for peace. The United Nations, including the Security Council, have a central role in responding to those challenges. The elements of a comprehensive settlement are well-known - the principle of land for peace and the implementation of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), the Madrid terms of reference and the Arab Peace Initiative of 2002. The international community must continue to promote the aim of creating a viable, democratic, sovereign and contiguous Palestinian State living side by side with Israel in peace and security.
