Mr. Sefue (United Republic of Tanzania): I thank
you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to address the
Security Council on this subject of great interest to all
of us, and I thank the Secretary-General and the
Executive Director of the United Nations Environment
Programme for their statements this morning. The
President of Nauru could not have been more
passionate about this subject, and that is something we
share. My delegation associates itself with the
statements made by the representatives of Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and of Argentina
on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.

The United Republic of Tanzania, like other
developing countries, considers climate change to be a
serious threat to our food and water security, our socio-
economic development and perhaps our very existence.
Poor countries like the United Republic of Tanzania
bear the least responsibility for the threat we all now
face, have the least capacity to mitigate the impact of
climate change and stand to suffer the most from it. We
also know that climate change and subsequent global

 

warming are linked to human activity, and that the
solution is to be found in sustainable development 4
an important issue that is currently being addressed by
and within the mandates of other United Nations
bodies and intergovernmental processes where we all
participate on an equal footing.

The Government of the United Republic of
Tanzania recognizes that there is an element of security
in climate change, just as there is an element of
security in most other things in the world. Yet we do
not bring all those things into the purview of the
Security Council. My delegation believes that climate
change is best handled by the other principal organs of
the United Nations, as well as by entities mandated to
deal with sustainable development. We also recall that
we had a similar discussion in 2007 (see S/PV.5663), in
which the overwhelming opinion of Member States
was that the Security Council should avoid infringing
on the mandates of other United Nations entities, such
as the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change (UNFCCC), the Economic and Social
Council and, ultimately, the General Assembly.

We recognize fully the threats facing Pacific
islands 4 we had to, as we listened to the President of
Nauru this morning 4 and others that are confronting
the possible loss of their land mass and the subsequent
creation of climate refugees. This is a threat that
countries like my own share, because we too have in
our territorial waters small islands that risk the same
fate as those in the Pacific if we do not bring climate
change under control.

That is why we attach great importance to the
ongoing multilateral negotiations aimed at reaching
amicable solutions through an intergovernmental
process we all participate in. We feel that isolating
climate change could weaken the possibility of an early
conclusion to negotiations under the UNFCCC. The
United Republic of Tanzania recommends that the
Secretary-General be requested to undertake a
comprehensive study to determine the size and scope
of the threat facing the Pacific islands and others in a
similar position, and develop a menu of alternative
options and solutions for consideration and decision by
the General Assembly.

In conclusion, let me underline the need to
provide recognition and incentives to those countries
that render global service in providing climate change
mitigation, including carbon sequestration, one of the

 

interventions enjoying consensus. Tanzania has
dedicated more than 30 per cent of its land mass to
forest reserves and national parks. It is a net sink for
carbon dioxide that deserves support, not just for the
United Republic of Tanzania but also for others that
play a similar role. We believe that the responsibilities
of Member States to avert the threat of climate change
lie in making progress through mitigation and
adaptation under the UNFCC framework and the
upcoming United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development.

