Mr. Tang Jiaxuan (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
statement and his Special Representative, Mr. Brahimi,
for his briefing. We endorse the Secretary-General's
analysis of the situation in Afghanistan and the views
contained in his statement. We believe that
Mr. Brahimi's opinions and recommendations
concerning the political arrangement, security, the
humanitarian situation and the economic reconstruction
of Afghanistan reflect the requirements of
developments in the country and are positive and
constructive. The Chinese Government will study them
in depth.

After two decades of civil war, the current
situation in Afghanistan is all the more turbulent and
complex. The humanitarian situation has further
deteriorated and is having repercussions in the
neighbouring countries. If it is not soon eased and
contained, it will become a threat to the peace and
stability of the whole region.

With the changing situation on the battlefield in
Afghanistan, the question of a potential power vacuum
has cropped up. There are ever greater dangers of
large-scale social chaos in that country. It is therefore
imperative for the international community, the United
Nations in particular, to accelerate the process of a
political settlement of the Afghan question, including
facilitating the establishment of a transitional
administration, and to set in motion Afghanistan's
reconstruction as soon as possible. At this critical
juncture, the United Nations should play a leading role
and provide, together with the international
community, the necessary political, technical and
financial assistance to Afghanistan on an urgent basis.

Diverse plans concerning the post-war
arrangement in Afghanistan have been proposed by
various parties concerned and some consensus was
reached at yesterday's ministerial meeting of the "six
plus two" group. We should encourage all parties and
factions in Afghanistan to intensify political dialogue

with a view to reaching agreement on the composition
of the transitional administration and avoiding the
occurrence of a power vacuum. At the very least, they
should reach basic agreement on the political
framework for the future arrangement. We are of the
view that the transitional administration should be
broad-based, fully represent the interests of all ethnic
groups and live in amity with all countries, especially
its neighbours. That is the only approach that can
contribute to lasting peace. It goes without saying that,
in the final analysis, any solution to the Afghan
question must be decided by the Afghan people
themselves.

We are ready to take into serious consideration
any proposals or recommendations that are conducive
to restoring the peace, stability and neutrality of
Afghanistan and in the fundamental interests of people
of all ethnic groups in that country. China has provided
emergency humanitarian assistance to Afghan refugees.
It is our hope that the international community will
make a greater effort to ease the current humanitarian
crisis in Afghanistan. The Chinese Government is
willing to make constructive efforts, together with all
Sides, for the promotion of a comprehensive political
solution to the issue of Afghanistan, with the assistance
of the United Nations.

