Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to congratulate the French Republic
on its assumption of the presidency of the Council for
this month. I commend the efforts of the Permanent
Mission of China for its very effective presidency of
the Council last month.

The Iraqi Government has paid great attention
to issues related to children because it is our belief
that their well being is crucial for the future in all
its aspects, including the overall framework for
building a new democratic Iraq. However, today my
country is confronting serious challenges because
of the violent attacks of the criminal terrorists of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), which
seeks to derail the efforts to achieve those objectives
and the Government's efforts to spread law and order
throughout the country. ISIL's actions have a negative
effect on the general enjoyment of economic, social,
cultural, civil and political human rights. ISIL's
criminal practices against children in the areas of
Iraq under its control have taken the form of killings,
forced displacements and expulsions, sexual violence
of all forms, trafficking in children, the deprivation of
education, forced recruitment and the use of children in
its media material, which contain scenes and ideas that
are in complete contradiction with children's innocence
and the way they should be raised. All that is in addition
to attacks against health and educational facilities that
care for children, which constitute a serious challenge
and threat to children and the entire Iraqi community.

One of ISIL's most dangerous practices in the
context of its attacks on children in Iraq was its attack
on the educational process in the areas under its control
in Iraq by seeking to change Government textbooks
and enforce the use of new textbooks and syllabuses
that focus on extremist ideas, the hatred of others, the
exclusion of others and involvement in acts of violence.
All that represents a threat to children's future and a
danger to the educational values of the Iraqi community
and the Government's plans in the area of education.

In addition to leaving thousands of children
without education or health care because of their flight
from ISIL's terrorist attacks, there are tens of thousands
of children who remain and, unfortunately, could not
escape. They are now subject to ISIL's control and
terror. This is a cause of great concern because these
entities do not abide by any international conventions
or instruments that guarantee the protection of
children, and one cannot negotiate with them to
guarantee the safety of these children. That leaves
the Iraqi Government to confront a huge dilemma.
The Government is not able to plead with that enemy
and urge it to refrain from recruiting children in the
fighting, from using them as suicide bombers or from
abusing them through their various brutal methods.

It is extremely important that the international
community reaffirm the principles that were adopted
over the course of many years for the protection of
women and children during wartime. Considering the
current situation of Iraq, which is faced with ISIL's
terrorism, the Iraqi Government will work hard to
reintegrate children and the victims of terrorism in
the areas that are liberated from ISIL's control after
the terrorist group is defeated. Therefore, the Iraqi
Government is focusing its attention and priorities on
combatting terrorism and rescuing its community from
extremism.

In conclusion, children living in the areas of armed
conflict in Iraq face increasing orphanhood because
of ISIL's terrorist operations and they will have to
deal with ISIL's negative effects on the future of the
country. Abducted Yazidi and Christian children also
face being forced to abandon their own faiths, adopt
brutal ideologies and carry out suicide attacks, as well
as being subject to heinous torture and death.

Iraq participates in every way possible in the
international "Children, Not Soldiers" campaign.

