Mr. Braun (Germany) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank France for organizing this important
debate. I also thank all the eminent experts for their
valuable and informative briefings.

Germany aligns itself with the statements delivered
by the European Union and Switzerland on behalf of
the Group of Friends.

It is imperative that we significantly strengthen
our commitment to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, as summed up perfectly by the Secretary-
General in his current report. The protection of civilians
is among the most urgent tasks of peacekeeping. In
order to carry out the task, four pillars are required, in
Germany's View.

First, there is the central role of the Security
Council. It is the responsibility of the Council to deeply
entrench the protection of civilians in the mandates
of peacekeeping operations and to support these
operations at the political and operational levels when a
heightened threat to civilians is obvious. Furthermore,
where national criminal prosecution mechanisms fail,
it must also ensure the application of international law
in the event of war crimes and crimes against humanity.
The aim is to send a clear message: attacks targeting
civilians will not go unpunished.

Secondly, there is a need to ensure the safety of
members of peacekeeping forces. The mission in Mali
is a perfect illustration of this growing threat. This
year alone, terrorists have killed 12 Blue Helmets and
countless civilians in targeted attacks. By adding 400
soldiers with state-of-the-art equipment to the German
contingent of the United Mission Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
we underscore the determination of our commitment to
this mission and to the civilian population.

Thirdly, peacekeeping operations must adopt good
practices. Germany shares the concerns expressed by
the Secretary-General in his latest report and supports
his call to undertake more effective measures to
improve the protection of civilians. Germany therefore
welcomes the formulation of the Kigali Principles on
the Protection of Civilians. Yesterday, my Mission
forwarded a note verbale regarding our support for the
Kigali Principles to the Permanent Mission of Rwanda
here in New York.

Fourthly, police activities must be strengthened.
The police play a crucial role in peacekeeping
operations, particularly with regard to the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. Germany therefore
welcomes the current evaluation report on the United
Nations Police Division. The report contains extensive
recommendations on the strengthening of that police
force. We are confident that the Secretariat will
not delay in implementing them. In conclusion, Sir,
Germany shares your view that it is necessary to assign
greater responsibility to the United Nations and the
international community in the protection of civilian
persons. Doing so requires conceptual work, in which
Germany will continue to participate fully.

