Mr. Morejon Pazmifio (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this important debate. I very much appreciate what was
said by Ambassador Kamau, Ambassador Skoog and
Ambassador Rosenthal this morning, for it touched on
the very essence of what we want to talk about today.
I also want to stress the fact that Mr. Rosenthal has
been present here right from the start of this morning's
debate, a courtesy that I greatly appreciate. The United
Nations was born on 24 October 1945 from the ashes of
the Second World War to maintain international peace
and security, one of its founding principles. Following
the Holocaust, we regarded peace only as the absence of
war. Nevertheless, in the twenty-first century, 70 years
later, peace continues to be absent, since were it present
then justice, dignity, development and the elements of
the visionary Sustainable Development Goal 16 would
all be present too. On the contrary, poverty, human
rights violations and conflicts continue to affect ever
greater populations. What is most serious is that those
conflicts have become increasingly complex, ever more
fragmented, more difficult and risk laden.

Such developments over time and the evolution of
the contexts in which conflicts arise underscore the
need for a change in the way peacebuilding is viewed.
The Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of the
Peacebuilding Architecture noted in its report (see S/2015/490) that the fundamental task of the United
Nations 4 the maintenance of peace 4 does not receive
due priority or adequate resources at the global level or
within the United Nations system.

That statement compels my delegation to address
the root causes of the Organization's inability to prevent
the resurgence of the conflicts that have once again
engulfed brotherly countries, posing major threats
to, and resulting in serious consequences for, the
peacebuilding efforts of the United Nations and other
international and regional actors, and in weaknesses
and divisions not only within their own organizational
structure but throughout the entire United Nations
system. However, my delegation also recognizes the
Organization's underlying concern about this important
issue.

Twenty-four years ago, the then Secretary-
General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, in "An Agenda for
Peace" (S/24111), defined and analysed post-conflict
peacebuilding. To that end, several new initiatives have
been taken, including the creation of the peacebuilding
architecture. Recently we have seen the report of the
Secretary-General entitled "The future of United
Nations peace operations: implementation of the
recommendations of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations" (S/2015/682) and the report of
the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of the
Peacebuilding Architecture (see S/2015/490). The
latter contains substantive and analytical content on its
findings and recommendations.

Let me briefly touch on just a few points. First,
peace must be the common denominator of all of the
Organization's activities. Second, we must shift the
Organization's focus from response to prevention.
Third, the task of maintaining peace means that the
entire United Nations system, in particular its three
main intergovernmental organs, must make the effort
to accord it due priority and attention. Fourth, we must
ensure more predictable funding for peacebuilding.
The goal of $100 million is a disproportionate sum
compared to the tremendous amount spent on the
peacekeeping operations. My delegation believes that
contributions to the fund could be both voluntary and
quota-based. Fifth, there is a need to achieve broad
and inclusive participation by the societies with which
they work in the field. Sixth, we must ensure women's
full participation in the entire peacebuilding process,
from beginning to end. And seventh, the triangular
relationship among peace, development and human
rights means that all three of the Organization's
components must work in close collaboration.

I conclude with a moral reflection by His Holiness
John Paul II in his encyclical on peace: that we are duty-
bound to build a peace that is sustainable over time and
that requires us to be responsible in helping to build a
decent society for humankind.

