Mr. Duarte Lopes (Portugal): I will also speak
in French.

(spoke in French)

I thank you, Mr. President, for having organized
this open debate on children and armed conflict.
Despite the efforts of the international community,
children remain among the main victims of such
conflicts. This is an issue that is an absolute priority.
I would like to thank Ms. Kamara and Mr. Awan for
their personal testimonies and I congratulate them on
their courage and their journey, which is so inspiring.
I would also like to reiterate my country's support for
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Virginia Gamba, and thank her for her briefing.

Portugal supports the statement to be made by the
observer of the European Union, as well as that on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Children and Armed
Conflict, which was just delivered by the representative
of Canada.

Allow me to thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2019/509), which unfortunately describes
a very worrying reality of violations of international
human rights law against children and highlights a very
large number of cases of child recruitment as a tactic
of war.

Portugal has signed the Convention on the Rights
of the Child and its Optional Protocols, notable the one
on the involvement of children in armed conflict. We
therefore call on Member States that have not yet done
so to follow that path.

Attacks on schools and hospitals and their use
for military purposes cannot continue in impunity.
Portugal reiterates its firm commitment to access to
education in emergency situations, including higher
education, and also calls on Governments that have not
done so to sign the Safe Schools Declaration. Education
is both a mechanism for preventing recruitment and a
means of addressing the root causes of conflict.

We also wish to emphasize the importance of the
Kigali Principles and the Vancouver Principles on
Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment
and Use of Child Soldiers, which complement the
Paris Principles. As a whole, those principles should
constitute a frame of reference for our future actions.

We must remain vigilant regarding situations of
sexual violence against children in wartime. In that
regard, Portugal welcomes the measures taken by the
Council with the adoption of resolution 2467 (2019),
which has made it possible to identify an approach
centred on victims and survivors of sexual violence.
In addition, we must do everything possible to put an
end to impunity with regard to exploitation and sexual
violence. It should be recalled that sexual violence in
conflict situations is linked to the broader issue of
gender equality, as noted in resolution 1325 (2000).
Portugal has just adopted its third national plan for the
implementation of that resolution, with clear objectives
and a concrete timetable.

In conclusion, I stress the importance that Portugal
attaches to the work of UNICEF and other specialized
agencies, as well as of civil society, to improve the
lives of all those girls and boys who suffer from
varying levels of extreme violence. This scourge can be
combated effectively only through cooperation among
all actors.

