Mr. Normandin (Canada) (spoke in French):
Canada is pleased to participate in this debate on the
prevention of conflict in Africa. We thank the President
for his initiative to hold this open debate.

Situations such as those in Darfur, northern
Uganda, Somalia and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo - in which civilians continue to suffer the
effects of war - illustrate that the immediate and long-
term costs of the failure to prevent armed violence, and
of delaying our response to it, are incalculable.
However, as we look back on our experience in the
area of conflict prevention, it is important not to lose
sight of the progress we have made. The Human
Security Report has concluded that there has actually
been an 80 per cent decrease in the number of armed
conflicts since the 1990s. That situation is attributed to
an extraordinary increase in the efforts of the
international community.
Since the adoption of resolution 1625 (2005), we
have created new tools to reduce the risk of conflicts
breaking out and to ensure that peace agreements do
not unravel once they are in place. Moreover, regional
cooperation has improved - the most recent example
of which is the new hybrid mission to Darfur. The
Peacebuilding Commission has also been established,
and Canada favours expanding its agenda to include
additional States at risk as well as such cross-cutting
themes as children affected by armed conflict and the
role of women in peace and security.

The Mediation Support Unit is an additional tool
in the area of preventive diplomacy. Canada supports
and encourages the timely and proactive deployment of
its capabilities.

We also encourage expanding the African Union's
Council of Elders.

It is clear, however, that improved cooperation
with the African Union and other regional and
subregional organizations is essential if we wish to
prevent conflicts in Africa.

Canada will continue to contribute to the
strengthening of the peace and security architecture of
the African Union, especially as regards the
deployment of civilian and military monitors, regional
centres of excellence for the deployment of trained
military and police components to peace support
operations, and the establishment of a future permanent
integrated force in Africa.

Nevertheless, those efforts are not enough. As the
Secretary-General pointed out in his most recent
report, a significant gap remains between rhetoric on
conflict prevention and the reality on the ground. The
World Summit's endorsement of the responsibility to
protect must now be translated into swift international
action to prevent genocide, war crimes and crimes
against humanity. That must be done both by
improving the capacity of States themselves to
intervene and by more speedy international efforts.

We urge the Security Council to continue to
integrate cross-cutting themes into its work -
especially as regards such principal causes of conflict
as the proliferation of light weapons, the exploitation
of natural resources, gender equality, human rights
violations and challenges in protecting civilians.

We also encourage the Secretary-General to
resort more frequently to the reporting functions

conferred upon him by resolution 1625 (2005), as well
as to inform the Security Council about increasingly
worrying situations that could benefit from the
Council's attention.

(spoke in English)

We commend the Secretary-General for his recent
and timely reporting on the situation in Somalia, and
encourage the Council to give that worsening situation
its focused attention. Canada is deeply concerned about
the situation in Somalia, including targeted attacks
against journalists, and has provided substantial
humanitarian assistance accordingly.

When the international community works
together, much can be accomplished. Security Council
cohesion is critical to overcoming the conflicts in the
Sudan. The Council's strong support for the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement and its prompt
deployment of the United Nations Mission in the
Sudan have at last helped to end one of Africa's longest
civil wars.

With respect to Darfur, the Council's unanimous
approval of resolution 1769 (2007) - authorizing the
hybrid mission - "opens a new chapter", in the words
of the Secretary-General. That key development has
already improved the atmosphere for the peace process
being led by the special envoys of the African Union
and the United Nations.

We emphasize, however, that the continuing
engagement of the international community is vital,
both in Darfur and in implementing the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement. Since the adoption of resolution
1556 (2004), Canada has been a core contributor to the
African Union's peacekeeping mission, committing
$286 million to provide critical airlift, armoured
vehicles and technical advisors. Canada has also
responded to the urgent appeal from the Council to
assist the African Union's mission until the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur can
be deployed.

Uganda is a recent example of international
cooperation under United Nations leadership to reduce
and prevent conflict. Canada works closely with the
United Nations and other partners in northern Uganda,
providing support for the Juba peace talks.

The Nairobi Summit and the signing of the Pact
on Security, Stability and Development in the Great
Lakes Region was also the culmination of more than
three years of confidence-building and negotiation,
primarily between the 11 core countries of the region.
Implementation, however, remains precarious, owing
to the unresolved issue of the remaining armed forces
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. That requires both sustained international
attention and a sustained international military
presence. In this regard, Canada will continue to
support implementation of the conference process
through our co-chairmanship of the Group of Friends
of the Great Lakes Region.

Finally, we would like to highlight our support
for the initiative of the Southern African Development
Community to address the growing crisis in Zimbabwe.
Given the destabilizing effects Zimbabwe's economic
and governance crisis could have on the region,
Canada believes that intensified regional diplomacy is
required on an urgent basis. We also urge the Security
Council to consider regular briefings on this steadily
deteriorating situation.

In closing, we would urge the Council to use all
of the conflict prevention tools at its disposal to
address emerging conflicts at a much earlier stage of
their development. Coordinated regional and
subregional action and, most critically, the provision of
timely and appropriate international support for such
action, are urgently required to sustain peace. We must
all do our part.

