Mr. Sharifov (Azerbaijan): I should like at the
outset to thank the presidency for having convened
this very important debate. We also thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Abou
Moussa, and the African Union (AU) Special Envoy,
Mr. Madeira, for their comprehensive briefings.

We welcome the positive developments registered
in the region during the reporting period, especially the
conduct of peaceful elections, economic growth and
efforts to promote regional integration and cooperation.
However, cross-border threats, the flow of illegal
arms and the activities of armed groups and terrorist
organizations, especially Boko Haram, the increase in
piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf of Guinea, poverty
and trafficking in persons continue to raise concerns.

Incidents ofpiracy and armed robbery in the Gulf of
Guinea have risen significantly in recent times, so that
the area has the second most acute piracy problem on
the African continent. The increasing number of piracy
attacks, in addition to transnational organized crime,
including the trafficking of illicit weapons, constitute
a serious threat to peace, security and economic
development in both the coastal and hinterland States
of the region.

The measures and initiatives undertaken at the
national and regional levels to mobilize international
attention to this problem and enhance maritime
safety and security in the Gulf of Guinea should be
commended.

Insecurity in the Sahel region continues to have
a significant negative economic and social impact
on a number of Central African countries, and more
consistency and determination are needed in addressing
those potential and actual risks and threats.

We are also deeply concerned by the atrocities
committed by the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA),
which continue to pose a threat to regional security
and stability. The LRA bears responsibility for grave
violations against civilians, including killing, maiming,
abductions, sexual slavery, rape and the recruitment
and use of children, as well as the displacement of
445,000 people. We note the work of the United Nations
agencies, in particular the World Food Programme and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, in providing humanitarian assistance to
this vulnerable group.

We welcome the development of the United Nations
regional strategy on the LRA, with the contribution of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa,
and the launching of the African Union-led regional
cooperation initiative. It should be noted that the
necessary funding is essential for the implementation
of both the strategy and the initiative.

At the same time, we would stress the importance
of further strengthening cooperation among all
LRA-affected countries, in particular through the
Regional Task Force, to address those common regional
threats. We take positive note in this regard of the
agreement reached on information-sharing between
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Uganda this
March.

The recent decrease in the number of LRA attacks
brought about an improvement in the regional security
situation. In the context of that approach, State
authority, as well as disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation, resettlement and reintegration activities,
should be further strengthened in the LRA-affected
areas. Moreover, various programmes to reduce poverty
and create job opportunities should be implemented by
the respective Governments, with donor assistance.
The reintegration into society of the displaced persons,
LRA abductees and former combatants is also very
important.

Even successful national efforts cannot bring about
overall normalcy and ensure a comprehensive solution
if they are not supported by the United Nations system
and the broader international community. Therefore
the initiatives undertaken by the Governments of the
affected countries, as well as the efforts of the African
Union and other relevant regional and subregional
organizations, should be forcefully supported.

