The President (spoke in French): I will now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Luxembourg.

I, too, would like to welcome to the Security Council
the Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation ofSierra Leone, His Excellency Mr. Samura
Kamara. Luxembourg congratulates the Government
and people of Sierra Leone on their exceptional
accomplishments on the road to peacebuilding and
economic development. Theirs is a success story indeed.

I thank the Executive Representative of the

Secretary-General, Mr. Jens Anders Toyberg-Frandzen,
for his final briefing to the Council in that capacity. We
salute him and the entire team of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNIPSIL). They have carried out their mandate with
dedication, effectiveness and professionalism in the
allotted time. I would also like to thank Ambassador
Guillermo Richchynski of Canada for his statement and
for his exemplary commitment as Chair of the Sierra
Leone configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC).

At the end of 12 years of support on the part of the
United Nations in the wake of a civil conflict of the
most violent kind, Sierra Leone has made remarkable
progress. The efforts to consolidate that progress must
go on, for such progress is never irreversible. However,
we are confident for the future. We are confident that
the representatives elected by the Sierra Leoneans will
possess the necessary wisdom to avoid the errors of the
past. We trust that they will be ready to consider the
national interest above all else, remain open to their
partners' feedback, and find the necessary strength to
bring lasting peace and prosperity to the country.

The Agenda for Prosperity is ambitious. Its
implementation is essential if Sierra Leone is to achieve
its goal of becoming a middle-income country by the
year 2035. To that end, Sierra Leone will need partners.
Its long-standing partners have already heeded the
call. For the next seven years, the European Union
has already set aside €372 million, amounting to some
$500 million, under the framework of the European
Development Fund, to support Sierra Leone in the areas
of governance and civil society, education, agriculture
and food security. The European Union has also decided
to support Sierra Leone in the fields of constitutional
reform and capacity-building of its police force.

In addition to official development assistance,
Sierra Leone needs reliable foreign direct investment.
Tax revenues will continue to grow. The economy
must be diversified beyond the extraction of natural
resources, which must take place under the necessary
transparency so as to ensure that the income thus
derived benefits the people of Sierra Leone as a whole.
Efforts are also needed to prevent and resolve land
disputes. Mutually beneficial arrangements for local
communities and the private sector can and must be
found.

Despite the persistent challenges, including
endemic poverty and the unemployment that especially
affects young people, we are confident that the people
of Sierra Leone will enjoy the long-awaited peace
dividends. The signing on 4 February of the mutual
accountability framework under the framework of
the New Deal for Engagement in Fragile States was
a sign of confidence, as is the continuing partnership
with the Peacebuilding Commission. Luxembourg
welcomes Ambassador Rishchynski's proposal to adapt
the approach of the Peacebuilding Commission's Sierra
Leone configuration in the next 12 months.

Finally, Luxembourg commends the cooperation
established by Sierra Leone among its neighbours in
the Mano River Union. In October, the Union adopted
a border security strategy that was drafted with the
support of the United Nations Office for West Africa
(UNOWA). The implementation of the strategy will
enhance the fight against transnational organized crime
and build peace at the regional level. We count on the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the Office for West Africa, Mr. Said Djinnit,
and the UNOWA team, in collaboration with the United
Nations country team, in supporting Sierra Leone in a
continually evolving regional context.

The leaders of Sierra Leone bear a heavy burden
of responsibility, but we are confident that they will
continue to follow the positive path that has been forged
over the past 12 years. The end of the Council's support
represents a historic milestone. We thank the United
Kingdom for preparing a draft presidential statement
to allow the Council to duly note that. We wish great
courage and success to the Government and people of
Sierra Leone as they open a new chapter on the history
of their country.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and International Cooperation of the Republic of Sierra
Leone.

