Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I thank the United States
presidency for putting this topic on the agenda. I would
have liked to discuss it even more with the curtains open,
as was the case at the very beginning ofthis presidency.

Let me start by expressing Germany's condolences
to the Government and the people of the Niger after the
horrendous attack that we witnessed last week.
I would like to thank the briefers. I was very happy
to hear that they had the same analysis and conclusions
on the situation. They both described the gravity of
the situation. Mr. Chambas said that the violence we
are witnessing is unprecedented and Mr. Chergui said
that the situation is worsening. When it comes to the
analysis, I think almost everybody around the table
can see that the root cause, as we mentioned by our
United Kingdom colleague, is the deficit in governance
and the State's inability to provide basic services and
security to its population. The numbers are just terrible.
Some 2,800 schools are closed in the region, the justice
system does not work, and we see corruption in most of
the countries, the marginalization of the population and
disadvantaged youth, among other issues.

My analysis of the situation differs from that of our
Russian colleague and I would only suggest that, over
the Christmas break, we look into a study conducted in
2017 by the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP), entitled Journey to Extremism in Africa,
which contains very good statistics and examples of the
situation in the area. It was already bad in 2017 and
since then it has worsened. I think that the analysis in
the UNDP study remains absolutely true. It highlights
governance deficit as linked with gender inequality,
which is still a nightmare, and I am also happy that
almost everybody finally recognizes the security
implications of climate change.

Now, when it comes to consequences to be drawn,
individual States must be primarily responsible for
resolving their own problems, and they can only be
supported to that end. I was very encouraged by what
we heard from the briefers with regard to the support
of the Economic Community of West African States
and the African Union. Everyone is concentrating
on the issue and I think it must go hand in hand with
cooperation between the African Union and the United
Nations. Within the United Nations, we must have a
one United Nations approach. When we visited some of
the countries earlier this year, my impression was that
there was good cooperation among the different United
Nations agencies.

I would also like to highlight what Mr. Chergui and
others said with regard to taking a holistic approach.
There is no military solution to this problem if we do
not resolve the basic political issues and ifwe do not get
back to or really achieve good governance. Governments
have to respect human rights. Governments have to
respect international humanitarian law. We have to
re-establish trust and confidence in the Governments
of the region. If there is no justice system, people will
have no trust in their Government. We have to fight
corruption; the income disparities in Africa are also too
high, and we must do more to protect schools. I think
one of the main issues for the military and security
forces is to make sure that children can go to school.
One must also listen to civil society. Governments have
to include women in decision-making in all bodies that
make decisions and look after young people. Military
security efforts have a chance to succeed only if good
governance is provided.

Germany is engaged in all of this. We have spent
millions and millions of euros. The Chancellor has
visited the region several times and the Foreign Minister
has done so too. We really emphasize the importance of
stabilizing the region. We are therefore doing all we
can to strengthen confidence in the rule of law and
the security forces, fight transborder organized crime,
improve migration management, prevent and fight
against radicalization and extremism and establish
social coherence at the local level.

