Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): Like
other colleagues who have preceeded me, I would like
to reiterate my congratulations to Ambassador Gary
Francis Quinlan on his assumption of the chairmanship
of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), as well as to thank
him sincerely for his first 90-day report. Aware of his
thoroughness, integrity and professionalism, we would
like to express our full confidence in him and assure
him of our cooperation.

I would also like to thank the Panel of Experts
established pursuant to paragraph 29 of resolution
1929 (2010). We encourage it to continue, under the
aegis of the Committee, to participate in the various
conferences and meetings having to do with the
Committee's mandate and, above all, to pursue the
dialogue undertaken with Member States during the
visits that it makes to the countries concerned.

The Committee continues to consider all the
cases referred to it. We hope that it will continue to
benefit from the cooperation of Member States and the
professionalism and impartiality ofthe Panel ofExperts.
We call on the Committee to continue to consider all
the assistance notices and to call for their application,
given their importance for the implementation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions. We would also
highlight the need to pursue the consideration of the
final report of the Panel of Experts (see S/2012/395), in
particular the recommendations it contains.

In the summary of its 16 November report, the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) stressed
that few concrete results had been achieved in terms of
resolving the pending issues with respect to the Iranian
nuclear programme, despite the three series of talks held
in Tehran since the previous December. We therefore
hope that the Islamic Republic of Iran and the IAEA
will quickly reach agreement on a structured approach
to undertaking substantive work on the pending issues.
As the only institution with the competency to deal with
safeguards, the IAEA must have all the cooperation
necessary to make concrete progress on the pending
issues.

At the same time, we welcome the positive
atmosphere in which the most recent talks between
the Islamic Republic of Iran and the five permanent
members of the Security Council and Germany, held
on 26 and 27 February in Almaty, Kazakhstan. On the
basis of our belief that dialogue, diplomacy and peaceful
means are the only way to resolve this issue, we hope
that the dialogue that has been undertaken, which will
continue in March in Istanbul and in April in Almaty,
will allow for progress towards a negotiated solution.

I would like to highlight the urgent need to
prevent any weakening of the non-proliferation regime
and to ensure that all States are in strict compliance
with their safeguards obligations. Non-compliance
with obligations undertaken through the voluntary
and sovereign decision to join the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons will only
make the achievement of the global goal of nuclear
disarmament more difficult and out of reach. My
country remains firmly attached to that goal. At the
same time, we reaffirm the right of every State to
use nuclear energy for exclusively peaceful ends. The
non-proliferation regime depends upon a delicate
balance between the rights and obligations of States. It
is important to protect, preserve and ensure full respect
for that balance.

