Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti, Ms. Sandra Honore
Braithwaite, for her presentation of the Secretary-
General's report (S/2017/604) and assessment of the
situation in the country during the critical period of
gradual transition from the current United Nations
mission to ajustice support mission.

Accordingly, in April we supported the adoption of
resolution 2350 (2017), taking into account the important
role that the United Nations plays in stabilizing the
situation in the country and the need to continue to
provide assistance to the Government of Haiti. In their
statements, members of the Security Council frequently
emphasize the importance of transitional periods and
stress that, once that stage has been completed, we can
judge the effectiveness of the United Nations system
and the Security Council in particular. We therefore
have paid particularly close attention to the Secretary-
General's report.

We note the positive assessments of the political

process in the country, the establishment of a
Government, the completion of the first 100 days of
the administration of President Moise and the gradual
progress in improving national criminal legislation, as
well as the establishment of the Haitian National Police
strategic development plan for the period 2017-2021.
We take note of the view that Haiti stands ready to bear
responsibility to independently address its challenges.

However, an analysis of the statistics noted in the
report during the reporting period in connection with
violations and the number of operations conducted
by Blue Helmets and Berets indicates the need for a
steadfast focus on security issues. The Mission, the
Secretariat and the Security Council are faced with the
challenge of ensuring that the planned reforms do not
generate a security vacuum. Consequently, the gradual
drawdown of the military and police contingents and
troop levels needs to be done in a very cautious manner.
There must be certainty that the Government is in a
position to independently and fully guarantee security
and tranquillity for the Haitian people.

The second half of the report focuses on the
transition from the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH) to the United Nations Mission
for Justice Support in Haiti. Once again, we would
like to highlight what we referred to in April when
resolution 2350 (2017) was adopted (see S/PV.7924). In
recent years, the Security Council has firmly advocated
having mission mandates be as comprehensible, explicit
and obtainable as possible. That was the premise as
we worked on resolution 2350 (2017). Ultimately, the
resolution explicitly stipulates that the Council "[r]
ecognizes the ownership and primary responsibility
of the Government and the people of Haiti". This is
also referred to in paragraph 6, which focuses on the
mandate of the Mission established. It states that the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
"shall be mandated to assist the Government of Haiti".

In that context, we noted that the wording, which
focuses on the work of the future Mission is somewhat
vague and it may be interpreted in a way to suggest
that the Mission has certain independent functions
and priorities that the Government must support. We
will closely monitor work along those lines, chiefly
with regard to the need to deliver good services and
monitor the human rights situation. Those duties must
be carried out strictly in line with the mandate handed
down by the Security Council.

In conclusion, we reiterate what the Council has
stated repeatedly based on experience. The effective
support of the United Nations is possible only when
there is trust-based cooperation with the host State as it
assumes the leadership role.

