Mr. Martinez Blanco (Honduras) (interpretation from Spanish): Speaking for the first time we are
speaking in the Security Council as one of its members,
I wish to congratulate you, Sir, in my capacity as
Permanent Representative of Honduras, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of January. My delegation is convinced that under
your usual skilful leadership the work of this Council will
be fruitful. You and the other members of the Council
can rely on our cooperation.

 

We also congratulate your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of Rwanda, on the very skilful way in which
he discharged his duties as President of the Council in
December. We also join in welcoming the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Italy.

My delegation is grateful to the Secretary-General for
presenting the third report of the Co-Chairmen of the
Steering Committee of the International Conference on the
Former Yugoslavia, pursuant to the provisions of paragraph
3 of resolution 943 (1994), adopted by the Council on 23
September 1994.
The Co-Chairmen of the Steering Committee have
certified that the Government of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) is continuing to meet
its commitment to close the border between that Republic
and the areas of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina
under the control of Bosnian Serb forces.

The report indicates that the authorities of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia are cooperating constructively with
the Mission of the International Conference, that the
Mission has freedom of movement within the territory of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and that it continues to
enjoy the cooperation of the Yugoslav authorities.

In general, the report reflects optimism prompted by
the apparently satisfactory way in which the monitoring
process on the border is proceeding. These monitoring
arrangements may help to improve the political process
aimed at achieving peace and ensuring the viability of the
agreements on a cease-fire and cessation of hostilities,
signed in December by the Bosnian parties in conflict.

The report indicates that the improvement has
facilitated the provision of humanitarian relief by the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
by the Red Cross, as reflected in the reports that the United
Nations Protection Force regularly provides to the members
of the Security Council on the situation on the ground.

Despite the apparently irreconcilable positions of the
parties in dispute, my delegation takes the view that the
suspension for a further hundred days of the restrictions and
other measures referred to in paragraph 1 of resolution 943
(1994), as well as in operative paragraphs 1 and 3 of the
draft resolution, is a significant step that will contribute to
the political process aimed at peace and reconciliation.

My delegation therefore supports all of the draft
resolution submitted by the sponsoring countries. But we
must also keep in mind that serious incidents continue to
take place in that turbulent and conflict-wracked area, and
we must therefore urge all the parties in conflict strictly
to comply with all the resolutions of this Council and the
agreements reached between themselves.

