Mr. La Yifan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Mr. President, the Chinese delegation thanks you for
organizing this debate. We also thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, for his briefing. We welcome the briefing
delivered by the Permanent Representative of the
United States of America, Ambassador Khalilzad, on
behalf of the Multinational Force in Iraq. We also
welcome the presence of the Iraqi Ambassador,
Mr. Hamid Al Bayati, at today's debate, and we thank
him for his briefing.

The process of peace and recovery in Iraq is now
at a critical juncture. We welcome the continuous
progress achieved by Iraq in the political, security and
reconstruction fields. Objectively, however, the overall
security situation in Iraq remains fragile. We are
especially concerned about the large number of civilian
casualties caused by military operations and violent
attacks. We call once again on the parties concerned to
do everything possible to avoid civilian casualties
while carrying out military operations.

We hope that the Government of Iraq will
continue to lead all factions to agree on a common
vision for the future of the country by placing national
interests above everything else and by strengthening
dialogue and unity. We encourage the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) to continue its
positive role in that regard.

We believe it is essential that political dialogue
and the national reconciliation of Iraq be promoted in
order to consolidate progress already achieved in
various fields. We welcome the recent adoption of the
provincial election law, as noted by the Secretary-
General in his report (S/2008/688). This law
constitutes an important milestone in the political
process in Iraq. Provincial elections conducted
smoothly in a secure environment will further increase
the inclusiveness of the political process in Iraq. We
support UNAMI in its continued efforts to provide
every possible support to Iraq in this regard.

For progress in the security and political fields to
be effectively consolidated, economic and social
reconstruction must move ahead. We call upon the
international community to truly honour its pledges of
aid to Iraq by helping Iraq speed up its process of
reconstruction and development. We support a larger
role for the meeting of foreign ministers of
neighbouring countries and other mechanisms.

Under the leadership of Mr. de Mistura, UNAMI
has achieved positive progress in all its activities under
difficult circumstances. We express our great
appreciation in that regard. We support UNAMI in its
continued efforts to accomplish its mission as
mandated by the Security Council. UNAMI's close
consultation with the Government of Iraq and
extensive outreach to all components of Iraqi society
are indispensable for the smooth conduct of its
activities.

Safety and security have always been the top
priority of UNAMI. It is a concern that China shares.
We are confident that the Government of Iraq will
honour in good faith its commitments in this regard.
