Mr. Pamir (Turkey): It is with deep sorrow that
we learned this morning about the devastating
earthquakes that hit northern Afghanistan, whose death
toll, according to reliable estimates, already approaches
5,000. We are short of words to describe the deep pain
that we know our Afghan brothers are now enduring.
Turkey will be taking part in the urgent task of
assistance to the region.

We have already aligned ourselves with the
statement made by Spain this morning on behalf of the
European Union. I am here to explain, to a certain
degree, Turkey's thinking with regard to the current
situation in Afghanistan.

Not even four months have passed since the
Interim Administration took office. After more than
two decades of fighting that bore witness to the tragic
events that befell this proud nation, a new era has
begun in Afghanistan.

It is with satisfaction that we observe today the
generally successful implementation of the Bonn
Agreement. The support of the international
community has been fundamental in this effort. That
commitment remains vital to the success of the ongoing
process. After all, security has not been fully ensured
throughout the entire country. To be precise, I do not
think that I can overemphasize the importance of
maintaining the support of the international community
under current conditions as we move towards the
convening of the Loya Jirga.

We all hope that the convening of the Loya Jirga
will constitute the first concrete step towards the
establishment of a broad-based, representative political
system in the country. This is clearly a critical
threshold, and the Afghan people are looking to us, the
international community, to help them in this important
transitional phase. The permanent members of the
Security Council in particular should impress upon the
Afghan people their commitment to a smooth
transition.

Long years of hardship and duress and the worst
kind of fratricidal fighting all have taken their toll not
only on the psyche of the Afghan people but also on
the infrastructures that are essential to a functioning
society. The country's great need for rehabilitation and
reconstruction should be addressed forthwith.
Agriculture, health and education are among the main
problem areas that require urgent intervention.

There is a certain disillusionment today with
the way reconstruction work is progressing.
Understandably, the Afghan people are impatient. We
need to find solutions quickly to many critical
infrastructure problems, as these have a bearing on the
security situation. We should be able to find ways to
speed up the pace of reconstruction in Afghanistan.

Turkey has always wanted to see a modern
administration in Afghanistan that would be in tune
with the contemporary requirements of governing a
country on the basis of stability, security and self-
esteem, and this is also what we wish to see today. It
was this vision and understanding that led Turkey to
contribute effectively to the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF).

With respect to the future leadership of ISAF, our
authorities are engaged in a continuing dialogue with
their British and American counterparts concerning a
whole range of military and technical questions. The
questions that are being dealt with are all very relevant
to the continued success of the important operation in
Afghanistan, and all of the concerned parties
understand this.

We welcome the comprehensive report of the
Secretary-General, which reflects the many concerns
we have about Afghanistan. Needless to say, we will be
heartily supporting the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in the fulfilment of
its mandate, and we think that it would be worthwhile
to integrate the efforts of the United Nations into a
single mission.

Besides our active involvement in ISAF, we will
continue to contribute to the military training and to the
equipment of the Afghan national army. We also stand
ready to contribute to the establishment of an Afghan
police force. Likewise, we will be contributing to the
restructuring of State organs, including through the
training of personnel and reconstruction work in the
country.

In this context, I am happy to report here that 20
young Afghan diplomats have already started their
training in Ankara, and that the first batch of medical
doctors to receive internship training have arrived in
Turkey.

We should never forget that we have embarked
upon this journey with the Afghan people and for the
Afghan people. As the Secretary-General rightly states,
the process of healing has just started.

For reasons that are clear to all of us, the only
option open to us in Afghanistan is success. Hence the
commitment of the international community, including
that of the permanent members of the Council; of the
countries contributing to ISAF; and of Afghanistan's
neighbours to this vision of success is, and will remain,
essential in the days and months to come.

On the basis of this understanding, we believe
that the current mandate of ISAF should be extended
for another term. By the same token, such an expansion
requires a very careful and multifaceted analysis, the
necessary elements of which are not yet available.

