Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful for the
briefing by Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Syria, whose work to date
we acknowledge.

We believe that tensions in Syria have been
reduced thanks to the efforts of the Astana guarantors,
as well as other countries whose agreements, such as
that between Russia and Turkey, have made it possible
to reduce violence in Syria so as to allow relative
peace to return among the civilian population. We
are hopeful with regard to the outcome of the meeting
with the three guarantors to be held at the end of this
month. Moreover, we emphasize the tireless work of
Mr. De Mistura with regard to such a sensitive issue,
which is important not only for the Security Council
but for the entire international community. At a time
that we are thanking him for all the work done over
the years, we reiterate our full support for the efforts
that he has made and will make until the end of this
year to foster a political solution to the situation. We
highlight the efforts made to date, as well as the high-
level diplomatic meetings held over recent weeks. We
welcome the holding of the quadrilateral summit in
Istanbul and its outcome document. We hope that such
rapprochements will produce results in the coming
months, with the establishment of a credible, balanced
and representative constitutional committee that will
allow for consolidating the relative peaceful situation in
Syria, which necessarily entails working in accordance
with the conclusions arrived at in the Sochi declaration.
Accordingly, we call on the parties to join forces to
make that happen.

We once again reiterate our call to resolve this
conflict through an inclusive political process,
including concerted dialogue, led by and for the
Syrian people, leading to a peaceful and sustainable
solution to the situation within the framework of the
Geneva process and resolution 2254 (2015), under the
auspices of the United Nations. We reject any attempt
to foment fragmentation or sectarianism in the country,
as well as the presence of foreign military forces
in Syrian territory without the authorization of the
Syrian Government. We therefore highlight the need
for them to withdraw from Syria under international
law and, above all, in accordance with the principles
of sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.

Lastly, we welcome the appointment of Mr. Geir
Pedersen as the new Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for Syria, to whom we convey our full support
for his work.

