Mr. Oshima (Japan): We thank Under-Secretary-
General Egeland for his timely and informative
briefing on his recent visit to the Central African
region. We pay tribute to the Emergency Relief
Coordinator for his unstinting efforts to address
humanitarian crises in Africa and elsewhere, and
particularly for his initiatives and efforts to highlight
forgotten or neglected humanitarian crises.

We welcome some positive developments that
have taken place recently in conflict zones in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Uganda. But
we must note that these moves toward settlement of
conflict, though much welcomed, are very fragile.
Therefore, sustained support is needed from the
international community to make them stick and to
address the humanitarian concerns and needs of the
many affected people, including refugees and
internally displaced persons, and in particular, to
address the plight of the most vulnerable of the
vulnerable, namely, women and children.

The agreement on the cessation of hostilities
between the Government of Uganda and the Lord's
Resistance Army, the result of the facilitation efforts of
the government authorities of South Sudan, is certainly
a welcome positive step. With that agreement in place,
it is now important to ensure that the cessation of
hostilities holds and is respected by the parties, and
that the favourable momentum that has been created
leads to further steps being taken for a peace agreement
and a lasting resolution of the conflict.

It is also important that the next steps should
continue to be led by Africans through the process that
they have set in motion. But the international
community must provide generous and sustained
support, too. As refugees have already begun to return
from their camps, the Joint Monitoring Committee,
established in May this year, needs to accelerate its
efforts to help implement the emergency humanitarian
action plan. In this regard, we expect the United
Nations, as a critical member of the Joint Monitoring
Committee, to play its role effectively.

The question of impunity must also receive due
attention. Impunity must end, and those responsible for
crimes and offences against the civilian population
must be brought to justice. At the same time, in any
conflict resolution process, promoting reconciliation
among warring parties is often a sensitive matter, and
as such the right balance needs to be struck, so that, in
the words of the Emergency Relief Coordinator, peace
and justice work together.

With regard to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, we are gratified to note the important progress
that has been made in the political process, allowing
the much-needed humanitarian space to increase. Here,
too, as internally displaced persons (IDPs) and
refugees begin to return, the process needs to be
supported and managed carefully so that tensions and
instability are kept to a minimum. We therefore support
the observation of the Emergency Relief Coordinator
that the improvement of the humanitarian situation for
the affected people must be pursued in tandem with the
political process. A similar transition from
humanitarian assistance to reconstruction is therefore
indispensable.

Finally, I would like to say a word about the
situation in southern Sudan. Concerns have been
expressed about the recent resurgence of the activities
of the so-called other armed groups. Frequent conflict
between such groups and the Sudan People's Liberation
Army is having a negative impact on the security
situation there. Reaching an agreement among
stakeholders is therefore critically important so that
efforts can continue towards the consolidation of peace -
specifically, the further return of refugees and IDPs
after the rainy season, the progress of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes and other

objectives in the context of the implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement. I would be happy to
hear Mr. Egeland's views on the situation in southern
Sudan.

