The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Indonesia.

We join others in welcoming the Special Envoy
for Darfur, Mr. Jan Eliasson, and thanking him for his
briefing on the political process on Darfur. Our thanks
go also to the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno,
for his update on the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).

It has been one year since the United Nations, the
African Union (AU) and the Government of the Sudan
agreed in Addis Ababa, on 16 November 2006, to work
on three broad fronts to resolve the Darfur crisis: the
political process, the deployment of a peacekeeping
operation and the strengthening of the ceasefire. We
are making some headway on two of them - the
political and peacekeeping tracks - as today's
briefings illustrate. However, the briefings also reveal
the challenges we continue to face.

My delegation acknowledges that giving more
time to the rebel movements may be necessary in order
to allow them to arrive at a common platform, needed
to facilitate the next negotiating stage with the
Government of the Sudan. Such efforts are called for
because of the need to facilitate the talks. We support
the Mediation's approach of involving Darfur's civil
society and other stakeholders, thus providing as wide
a basis as possible for the peace process. We also
encourage countries in the region to continue with their
constructive roles in supporting the political process.
We underline the importance of support by Member
States for the political process and of encouraging all
rebel movements to participate in the talks.

While more time is needed, my delegation is
troubled by the postponement in establishing a
cessation of hostilities, which is crucial not only for
Darfur's civilian population but also for peace in
Darfur, as it would strengthen confidence-building and
foster a conducive environment for negotiations. We
therefore appreciate the ceasefire announced by the
Government of the Sudan.

In spite of delays on the political front, the
peacekeeping track should move forward within its
already determined time frame, which would also
enable it to support the political process. We therefore
encourage the Secretariat to continue to work with
troop-contributing countries, including obtaining
critical force enablers, such as ground transport and

helicopter capabilities. The international community
should not retreat from the commitment it made in
Addis Ababa last year and in resolution 1769 (2007) on
supporting the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation. We also encourage the Secretariat to
continue to consult with the Sudanese authorities, with
a view to agreeing, as soon as possible, on remaining
technical issues.

We underline the point in the Secretary-General's
report (S/2007/653) about the perpetrators of the attack
against the African Union Mission in Sudan (AMIS) in
Haskanita two months ago. This attack demonstrates
not only the urgency of deploying a robust and credible
force in Darfur, but also the need for the Council to
take resolute action against such perpetrators. The
Hybrid Operation needs and deserves the Council's full
and unwavering backing. The troop- and police-
contributing countries, on which the Council relies to
establish and enforce its mandate, deserve nothing less
than our full support.

On the humanitarian aspect of the Darfur
problem, we welcome the fact that the March 2007
joint communique has significantly facilitated
humanitarian operations in Darfur, as reported by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
However, we are deeply concerned that reprehensible
attacks against humanitarian workers have continued.
We are concerned that vehicles belonging to
international non-governmental organizations and
United Nations agencies are frequent targets for
carjacking by non-State armed groups. Attacks against
those employed in the service of peace violate not only
the laws of war, but also our moral sensibilities and
should not be allowed to continue.

In closing, I should like to reaffirm Indonesia's
strong support for the Secretary-General's Special
Envoy, Mr. Jan Eliasson, and the African Union
Special Envoy, Mr. Salim Salim, in continuing with
their efforts in the Darfur political process.

I shall now resume my functions as President of
the Security Council.

I now give the floor to Mr. Jan Eliasson, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Darfur, to respond
to the comments made.

