Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Tanin,
for his detailed briefing on the recent developments in
Kosovo. We also thank the First Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, Mr. Dacie,
and Ms. Citaku for their statements.

The reporting period under consideration was
a very active one in the light of the elections held
in both Serbia and Kosovo. The recent events have
changed the political landscape and configuration of
both sides. We therefore encourage the strengthening
of confidence-building measures, which are needed
now more than ever. We welcome the efforts of the
European Union and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) to provide assistance for
the holding of peaceful, free and democratic elections.
We hope that a similar procedure will be adopted during
Kosovo's local elections in October.

My delegation commends the European Union
and the High Representative for Foreign Affairs
and Security Policy of the European Commission,
Ms. Federica Mogherini, for successfully hosting a
high-level meeting between the two parties on 3 July
in Brussels. We view the outcome of that event as
advantageous since the leaders agreed to start a new
phase of dialogue, which could turn out to be very
promising. In that regard, we highly recommend that
both sides discuss any new initiatives in order to find a
mutually beneficial solution.

Kazakhstan calls on the parties to follow
agreements and avoid any nationalist and provocative
rhetoric, while focusing on promoting intercommunity
reconciliation and trust, the rule of law and human
rights. It is equally vital to implement laws on the use
of languages, the protection of vulnerable groups and
cultural heritage. Special attention must be paid to
the strengthening of the Office of the Ombudsperson,
supported by UNICEF.

We see the importance of implementing resolution
1325 (2000), on women and peace and security, with
the support of UN-Women, and addressing the issue
of conflict-related sexual violence. We also need to
implement resolution 2250 (2015), on youth and peace
and security, and provide full support to the laudable
engagement of young people of all ethnicities in
promoting reconciliation. Furthermore, we believe
that social stability will be achieved only through the
full engagement of the United Nations country team,
regional and subregional organizations and civil
society groups, as well as youth working to achieve
sustainable peace.

We therefore underscore the pressing need
for further peacebuilding, conflict prevention and
mediation in Kosovo. Peace is achieved if the weakest
links in society have their rightful place. We therefore
call for improving the conditions for internally
displaced persons and members of non-majority
communities, through better health services and
economic development.

Finally, we encourage the leaders of both parties,
as well as the new Administration, to overcome narrow
political interests and ethnic divisions and to make
meaningful progress towards honouring commitments
on economic and political reforms. To that end, it is
essential to ensure close cooperation on the ground
among Kosovo authorities, the Kosovo Force, the
European Union, the OSCE, the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo, the Council of Europe and
the United Nations system for the full realization of
resolution 1244 (1999).

