Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): Let me first
express our appreciation to you, Mr. President,
and the Republic of Kazakhstan for convening this
meeting on this very important topic. We commend
Kazakhstan for its continued leadership role in this
area. On a personal note, allow me to add that it is a
pleasure to see you, Minister Abdrakhmanov, back in
New York and presiding over the Council. I would also
like to thank Secretary-General Guterres for his very
informative briefing.

As declared repeatedly by the Council, the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction is a
threat to international peace and security. Therefore,
the Kingdom of the Netherlands attaches the greatest
importance to making every effort to prevent the use,
stop the spread and ultimately achieve a world free
of weapons of mass destruction. In that light, I will
make three main points here today, concerning the
importance of the non-proliferation architecture, the
need for attention for implementation, and the need for
activities to strengthen the architecture.

On my first point, achieving a world without
weapons of mass destruction starts with the
current non-proliferation architecture - that is,
the international regimes and norms that underpin
our efforts against proliferation. The NPT is the
cornerstone of the international regime to prevent
nuclear proliferation and to work towards nuclear
disarmament. Chemical and biological weapons are
fully banned by the Chemical Weapons Convention and
the Biological Weapons Convention. The Hague is the
proud host of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons. As the Polish President mentioned
earlier, we attach great value to The Hague Code of
Conduct against Ballistic Missile Proliferation.

However, proliferation concerns are not restricted
to States alone. Non-State actors represent a growing
threat when it comes to weapons and materials of mass
destruction. We must make every effort to prevent such
weapons and materials from falling into the hands of
terrorists. This, of course, is the purview of resolution
1540 (2004). This comprehensive architecture
of non-proliferation norms and obligations is the
foundation of international peace and security.

This brings me to my second point. We must
pay constant attention to the implementation of our
obligations, because clearly the non-proliferation
architecture is not free from Violations. It is imperative
that all countries fulfil their commitments in order to
bring us closer to the goal of a world free of weapons
of mass destruction. We have to work persistently
to universalize, implement, verify and enforce the
international non-proliferation norms. Non-compliance
must always be addressed and enforcement measures
have to be taken. Doing so, and doing so effectively,
will also strengthen international confidence in
the architecture.

The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (J CPOA) is
a milestone accomplishment of international diplomacy
and has proven to be a success, as verified by the
International Atomic Energy Agency. It is essential
that all parties continue to fulfil their commitments
under the JCPOA. As facilitator for resolution 2231
(2015), I look forward to working with all parties to
ensure full and comprehensive implementation of the
resolution. I welcome the suggestion just made by our
French colleague for a frank dialogue with Iran on
related issues.

When States fail to live up to their obligations and
endanger international peace and security, we must act
with common purpose to find diplomatic solutions. The
Democratic People's Republic of Korea has repeatedly
defied its international obligations. Its nuclear weapons
and ballistic missile programmes threaten not just
regional, but also global stability and security. The
international community has been swift and strong in
its condemnation of the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea's actions and the Council has imposed the
heaviest sanctions ever. To make these sanctions work,
we need scrupulous and worldwide implementation.
As Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1718 (2006), I am working with all parties
to this end, building on the work of Italy, our split-term
party in 2017-2018. Of course, as others have said, we
welcome recent developments of increased contacts
between the Republic of Korea and the Democratic

People's Republic of Korea.

The use of chemical weapons in Syria, especially
by the Government, as well as by terrorist groups, is
another grave Violation of international norms and
is unacceptable. We regret the dismantling of the
Organiation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-
United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism. We must
ensure accountability for such acts, lest we undermine
the rule of law and the humanity that underpin the
United Nations system. Let me recall in this context the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
for the Syrian Arab Republic and the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian
Arab Republic.

Turning to my third point, we must engage in new
activities to further strengthen the non-proliferation
architecture. The first example is the cycle of the 2020
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). While
obstacles remain, the first meeting of the Preparatory
Committee set us on the path towards a successful review
cycle. As Chair of the first Preparatory Committee, we
found that, even when different States and regions have
different priorities, support for the NPT remains strong.
We should build on this support to preserve our common
ground and reach our shared goals.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands also values
initiatives aimed at facilitating cooperation and
dialogue. We promote progress towards a fissile material
cut-off treaty and support the important work being
done on the topic of nuclear disarmament verification.
We call on all States to make every effort to realize
the entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-
Test-Ban Treaty. We must continue to push for the
full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), and we
should support the work of international organizations
and actively engage in multilateral initiatives, such as
the Global Partnership Against the Spread of Weapons
and Materials of Mass Destruction and the Global
Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism.

In conclusion, only together can we maintain and
strengthen international norms against the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction. That will require
implementing our commitments and complying with
our obligations under the relevant treaty regimes. It
will require building upon our commitments to further
strengthening the non-proliferation architecture. And
it will require addressing and enforcing issues of
non-compliance, collectively and effectively. These
steps will serve to build confidence. They will serve to
enhance international peace and security, and help to
prevent conflict, which is a fundamental responsibility
of the Council.

