Mr. Manongi (United Republic of Tanzania): We
join other members in thanking the Presidents of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
and the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), Judge Erik Mose and Judge Fausto
Pocar, for their briefings this morning and for their
reports. We also congratulate Judge Pocar on his
election to the presidency of the ICTY and wish to
thank the departing President, Judge Theodor Meron,
for a job well done. We also thank Prosecutor Carla
Del Ponte of the ICTY and Prosecutor Hassan Jallow
of the ICTR for their useful remarks.

The United Republic of Tanzania commends the
Tribunals for Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia for
their continuing efforts designed to implement their
respective completion strategies. The year 2008 as the
date for the completion of trials at first instance is fast
approaching, as is the year 2010 for the conclusion of
all of the work of the Tribunals. The support of the
Security Council and of the international community is
therefore increasingly becoming critical.

While we note that the ICTR is striving to meet
the date set for the completion of its work, we wonder
whether the appeals process will be completed by
2010, especially when it is becoming increasingly
evident that most of the work will be concluded at the
very end of the Tribunal's mandate. The Appeals
Chamber is bound to be strained as trials are completed
by both the ICTR and the ICTY. For its part, the
Council must begin to address the question of
increasing the number of judges in the Appeals
Chamber to facilitate the desired completion strategy.

We note that the trials of 26 persons are currently
taking place in the ICTR, and that it is expected that
those trials will be completed beginning in the year
2006. We are concerned that 19 indicted persons are
still at large. We note that the ICTR is hopeful that at
least 14 of them will be apprehended, as it has
embarked on a more aggressive programme to track
and apprehend fugitives. We appeal to all Member
States to cooperate with the ICTR to arrest the
fugitives and transfer them to Arusha so that they can
face justice. We join the Prosecutor in commending the
Government of Gabon for the cooperation that made
possible the recent capture of a fugitive.
We concede that the completion strategy must
include the transfer of suspects to national
jurisdictions. We also note that the ICTR has already
transferred some 30 case files to Rwanda and one file
to Belgium, and that it intends to transfer a total of 40
cases. We support the transfer of those trials to the
countries where the suspects or fugitives currently
reside. Such countries should be assisted in prosecuting
those cases. We agree with the Prosecutor of the ICTR
that the overriding factor in determining whether or not
to carry out a transfer should be compliance by the
respective national courts with international standards
for fair trials.

We commend various methods adopted by the
ICTR to hasten trial proceedings, including the joinder
of cases, reducing the number of motions and
interlocutory appeals, the disclosure of documents
before the commencement of trials and the introduction
of a system of morning and afternoon shifts, whereby
two cases can be heard simultaneously. We also believe
that the election and addition of nine ad litem judges
has played an important role in implementing the
completion strategy.

I turn now to the Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, which continues to receive new indictees.
Three have been apprehended since the Tribunal's last
report, bringing the year's total of new persons accused
to 20. Only six indictees remain at large. It is obvious
that those new arrivals will have an impact on the
ICTY completion strategy. The President of the
Tribunal confirms in the current report that the date for
the completion of trials is now 2009.

We commend the inventive ways adopted by the
ICTY to speed up trials, including the shortening of
briefs, the three-court system and expediting appeals
and the translation of trial judgements. We have also
noted the consensus among the ICTY judges, following
their recent plenary meeting, regarding issues that may
arise in relation to the trials of multiple accused. Since
the alternative solution being offered is an effort to
contribute to the Tribunal's completion strategy, our
view is that the proposition deserves serious
consideration by the Council.

We commend the progress the ICTY is making in
referring cases to national jurisdictions. We note from
the report that the capacity to handle cases involving
complex war crimes is growing steadily in local courts
of Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, and Serbia and
Montenegro. We welcome efforts to enhance national
capacities through training judges and using visiting
judges, among other things. We also note that the
Prosecutor has promised to take back those cases
where an accused is not afforded a fair trial under a
national jurisdiction. We share that view.

It was with great relief that we learned of the
recent arrest and transfer to the ICTY of the fugitive
former General Ante Gotovina of Croatia. We wish to
commend the Governments of Croatia and Spain for
their cooperation, which made that outcome possible.
We believe that the arrest of Ratko Mladic and
Radovan Karadzic will soon follow. We appeal to all
responsible to cooperate with the ICTY so that those
infamous fugitives are eventually brought to justice.
Their evasion should not be allowed to outlast the
Tribunal.

Finally, we wish to note that the atrocities
committed in both Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia
are crimes that we as the international community
committed ourselves to deter and to bring those
responsible to justice. It is in our collective interests to
do so, and the cost should not be an immediate
concern. Justice should be the overriding concern. We
again join the appeal to all Member States to pay their
assessed contributions to the ICTR and ICTY so that
the two Tribunals can undertake their mandates as
required of them. We also appeal for more voluntary
contributions to the two Tribunals to enable them to
complete their work, thereby ensuring that justice is
served.

