Mr. Yamamoto: As this calendar year closes, we
are still left to tackle the issue that concerns us most
in Afghanistan: a convincing peace process to end the
40 years of conflict, which have left 39 per cent of the
population under the poverty line, including 3.3 million
in acute need of humanitarian aid.

One year ago in the Council, I called upon all
Afghans to come together and find ways to build their
own joint future. I also called upon each country of
the region to help create an environment conducive to
peace in Afghanistan and the region. We must use the
upcoming winter months, when conflict levels tend to
decrease, to advance on this issue before the cycle of
violence is renewed next spring.

How can this be done? The Kabul Process
meeting planned for 1 February offers an opportunity.
At the meeting, the Government of Afghanistan is
expected to present its strategic concept for reaching
a political settlement with the armed opposition and
seek the support of the international community.
This chance must not be missed. The Government
and the international partners must focus on how we
can reduce the levels of violence next year. We must
also seek commencement of a structured dialogue for
peace. I once again call on the Taliban to express a clear
willingness to begin negotiations towards a political
settlement and to start the initial dialogue.

I welcome the increased consultations among
the countries in the region about securing peace in
Afghanistan. Countries in the region recognize that
they have a common stake in the future of Afghanistan.
Any regional consensus, however, must be built around
a clear policy. Regional efforts for peace also need to
be consolidated. That is why the Afghan Government's
presentation to the Kabul Process conference is of such
great importance.

Another crucial issue is the holding of parliamentary
elections next year, followed by presidential elections
in April 2019. The holding of timely, credible and
accepted elections is indispensable to maintaining
the constitutional order and trust in the representative
system of government.

There has been, to be frank, insufficient progress
on electoral preparations. The lack of progress,
and intense criticism from electoral stakeholders,
led the Independent Election Commission to vote
to remove its Chairman. The Commission needs to
demonstrably advance on electoral preparations to
regain its credibility.
On a positive note, on 6 December the Commission
finally announced the modalities that it will use to
conduct voter registration. If implemented as planned,
the process will result for the first time in a single,
complete voter register, as well as polling-station-based
voter lists. This will significantly cut down on fraud
by reducing the number of extra ballots that are
distributed. The United Nations technical support team
has been working closely with the Commission on
the operational concept for voter registration and will
assist the Commission in its implementation, though
this is ultimately a process that must be owned and led
by Afghan institutions. I should also like to underline
security as a defining factor enabling credible
and inclusive elections. The Afghan Government
needs to have a thorough security plan for this
democratic exercise.

The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) will continue its efforts to
advance women's political participation. We recently
convened 13 dialogues across the country in which
women described in often poignant terms how their
participation as voters and candidates was obstructed
by corruption, conflict and conservative cultural
norms. Based upon these experiences, women offered
practical recommendations to bolster women's strong
participation in the 2018 elections and beyond.

Despite an intense fighting season, recent efforts
by the Afghan security forces to protect civilians
have resulted in reductions in the number of civilian
deaths and injuries caused by those forces during
ground engagements. However, we remain concerned
by the continued indiscriminate use of improvised
explosive devices by anti-Government elements, as
well as civilian casualties from air strikes by pro-
Government forces. All in all, the number of civilian
casualties remain at terribly high levels. I continue
to receive disturbing reports of child recruitment by
armed groups, mainly Da'esh and the Taliban. I urge
the parties to immediately cease this unlawful practice.

Afghanistan's election to the Human Rights Council
provides an opportunity for all national institutions,
including the military, to deliver on public pledges to
comply with its international legal obligations. As an
initial step, I encourage the Government to ratify the
Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture
and to withdraw its reservations to the Convention.

We often overlook the impact of Afghanistan's
economy on its society and the conflict. The significant
reduction of the international military presence in 2014
led to a collapse in economic growth, from 10 per cent
to minus 2 per cent. This year, Afghanistan is expected
to record positive growth for the second year, but not
enough to absorb the 400,000 young Afghans who
annually seek tojoin the labour force. At the same time,
the illicit economy is expanding, as demonstrated by
the massive increase in opium production recorded by
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in 2017.
Narcotics trades are known to be a source of funds for
insurgencies. We must pay more focused attention to
those issues and reinforce our efforts.

If the vision of Afghan economic development is to
succeed, the Afghan National Peace and Development
Framework must be supported. The entire United
Nations family is engaged in a continuing dialogue with
the President on better aligning the work of the United
Nations to support the Framework, providing value for
money and demonstrating impact. The Government's
goal is to reduce reliance on aid and secure its own
tax base. That will require intense efforts to stimulate
the private sector, reduce corruption and red tape,
and build infrastructure that allows Afghanistan to
benefit from its central geographic location. Once
investment mechanisms and infrastructure are in
place, Afghanistan's mineral wealth can be exploited.
Achieving that goal is possible. The past year has seen
important progress on infrastructure development, with
an eye to connecting Afghanistan to Europe through
the Caspian Sea and the Caucasus to the Arabian Sea.

Such developments demonstrate how Afghanistan's
relationships with its neighbours present opportunities
for prosperity. But there are also obstacles. I am
particularly concerned about recent reports of
increased military activities between Afghanistan and
Pakistan. UNAMA has recorded some of the suffering
caused by such activities on local residents, including
civilian casualties, closures of education facilities and
population displacement. I call on the Governments of
Afghanistan and Pakistan to find ways of collaborating
more effectively to address that issue, which affects the
populations of both countries.

The achievements in regional cooperation are
encouraging, but the main dividends of regional
cooperation cannot be achieved until there is peace
and stability in Afghanistan. I do not believe that this
sequence can be reversed. In the coming months, there
must be significant progress on election preparations,
real attempts to reduce violence and a transition towards
a credible peace process. Because ofthe cyclical nature
of the conflict, opportunities that are missed in the next
three months will, in all likelihood, be missed for the
next year.

Before closing my remarks, we request members of
the Council to lend their political and financial support
to the implementation of the humanitarian response
plan, which addresses 3.3 million people who are in
need of such assistance.

We see the need to focus on seeking peace. The
United Nations is ready to do whatever it can, from
raising the importance of the issue, as I have tried to do
today, to using good offices for mediation, should that
be requested. I truly hope that empathy for the ongoing
suffering of millions of Afghans will move us all to
make the efforts necessary to achieve peace and realize
the important opportunities that lie beyond a much-
needed peace agreement.

