Mr. Kono (Japan): Please allow me to begin
by emphasizing how timely it is for the Security
Council members to have this opportunity during the
high-level week of the General Assembly to discuss
non-proliferation, an issue that the international
community must tackle in unison.

Japan is deeply concerned by the serious
challenges facing the international non-proliferation
regime. It is critical for the Council, which has primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, to resolutely and concretely address
the serious issues that are shaking the very foundation
of the non-proliferation regime.

Given the seriousness of the situation, it is urgent
that we achieve the early entry into force of the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and commence
negotiations on a fissile material cut-off treaty without
further delay, in addition to strengthening the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons regime.
Japan calls upon the international community to work
closely on practical and concrete measures to that end.

North Korea has ignored the strong protests
and warnings of the international community by
going ahead with a ballistic missile launch that flew
over Japan last week. Earlier this month, it also
conducted its sixth nuclear test, which is suspected of
being a hydrogen-bomb test and which was on a far
greater scale than previous tests. This is an entirely
unacceptable provocation. North Korea's provocative
actions, including its nuclear test and the series of
ballistic missile launches, pose grave challenges to the
international non-proliferation regime. It goes without
saying that North Korea's actions clearly violate
relevant Security Council resolutions. They also pose
an unprecedented, grave and imminent threat to the
peace and security of the region, including Japan.

No bright future awaits North Korea if it continues
on its present path and its isolation from the world
continues. Japan strongly urges North Korea to fully
implement the relevant Security Council resolutions,
including the recently adopted resolution 2375 (2017),
and to immediately demonstrate seriousness and
concrete actions towards the complete, verifiable and
irreversible denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula.
Japan also calls for North Korea to return to compliance
with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons and the International Atomic Energy Agency
safeguards agreement as soon as possible.

The denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula
requires the international community to apply the
strongest possible pressure on North Korea. Current
efforts are insufficient, and further pressure is needed.
To that end, Japan strongly calls for all States Members
of the United Nations to fully and promptly implement
the relevant Security Council resolutions. No State
should be allowed to use a loophole in the North Korea
sanctions regime.

The non-proliferation of chemical weapons is
another important issue that needs to be addressed by
the international community. Japan, which experienced
a sarin chemical attack in its subway, cannot accept
the use of chemical weapons under any circumstances.
In that regard, Japan condemns in the strongest terms
the use of chemical weapons in the town of Khan
Shaykhun in Syria. The Organzation for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons and the United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism are currently conducting
their investigation to identify the perpetrators of
chemical attacks. Japan supports the activities of the
Joint Investigative Mechanism. I would like to stress
that the Security Council must be united and hold
the perpetrators accountable in order to prevent a
recurrence of the use of chemical weapons.

Finally, Iwould like to address the issues surrounding
Iran. Japan supports the Iran nuclear deal, which will
contribute to the international non-proliferation regime
and the stability of the Middle East. It is extremely
important that the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA) be continuously and steadily implemented.
In that regard, Japan supports the monitoring and
verification activities of the International Atomic
Energy Agency and again underlines the importance of
the steady implementation of the JCPOA and its spirit.
The ballistic missile launches by Iran are inconsistent
with resolution 2231 (2015). Japan strongly calls for
Iran to play a constructive role in the region.

I would like to conclude by calling for the
international community to make concerted efforts
against actions that threaten the international
non-proliferation regime.

