Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China appreciates Nigeria's initiative to convene this
meeting on security sector reform (SSR). I would like
to thank Assistant Secretary-General Titov, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Bangura and
Assistant Administrator Nakamitsu for their respective
briefings.

Security sector reform is an integral part and
essential element of United Nations peacekeeping
and peacebuilding. United Nations SSR assistance to
post-conflict countries aimed at building professional,
efficient and dedicated security sectors is conducive
to the maintenance of peace, security and stability
in recipient countries, as well as helpful in creating
enabling conditions for post-conflict reconstruction in
those countries.

In recent years, the United Nations has actively
assisted the SSR efforts of post-conflict countries and
has achieved positive results. Sierra Leone and Liberia,
among other countries, have gradually restored stability,
and their security sectors have once again taken on their
essential responsibility for national stability. However,
in some other post-conflict countries SSR continues
to face considerable challenges. Member States must
seriously review good practices and lessons learned
and, on the basis of existing achievements, further
explore how to improve SSR. China would like to make
four points on this issue.

First, it is important to observe national ownership
of the SSR process. The maintenance of national
security is the sovereign right of a State, and the host
country should have ownership of the SSR process.
In assisting host countries with SSR efforts, the
United Nations and other entities should respect the
sovereignty and ownership of the host countries. While
providing construcive assistance in line with their
needs, their is also a need to avoid micromanagement.
More important, a guest should never usurp the role of
the host.

Secondly, the United Nations should adhere to the
principle of adapting SSR to local specificities. Post-
conflict countries face myriad challenges that vary
from country to country, and their SSR needs vary as
well. While providing assistance to countries for their
SSR processes, the United Nations needs to reflect
the differences in line with their realities and specific
conditions. It must develop a policy for each country,
while identifying priority areas and the focus for the
work. Efforts should also be made to avoid stereotyping
and a one-size-fits-all approach.

Thirdly, the Organization must implement policies
in an integrated manner. Security sector reform is
central to peacebuilding in post-conflict coutries.
The United Nations should act mindful of the need to
comprehensively implement peacebuilding strategies,
reinforce integrated planning on SSR and ensure
that SSR is closely combined with efforts to achieve
national reconciliation, promote coordinated social and
economic development and eradicate poverty, among
other things. It should also ensure the eradication of the
root causes of conflict so as to achieve lasting peace
and security.

Fourthly, regional and subregional organizations
should play their full role. Over the years, the African
Union and other regional and subregional organizations
have done a great deal of work and build up a wealth of
experience in helping post-conflict countries with their
SSR efforts. The United Nations should encourage such
organizations to scale up their participation in SSR and
support them in playing a greater role. In addition, the
United Nations should bolster its communication and
coordination with the organizations concerned through
information-sharing and exchanging best practices in
order to build synergies on SSR.

This year, the United Nations will carry out a
comprehensive review of its peacebuilding architecture
in order to take stock of positive experiences in
peacebuilding over the past decade and promote the
peacebuilding undertaking. China has taken note of
the report of the Secretary-General's Advisory Group
of Experts on the issue. We also welcome the decision
by the Presidents of the Security Council and the
General Assembly to appoint Angola and Australia as
facilitators for the intergovernmental review process.
China is prepared to participate in the discussions
and will work with other Member States to ensure
that the review produces positive results so that the
Organization will be better able to carry out its sacred
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security, as it has been entrusted to do by the Charter of
the United Nations.

