Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): On behalf of
the delegation of Senegal, I welcome this opportunity
to address the important issue of the situation in
Afghanistan at a time when the country has just
completed the first year of its transformation decade
from 2015 to 2024, which my delegation fully supports.
I thank the Spanish delegation for its efforts and
Mr. Haysom for the high quality of the report that he
has introduced (S/2016/218).

I also take this opportunity to pay well-deserved
tribute to the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) for its outstanding work,
often undertaken in difficult security conditions. My
delegation voted in favour of resolution 2274 (2016),
which the Security Council has adopted today with a
view to extending the UNAMA mandate by one year.

I welcome and highlight the significant progress
made thanks to the joint action of the Afghan
Government, the NATO Resolute Support Mission,
which took over from its International Security
Assistance Force, the United Nations country team and
other international actors. We should also pay tribute
to all of Afghanistan's international partners, who
continue to be committed for the sake of the country's
stability and the security of its population. With regard
to technical and financial partners and other generous
donors, we urge them to pursue their efforts towards
Afghanistan's reconstruction and development.

Afghanistan has made notable progress, in
particular with the setting up of the Quadrilateral
Coordination Group, the steps taken with regard to the
enrolment of children and combating drug trafficking,
as well as the submission of the recommendations
of the Special Commission on Electoral Reform.
Nevertheless, sizable challenges continue to exist,
including the deterioration in the security situation,
in particular the heightened terrorist threat, as well as
delays in implementing electoral reforms in the run-
up to local and parliamentary elections, protecting
human rights and ensuring respect for international
humanitarian law.

Developments in the security and political front
remain of great concern, as witnessed by the recent
statement by a Taliban faction to temporarily withdraw
from talks, slowing a political process that is already
facing difficulties. The intensity of the conflict and its
spread continue to have an atrocious impact on civilians,
especially on women and children. As noted in the report

before us, the number of victims of the conflict in 2015
rose 4 per cent over the previous year. In 2015, more
than 3,000 children lost their lives in Afghanistan, an
increase of 14 per cent over 2014 and a sad toll unseen
since 2009. And that is above and beyond difficulties in
accessing humanitarian assistance and education, along
with the recruitment of child soldiers and the existence
of sexual abuse and other reprehensible acts, which my
delegation of course condemns vehemently.

On the humanitarian front, the record number of
internally displaced persons - 335,000 in 2015 - off-
sets the 58,463 persons returning voluntarily. A number
of Afghan refugees - 213,000 people - are also
headed for Europe, which represents the largest group
after those coming from Syria. All of this serves to
highlight the gravity of the challenges we face.

We welcome the work done by the Afghan
Government, especially with the support of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, to protect
children and improve their well-being. We call on all
stakeholders to continue their efforts to help civilians.
We would point out that protecting civilians in conflict
is a responsibility that lies with the parties to a dispute,
in line with international humanitarian law.

That leads me to stress the overriding need to
carry out an inclusive peace process between the
Government and the Taliban, with the support of the
international community, in particular neighbouring
countries. Senegal therefore welcomes the conclusion
of the agreement between China, Pakistan, the United
States and Afghanistan to establish the Quadrilateral
Coordination Group, which is the format chosen to
support the peace talks. In that connection, allow
me to welcome the regional momentum generated by
Afghanistan, neighbouring countries and international
partners that enabled the holding, in Islamabad on
9 December 2015, of the fifth Ministerial Conference
of the Heart of Asia Process as well as the seventeenth
meeting of the International Contact Group on
Afghanistan, held in Berlin on 3 February 2016, and
which also led to the joint declaration adopted by
Iran and Afghanistan early this year. The willingness
expressed by Afghanistan and Pakistan to step
up their cooperation on border security, trade and
fighting terrorism continues to be commendable, as
its contribution to achieving peace with the Taliban
remains decisive.

Given the complexity of the peace process and
the time it will take, it will be necessary to ensure
the ongoing presence of international forces to pursue
the efforts under way to strengthen the capacities of
the Afghan security forces in a context marked by the
threat posed by the Haqqani Network, Al-Qaida and the
Islamic State in the country. Moreover, my delegation
believes that it is important to increase cooperation
between the Sanctions Committee on Da'esh, Al-Qaida
and the Taliban and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
in order to counter any actions that could derail the
peace process.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Senegal's
full support for the economic, social and political
goals set out by the Afghan Government in the hope of
achieving a stable and prosperous Afghanistan living in
perfect harmony with its neighbours.

