Mr. Manzi (Rwanda): Thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this debate. I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Farid
Zarif, for his briefing. I welcome Mr. Ivica Dacie, Prime
Minister of the Republic of Serbia and Mr. Hashim
Thaci of Kosovo. We welcome their presence here
today and their statements.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2013/254) on
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) highlights the challenges to its long-
term presence and security in Kosovo, but the report
also highlights the agreement between Belgrade and
Pristina. Rwanda welcomes this historic agreement
governing the normalization of relations, reached in the
framework facilitated by the European Union. Serbia
and Kosovo have proved that they can both focus on the
future rather than stay entangled in the past.

Indeed, Rwanda believes that it is in the common
interest of both countries to close that dark chapter of
their history and continue with serious negotiations.
I deeply appreciate the role of the European Union,
especially its continued efforts to maintain the
momentum of peaceful dialogue between the two
countries. It is evident to us in the active, skilful and
sustainable involvement of the High Representative of
the European Union, who has stewarded that sensitive
and delicate negotiation towards a landmark agreement.
Rwanda strongly believes that it is through dialogue
that the long-term normalization of relations between
Belgrade and Pristina can meaningfully flourish.
The step taken by the parties is a cornerstone in their
history, and there should be no turning back. We
therefore call on both sides to maintain open channels
of communication and involve all stakeholders as the
process moves towards full realization.

This important step on the part of both leaders
indicates that they are looking forward to a better
future for their countries. We call on the international
community to give full support to the parties on their
journey to implement this agreement. The Council
responding with one voice in support of this agreement
would be a key contribution to the realization and
implementation of the agreement, but of course both
parties should continue to demonstrate their political
while and sincere desire in the continuation of the
dialogue that will bring lasting peace.

On the security situation, my delegation is
concerned about the tensions in Kosovo. We call
upon leaders, in collaboration with the international
presence, to engage opinion leaders in the concerned
communities in finding a peaceful solution to the cause
of this tension. We welcome the ongoing cooperation
on cultural heritage projects. Despite recent violence
caused by the acts of a few extremists, Rwanda remains
optimistic that Kosovo and Serbia can eventually
resolve their differences.

I commend the collaboration between UNMIK
and the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX) in the area of the rule of law and its
technical cooperation with the Ministries of Justice and
Internal Affairs. In particular, we commend the efforts
undertaken by EULEX in monitoring and advising the
rule of law sector.

Regarding human rights, Rwanda stresses that it is
crucial to protect the human rights of minorities. The
protection of their religious values as cultural heritage
is crucial for the stability of Kosovo and the region.
Rwanda welcomes the establishment of a specialized
unit for the protection of cultural heritage and religious
sites.

My delegation welcomes the drafting ofthe Kosovo
Strategy and Action Plan for the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security.

I welcome the cooperation between UNMIK and
other international organizations in implementing the
United Nations mandate. We urge the international
community to maintain its commitment to increasing
its assistance to the parties in order to achieve lasting
peace. However, we remain convinced that the task of
building a stable and prosperous Kosovo and Serbia is
the primary responsibility ofboth countries themselves.
We therefore call upon the two countries to strengthen
their cooperation with UNMIK.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to stress
that the achievement of peace in Kosovo lies in the
hands of both parties, Kosovo and Serbia, themselves.
My delegation therefore urges both sides to continue
in the same spirit of determination and compromise
in the implementation and realization of the historical
agreement.

