Mrs. Asmady (Indonesia): Allow me to begin by
extending my delegation's appreciation to
Mr. Williams for his comprehensive briefing on the
issue before us. Indonesia regards the situation in the
Middle East as one of the most important unresolved
issues of peace and security in the world today.

Conflicts in human history have their beginnings
and their ends. The war that led to the birth of the
Westphalian system of States concluded in thirty years.
The First World War ended in four years and the

Second World War in six years. Most conflicts in other
regions, such as in the Balkans, Africa, Asia and Latin
America, also have their endings.

Conflict in the Middle East, however, has
continued since the second half of the 19405 without
clear signs of its final conclusion. Developments on the
ground have made the conflict one of the most volatile
and protracted ever. The Middle East conflict will
remain unresolved, if all parties concerned do not go
beyond the ordinary in their efforts to find a viable
solution to the conflict. There is no better time than
now to act to resolve the Arab-Israeli conflict and
broker a peace.

The current surge in diplomacy at different levels
to jump-start the peace process is a welcome
development. A series of Quartet meetings has paved
the way for a more substantial role. In our view, all
parties concerned need to engage in a meaningful and
inclusive political process that will bring forth a
consensus by the parties.

The resumption of bilateral meetings between
President Abbas and Prime Minister Olmert on
6 August is also encouraging. My delegation, however,
believes that the meeting will be meaningful only if
Israel has genuine commitment to the discussion and
commitment to the four core issues, namely, the fate of
the Palestinian refugees who fled or were forced to flee
their homes; the status of Jerusalem; the borders of a
Palestinian State and the dismantling of Israeli
settlements in the West Bank.

The active role of the Arab League can be very
useful in many ways, including by providing
legitimacy and regional perspective to the effort. We
have observed such success in establishing legitimacy
in other regions. Regional arrangements can serve as a
strong complement to the activities of the United
Nations itself and should be encouraged.

The 2002 Arab Peace Initiative that the League
advocates is a homegrown peace process that deserves
our support. This initiative has the benefit of
representing a common Arab position and a
commitment to cooperating for peace and stability in
the region. We encourage the establishment of a special
committee composed of concerned Member States and
the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States, as
suggested in the Arab Peace Initiative document. We
support the initiative's efforts to gain cooperation from
the Security Council, as well as from the Quartet, and
from other interested parties.

Peace in Palestine remains far from reality.
Sustainable peace in the country can be achieved only
when Palestinians are united. Internal division and
splintering threatens to undermine the concept of one
sovereign and independent Palestine and to weaken
concerted efforts to achieve that idea. We therefore
believe that a dialogue between Hamas and Fatah is
critical to moving forward and should be assigned
paramount importance.

Support and assistance provided for Palestine by
the international community should not broaden the
political and de facto division among Palestinians, but
should rather promote unity among them. Any efforts
to assist one faction at the expense of other factions
will only create more difficulties for the Palestinians
and to the idea of an independent and sovereign
Palestinian State.

My delegation shares the view that holds that the
people of Gaza should not be punished for the Hamas
takeover. Palestinians in Gaza are part of one
Palestinian nation aspiring to the creation of one
democratic and peaceful State. We also believe that the
engagements by the international community for
Palestine must be based not simply on the humanitarian
costs, but also on the principles that promote peace and
unity.

The end of the conflict between Hamas and Fatah
in Gaza is heartening. Yet, Indonesia remains deeply
concerned over the growing humanitarian situation in
Gaza. The region has increasingly become
economically and politically isolated and Israel's
blockade has brought trade to an abrupt halt. As it has
been reported that more than 90 per cent of Gaza's
factories have been closed and 70,000 people have lost
their jobs because shipments of raw materials have not
been getting in.

These are ingredients which, in our view, could
devolve into violence and conflict and we should not
let this situation continue to deteriorate. The
inhabitants depend on the continued support of the
United Nations and we should continue to provide it
while at the same time working with the parties to the
conflict to find a more satisfactory political solution as
soon as possible.

The burden that Palestinians are bearing now has

been made heavier by the continuing incursions by the

Israeli occupying forces into Palestinian towns and

neighbourhoods across the West Bank and Gaza Strip.

Indonesia strongly deplores those inhumane and illegal

actions which constitute a grave breach of international
humanitarian and human rights laws.

Regarding Lebanon, unity is a key aspect of the
achievement of sustainable peace in the country.
Accordingly, Indonesia fully supports the initiative of
France in hosting a Lebanese dialogue and its follow-
up. We encourage the Government of Lebanon and all
parties concerned in the country to redouble their
efforts in promoting political dialogue and national
reconciliation. In our view, a blend of sincerity on the
part of the international community to help Lebanon
and a strong commitment by all factions in the country
to inclusive political dialogue and rational
reconciliation are essential to the achievement of
peace, stability, and unity in the country.

Israel's invasion into Lebanon a year ago had
brought about not only physical damages and civilian
casualties among Lebanese, but also a menace to the
security and stability in the southern part of Lebanon
and beyond. The Security Council has been decisive in
responding to this incursion by strengthening the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)and
expanding its mandate, through the adoption of
resolution 1701 (2006). My delegation observes that
after one year of its deployment, UNIFIL has not only
provided the Lebanese with the opportunity to rebuild
and restore their daily life, but has also helped to
establish a new strategic military and security
environment in southern Lebanon.

UNIFIL is the vanguard of resolution 1701
(2006). We believe that only UNIFIL has the authority
to monitor on the ground compliance by all parties
concerned with resolution 1701 (2006). We also
believe that UNIFIL must have the capacity to deter
and respond to challenges that could undermine
resolution 1701 (2006), including the daily violations
of Lebanese airspace by the Israel Defense Forces
(IDF), which blatantly contravene the spirit and letter
of resolution 1701 (2006). We remain deeply
concerned over the continued presence of unexploded
ordnance in southern Lebanon used by Israel in last
summer's war. In this regard, Indonesia would like to
join the call of the Secretary-General to urge the
Government of Israel to provide the strike data of the
unexploded ordnance to the United Nations as soon as
possible. The permanent ceasefire as envisaged by
resolution 1701 (2006) is still far off. The role of
UNIFIL in monitoring the cessation of hostilities and
in achieving a permanent ceasefire remains critical.

The Middle East conflict has been very
prolonged. The need to find a peaceful, just, lasting,
and comprehensive settlement to the conflict is dire.
The Government of Indonesia is committed to helping
achieve an end to this protracted and bitter conflict that
has been a source of suffering for the parties for far too
long.

We hope that multilateral efforts, including the
Security Council and those of the Quartet and the Arab
League, could maximize their potential in contributing
to the achievement of a just, comprehensive, and
lasting peace in the Middle East, based on the relevant
resolutions of the Council, including resolutions 242
(1967), 338 (1973), and 1515 (2003), the Madrid terms
of reference, the principle of Land for Peace, and the
Arab Peace Initiative.

