Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, we would like to thank Special Envoy Geir
Pedersen for his informative briefing and for his tireless
efforts since he assumed his post. The State of Kuwait
reiterates its full support for his efforts to revive the
Syrian political process in order to arrive at an equitable
political Syrian-led and -owned settlement, under the
auspices of the United Nations and in accordance with
resolution 2254 (2015). That resolution laid out practical
steps for a political transition period, including several
phases such as the drafting of a constitution and
the holding of free and fair elections that enable the
participation of all elements of Syrian society, including
those living abroad, in line with the new constitution
and under the auspices of the United Nations.

With the Syrian crisis entering its ninth year as of
last month, we support the Secretary-General's four
recommendations. The first urges all parties to preserve
the Russian-Turkish ceasefire in Idlib. The second calls
for all military operations to respect international
humanitarian law and human rights. The third stresses
sustained access to humanitarian assistance. The fourth
seeks to promote international support with a View to
reaching a political solution that meets the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian people and supporting the
Special Envoy in implementing resolution 2254 (2015)
and the 2012 Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex).

In February the Special Envoy indicated in his
briefing (see S/PV.8475) the five objectives he wished
to focus on, and we believe that achieving them would
advance the Syrian political process. All the parties
should work to support the Special Envoy in fully
realizing his mandate.

We have taken note of the twelfth meeting of the
Astana guarantors in Nur-Sultan, as well as the small
group's meeting with the Special Envoy in Geneva. We
note in that regard the importance of making progress
on the constitutional committee. We stress that it
should be balanced and credible, and should include
representatives of all sectors of the Syrian society. We
also emphasize the importance of working to make
greater progress in securing the release of Syrian
detainees and determining the fate of missing persons,
especially given the humanitarian aspect of our work.
We reiterate that the return of Syrian refugees must
be safe, voluntary and dignified. Measures such as
arbitrary detention and expropriation would obstruct
the efforts to enable their return, and in that regard we
reject any demographic changes in Syria.

On the issue of accountability, we stress the
importance of ensuring accountability for those who
violate international humanitarian law and human
rights law in Syria. We reiterate our support to the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011. We stress that it will not
be possible to achieve a sustained and comprehensive
peace in Syria without justice and without ensuring that
there is no impunity for the perpetrators of such crimes.

In conclusion, we reaffirm that there is no military
solution to the Syrian crisis. The only solution is a
political one that meets the legitimate aspirations of the
Syrian people. That would be done through a political
settlement in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015)
and the Geneva communique of 2012 (S/2012/522, annex), with a view to preserving unity, independence
and sovereignty of Syria.

