Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the Special Adviser of the
Secretary-General on the Sahel, Mr. Ibrahim Thiaw;
the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, our
colleague the Permanent Representative of Romania,
Mr. Ion Jinga; and all the other briefers for their
interesting presentations.

We cannot fail to agree with the briefers that in
recent years the Sahel countries have continued to face
increased challenges to their stability and security,
which have obviously had an impact on their ability
to overcome the numerous socioeconomic and other
difficulties they face. We note that despite the efforts
made, extremism and terrorism are unfortunately
now affecting new countries there. Combating these
dangerous phenomena is a top priority for the region.
Accordingly, we deem it extremely timely that efforts
have been made by Sahel States to counter growing
threats. We support the regional initiative to establish
the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel.

These threats of course undermine political
stabilization and progress in solving socioeconomic
problems. Therefore, efforts to foster security
and stability must be made in the framework of a
comprehensive approach combining military and
counter-terrorism measures, strengthening State
institutions and systemic economic and social
development, enhancing efforts to spread of a culture
of respect for human rights and the rule of law, and
promoting job creation for young people.

We highly commended the work of the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel and the
United Nations specialized agencies in providing broad
assistance to countries on the African continent. It is
crucial that these efforts be made in close coordination
with regional organizations, such as the African Union,
the Economic Community of West African States
and others.

A positive role in mobilizing support for the
Sahel region is also being played by the Peacebuilding
Commission. We consider it important to enhance the
effectiveness of the United Nations Integrated Strategy
for the Sahel. In our opinion, its potential has not yet
been fully exploited. In implementing the Strategy,
the opinion of those countries for which it has been
developed is very important.

We agree with those who have convened today's
meeting that the numerous assistance programmes for
the region need to be duly coordinated. The effectiveness
of this coordination will depend on whether the
structures already in place - first and foremost, those
of the United Nations system - are adhering to their
remit and upholding the principle of division of labour.
In our opinion, it is only through collective, targeted
efforts that are undertaken in the appropriate format
and do not create a conflict of competences that we can
achieve the desired result.

The most important thing for us is that external
assistance not turn into an imposition of blanket
prescriptions using medicine that is alien to African
States. All external interference should be excluded.
We are all well aware that had there not been a violent
coup d'etat in Libya in 2011, organized from the outside,
perhaps we would not have to take up the difficult
processes that are occurring in the region to a large
extent because of it.
