Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2011/360)
and Patricia O'Brien for her comprehensive briefing
this morning. I also commend Mr. Jack Lang, Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General, for his work on this
issue, which led to the adoption of resolution 1976
(2011).

The United Kingdom remains strongly committed
to the fight against piracy across the spectrum of
necessary activity to address piracy directly and to
tackle the roots of piracy on land. We continue to
provide military assets in support of the European
Union, NATO and the Combined Maritime Forces
counter-piracy naval operations, and we provide
capacity development support to regional partners,
including direct support to the Coast Guard of the
Seychelles.

The United Kingdom is supporting work to target
pirate leaders and disrupt the financial flows linked to
piracy. The United Kingdom is also taking forward
work to identify how development work can most
effectively be targeted to undermine piracy.

As a key part of this commitment to a
comprehensive approach to counter-piracy, the United
Kingdom strongly supports efforts to deliver viable
legal solutions. In the past year the United Kingdom
has provided $8 million of support for the work of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in building
the capacity of local courts and prisons in the region, in
line with the Special Adviser's recommendations.

In our view, there must be particular emphasis on
efforts to build prison capacity, which remains the
critical capacity issue, much more so than court
capacity. It is of note that there is a greater willingness
among regional partners to prosecute suspected pirates
than there is to hold those convicted, and that the
Somali administrations are willing to accept post-trial
transfers from courts in the Seychelles, and in principle
from others too, once similar agreements are reached.
The United Kingdom welcomes the stated intention of
the authorities in Somalia to work with the United
Nations on specialized anti-piracy courts within
Somalia and on prisons within Somalia to provide
more capacity in both areas as soon as possible.

As Patricia O'Brien has highlighted this morning,
the report sets out the clear view of the Transitional
Federal Government of Somalia and the regional
administrations of Somalia that they do not support the
establishment of a specialized Somali anti-piracy court
outside of Somalia. We believe that it would be wrong
to disregard their views.

In addition, the report sets out the challenges and
difficulties that would be faced in setting up such an
extraterritorial court. It seems clear that it would not be
workable in the near future for legal and other reasons,
nor would it be cost-effective when compared to the
costs of prosecution in national courts in the region or
elsewhere. The United Kingdom believes that such a
proposal should therefore now be put aside and efforts

and money focused instead on supporting national
courts and prison capacity.

Regarding the specific proposal to base an
extraterritorial court in Arusha, the United Kingdom
believes that a single extraterritorial court in Arusha
would be unable to handle the problem. Both the
judicial and detention requirements would be more
than Arusha can provide, particularly while the
Rwanda Tribunal continues its work.

The United Kingdom is willing to consider
prosecuting pirates in its national courts on a case-by-
case basis, especially where our nationals have been
affected, and we encourage all flag States and
international partners to show similar willingness. We
pay tribute to partners who have taken forward such
prosecutions already and express particular gratitude to
the Governments of Kenya, the Seychelles and Somalia
for their leadership role in the region, as well as to the
Governments of India and the United States for their
repeated willingness to take determined steps to ensure
prosecution of the pirates captured by their military
forces.

