Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I Wish
to begin by thanking Mr. Nikolay Mladenov and
Mr. Stephen O'Brien for their statements, as well as
their commitments.

France has long been aware of the alarming fact
that the so-called status quo in the Middle East is
deteriorating and is doing so on a daily basis, affecting
both populations and peace prospects. With each day
that passes, the two-State solution - which, now more
than ever, should be our collective guide - is further
threatened. Clarity is our first joint responsibility.
If nothing is done, the fragile horizon of the two-
State solution will simply disappear, giving way to
a fait accompli in which Israeli security will not be
guaranteed and the legitimate rights of the Palestinians
will not be exercised. I wish to reiterate that, for France,
the one-State solution is not in anyone's interest.

At the Arria Formula meeting last Friday, the
findings of Council members were unanimous
regarding trends that conspire to threaten the two-
State solution. The first of those trends is obviously
the continuing settlement policy. What is clear is that
settlement is the result of a deliberate and structured
policy of the Israeli State. Israel is not just approving
building plans, but is also ensuring that settlements
are viable, sustainable and part of a tightly woven
territorial, road, communication and socioeconomic
network that over the years, will lead to a fait accompli
and erode the territory of the future Palestinian State.
Despite calls from the international community and
despite the recommendations of the latest Quartet
report (S/2016/595, annex) earlier this month, Israel
announced the construction of98 new housing units near
the Shilo settlement, thus building a new settlement.
The international community has been unanimous in
condemning the decision, which contributes to fuelling
tensions and makes the prospects ofa viable Palestinian
State increasingly unlikely.

Furthermore, acts of violence and the incitement
to violence and hatred also jeopardize the ability of the
Israeli and Palestinian peoples to sustainably coexist in
peace and security, without even mentioning the regular
rocket fire on Israel from Gaza. France condemned the
fatal attack in Jerusalem on 13 October and is aware
that high levels of tension continue, which can erupt in
the blink of an eye, as evidenced last year, and can lead
to a rapid escalation of violence.

Finally, it is essential to encourage progress in
inter-Palestinian reconciliation in order to end the
division of the Palestinian territories, on which the two-
State solution also depends. Without Palestinian unity
there will be no viable peace agreement. In the light
of that unchangeable fact and in order to prevent the
cycle of violence that Israel and Palestine experienced
in autumn 2015 from happening again, our message in
recent months has been constant - political dialogue
must be reinitiatedand the two-State solution saved.
We are convinced that it is the only way of breaking the
current deadlock and recreating positive momentum.

This is the thrust of France's initiative. We must
first launch a political mobilization. While the peace
process has been partially eclipsed by the serious
crises shaking the Middle East, our primary objective
is to re-establish the conflict at the heart of the
diplomatic agenda.

Our second goal is to collectively and
unambiguously reaffirm support for the two-State
solution, as it is the only solution that will ensure
security for Israel and fulfil the legitimate aspirations
of the Palestinian people.

The third goal of the French initiative is to promote
international support for the parties through a renewed
and collective approach, based on a coherent support
and incentive mechanism.

It is obvious that peace cannot be imposed on
the parties. But we all must recognize that, under the
current conditions, an immediate resumption of direct
negotiations is not yet possible, owing to the great
mistrust between the parties. Our initiative aims to bring
about the conditions, especially political conditions,
that will enable a resumption of negotiations, to build
consensus around the path to a two-State solution and
to promote the convergence of all existing proposals in
one direction.

The ministerial meeting held in Paris on 3 June
marked the first and essential stage of an international
mobilization to save the two-State solution. We will
continue efforts, in close coordination with the Quartet
and all partners, notably through several working
groups that are being established, in order to lay the
groundwork for the international conference that
France hopes to organize by the end of the year. Our
objective is to help the parties understand how peace
is in their best interest and how the active support of
the international community can assist them, and to get
them involved in the next phase of the process. France's
approach is resolutely inclusive, and all goodwill efforts
are welcome in this joint effort.

France is committed to ensuring the success
of the initiative and to bring the parties to resume
negotiations for a peace agreement, on the basis
of renewed international support and concrete and
encouraging proposals. We call particularly for the
support of Security Council members. Let us together
shoulder our historic responsibility to bringing peace to
the Middle East.

