Mr. Lamba (Malawi): First of all, I should like to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. My
delegation will support you fully in completing the
agenda that you have set. Also, I wish to thank you for
convening this, yet another important open debate on
the question of small arms and light weapons as they
affect global peace and security - particularly in the
Western and Great Lakes regions of Africa, where
small arms continue to fuel conflicts and instability.
Indeed, my own country, Malawi, has not been spared
the ghastly consequences of these lethal weapons.

My delegation joins previous speakers in
commending the Secretary-General for his informative
report (S/2002/1053) and for his sound proposals for
moving more concretely towards effective containment
of the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons. In
the same vein, my delegation calls upon the Security
Council and the General Assembly to close ranks with
regional and subregional organizations and with other
multilateral and civil society organizations to ensure
the successful enforcement of previously agreed
actions, including the United Nations Programme of
Action on small arms and light weapons, in order to
stem the rising tide of the illicit trade in these
dangerous weapons.

The problem of small arms was first encountered
in Malawi in the early 1980s, when the country started
to experience an influx of refugees from neighbouring
countries where civil wars were raging. Malawi, which
has enjoyed relative peace and stability since its
independence in 1964, suddenly found itself
confronting the infiltration and the use of illegal small
arms. That situation led to an increase in criminal
activities such as murder, armed robbery and car thefts
by armed gangs, most of whom were alien to the
country. While the Malawi Government is doing its
utmost to keep in check the illicit flow and circulation
of small arms, the country - like many others in
Africa - continues to be held to ransom by those who
are bent on spreading fear and insecurity, using these
destructive weapons for their narrow self-interest.

The proliferation and misuse of small arms has
become a global problem and concern that calls for
urgent action. While weapons of mass destruction-
such as nuclear weapons - exist mostly in the
developed world, small arms and light weapons are
present and used throughout the world. In most
developing countries, it is these latter weapons, more
than nuclear weapons, that threaten peace and security.
They are easy to acquire. Post-conflict situations often
leave behind huge quantities of weapons that end up in
unauthorized and dangerous hands.

An urgent and compelling need exists, therefore,
for a tough United Nations protocol, for
implementation by Member States, to regulate or
prohibit the possession and use of small arms.
However, no United Nations measure can be effective
without the cooperation of supplying nations. Even if a
mechanism created through national legislation
succeeded in retrieving small arms in circulation, arms
manufacturers would have to come under a tough
regime of international standards to be established by
the United Nations to regulate acquisition and to
enhance oversight and accountability. Many guns in
developing countries remain unregistered and therefore
unregulated.

The proliferation of small arms, which generates
violence and socio-economic destabilization, is no
doubt a great threat to peace and security, which are the
prerequisites for meaningful development in any
country. Realizing the menace to Malawi of the effects
of small arms, the Government is working closely with
other States members of the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) to implement a
range of measures for monitoring and facilitating
cross-border operations within the subregion. That is in
line with the SADC protocols on firearms, ammunition
and related materials signed by heads of State or
Government at the SADC summit held at Blantyre,
Malawi, in August 2001.

Malawi reaffirms its support for the outcome of
the United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, held
in July 2001, and looks forward to more active
implementation of the United Nations Programme of
Action on small arms and light weapons at the national,
regional and global levels.

It is important to develop closer, mutually
reinforcing linkages between the Programme of Action
on small arms and light weapons and the Secretary-
General's broad ranging recommendations presented
today, in order to enhance implementation of the
Programme of Action and strengthen global vigilance
and decisive action against the illicit production and
flow of surplus small arms and light weapons.

In response to the widening problem posed by
small arms in Malawi, law enforcement agencies have
carried out regular surprise operations designed to
recover many of these illegal weapons. Furthermore,
through the assistance of the donor community,
capacity-building programmes for law enforcement
agencies, such as the police, customs, border guards,
and the armed forces, are being conducted in order to
prevent, combat and eradicate the proliferation of these
illegal arms. The country is also finalizing the
enactment of national legislation for the regulation of
small arms and light weapons with a view to containing
their ownership and minimizing their wanton and
illegal use.

I would like to conclude by pointing out that the
problem of illicit arms cuts across borders and no one
country is, therefore, insulated from their horrific
effects. There is need, therefore, to step up collective
efforts and collaboration in the global fight against this
scourge. In this connection, my delegation looks
forward to a more comprehensive review and
monitoring of the performance of the existing measures
and the adoption of other far-reaching mechanisms to
take into account the Secretary-General's
recommendations, which are constructive and call for
deeper reflection by all States. Malawi undertakes to
play its part in strengthening international resolve and
commitment to combat and eradicate the proliferation
of small arms through intensified cooperation with the
United Nations and all Member States.

