The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Botswana, Cuba, Egypt, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Israel, Jordan, Kuwait, Malaysia,
Morocco, Nicaragua, Norway, Pakistan, South Africa,
Sri Lanka, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia and the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 8 April 2010
from the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United
Nations, which will be issued as document 8/2010/182
and which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the Security Council open debate that will be
held on Wednesday, 14 April 2010, regarding the
situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting in accordance with the rules
of procedure and the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mr.
Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 12 April 2010 from His
Excellency Mr. Zahir Tanin, in which he requests to be
invited, in his capacity as Vice-Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People, to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. If I
hear no objection, I shall take it that the Security
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of
its provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Mr. Zahir Tanin.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Tanin to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter from His Excellency Mr. Pedro
Serrano, in which he requests to be invited, in his
capacity as acting head of the delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate in
the consideration of the item on the Council's agenda.
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Security
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of
its provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Mr. Pedro Serrano.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Serrano to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with, the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Lynn Pascoe. I now give the floor to
Mr. Pascoe.


