Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): I should like to begin by
expressing my delegation's appreciation to the
Secretary-General for transmitting the report of the
International Commission of Inquiry. We find the detailed
information contained therein to be valuable as the Council
considers whether in fact violations of Security Council
resolutions, and particularly of the arms embargo on
Rwanda, were indeed committed.

This is not the first time the Council has deliberated
on the question of the flow of arms to former Rwandan
government forces, in violation of resolutions 918 (1994),
997 (1995) and 1011 (1995). Such uncontrolled illegal
flows of arms and related mate'riel does indeed pose a
threat to peace and stability in the Great Lakes region. The
Indonesian delegation therefore supported the
establishment of the International Commission of Inquiry
pursuant to resolution 1013 (1995), and today we have
occasion to reaffirm this support. The Indonesian
delegation remains convinced of the important role of the
International Commission of Inquiry in stabilizing the
situation in the Great Lakes Region.

The thoroughness with which the Commission
discharged its task has enabled it to conclude that it is
highly probable that violations of the arms embargo
occurred, that two shipments of arms destined for former
Rwandan government forces took place, and that flights
from neighbouring countries continue. On the basis of
these findings, the Commission subsequently put forward
several recommendations for the Council's consideration
and decision.

My delegation feels that the various measures
proposed by the Commission would yield positive
benefits. They would not only address the specific issues
of illicit arms flows, but might well contribute to the
broader considerations that underlie the peace process. In
this respect, my delegation fully supports the objective of
ensuring that the countries in the Great Lakes region are
not used as bases for armed groups to launch incursions
or attacks against any other State, and that of preventing
military training and the sale or supply of weapons to
militia groups or former Rwandan government forces, as
reflected in operative paragraphs 4 and 5 of the draft
resolution.

These proposals, in our view, constitute
confidence-building measures which, if pursued faithfully
by all concerned, would undoubtedly promote peace and
stability in the area. They are consistent with Security
Council resolutions and, indeed, with the general
principles of international law and the Charter of the
United Nations.

In our view, it would be difficult for the Security
Council to assist in establishing peace and stability in the
region without addressing the uncontrolled illegal flow of
arms. In this respect, we are pleased that the Council has
expressed its determination that the prohibition on the sale
or supply of arms and related mate'riel be implemented
fully in accordance with resolution 1011 (1995).
However, this proposal will be to no avail without the
cooperation and support of the countries in the region.

My delegation has consistently taken the view that
the cooperation and support of the Governments of
 

interested countries in the region are essential if the
Commission of Inquiry is to effectively discharge its
responsibilities. Moreover, such cooperation is an important
manifestation of the Commission' s respect for the principles
of sovereignty and territorial integrity. We therefore deem
it essential that those States that have yet to extend their
full cooperation to the Commission in its inquiries should
do so without delay.

In order for the Commission to be able to discharge its
mandate effectively, it is imperative that it receive the
necessary funding. In this regard, Indonesia recognizes the
importance of voluntary contributions by States to the
Secretary-General's Trust Fund for Rwanda to support the
work of the Commission of Inquiry, as well as their
contributions of equipment and services. My delegation
further looks forward to the outcome of the
Secretary-General's consultations with States neighbouring
Rwanda on measures to improve the implementation of the
arms embargo and to deter the shipment of arms to former
Rwandan government forces.

In the light of these observations, my delegation will
vote in favour of the draft resolution, which we consider an
appropriate response to the evidence presented by the
Commission of Inquiry.

