Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): The topic we are
discussing is a very serious one, but I hope that I may
begin with a slightly mischievous remark. One of the
most common themes that we have heard in the
discussion so far is that this whole process has seen the
marginalization of the elected members of the Council.
Yet this afternoon, when all of the permanent members
except one had spoken and an elected member began to
speak, the Chamber emptied. I think the actions in this
Chamber indicate the realities that we must deal with.

I turn now to my text. This meeting is timely. The
whole world is focused on the issue of Iraq. As more
than 15 months have passed since the Security Council
last met formally to consider the situation between Iraq
and Kuwait, it is time for the Council to revisit the key
issues. As we conduct our debate in this Chamber, we
cannot ignore a wider global debate that is taking place
on the same subject. There is a clear international
consensus that Iraq must comply with the Council's
resolutions that it has hitherto defied. But a
simultaneous discussion is taking place about the
possibility of war in Iraq, a war that would have
potentially far-reaching consequences. That is why the
Council needs to confront this issue squarely. Only the
Council can deliver a credible alternative path towards
peace.

The good news is that United Nations weapons
inspectors are poised to return to Iraq, after a hiatus of
nearly four years. To ensure that they return to Iraq
with a strong hand, intensive consultations are
underway on a new resolution. Most Member States
have learned through the media about the concepts
contained in the various draft texts. Intensive
discussions in the corridors have, in turn, led to today's
discussions in the Chamber. We are pleased that the
wider membership has decided to participate in this
debate and to provide their views on how the Council
should proceed.

As we conduct our meeting today it is vital to
remind ourselves that the Security Council, pursuant to
Article 24 of the Charter, has the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
In his address to the General Assembly on 12
September, United States President George Bush urged
that the terms of the Council's previous resolutions
against Iraq be enforced. Secretary-General Kofi
Annan also declared to the General Assembly on 12
September that "If Iraq's defiance continues, the
Security Council must face its responsibilities."

Virtually all of us, including Singapore, have
consistently taken the position that Iraq must comply
with the relevant Security Council resolutions, in
particular resolutions 687 (1991), and 1284 (1999).
Those two key resolutions provide the governing
standards for Iraqi compliance. Article 25 of the
Charter clearly states that the decisions of the Security
Council are legally binding on all States. All Security
Council resolutions, irrespective of whether they are
adopted under Chapter VI or Chapter VII of the
Charter, must be complied with. No Council resolution
on any issue can be cast aside without consequence.
Hence, to maintain its credibility and authority, the
Council must vigorously pursue the implementation of
all its resolutions, whether they are on Iraq, the Middle
East, the Balkans or Africa. Selective implementation
will undermine the Council's moral authority.

In the case of Iraq, some important questions
have remained outstanding since the end of the Gulf
War, in 1991. One of the most critical of those
questions is the disarmament of all Iraq's weapons of
mass destruction. That obligation was the keystone of
the post-Gulf War ceasefire settlement reached between
the coalition forces and Iraq. The ceasefire terms
adopted by the Council in resolution 687 (1991)
required Iraq to end its weapons of mass destruction
programmes, recognize Kuwait, account for missing
Kuwaitis and third-party nationals, return Kuwaiti
property and end its support for international terrorism.
Resolution 687 (1991) was designed as a
comprehensive framework to restore peace and
maintain the security of the region. Regrettably, Iraq
has not complied with many of the terms of that
resolution, even though 11 and-a-half years have
passed.

The United Nations Special Commission
(UNSCOM) was also formed under resolution 687
(1991) to oversee Iraq's compliance with its
disarmament obligations. Unfortunately, problems over
access to suspected weapons of mass destruction sites
began almost as soon as UNSCOM. commenced
operations, in April 1991. Instead of declarations and
verifications, inspections soon turned into a persistent
pattern of hide-and-seek. The inspections crises
became especially acute after 1997 and 1998. The tense
stand-offs and expulsions of inspectors were followed
by temporary compromises that allowed UNSCOM. to
resume inspections.

In February 1998, a memorandum of
understanding was signed between Iraq and the
Secretary-General. It provided for access to eight
presidential sites by inspectors and diplomatic
observers. Resolution 1154 (1998), which was adopted
under Chapter VII of the Charter, stressed that
compliance by Iraq with its obligations to accord
immediate, unconditional and unrestricted access in
conformity with the relevant resolutions was necessary
for the implementation of resolution 687 (1991). It also
warned that "any violation would have severest
consequences for Iraq".

Despite that, the situation deteriorated. Iraq
barred UNSCOM. from inspecting new facilities. In
November 1998, the Security Council unanimously
adopted resolution 1205 (1998). Iraq's refusal to
cooperate with UNSCOM. was deemed a flagrant
violation of the ceasefire agreement. Further efforts to
obtain Iraqi cooperation were not successful. The
inspectors were withdrawn. That was followed by a
bombing campaign in December 1998 by the United
States and the United Kingdom. Known as Operation
Desert Fox, that campaign was directed against Iraqi
weapons of mass destruction facilities and other
military targets. We should bear in mind this
unfortunate turn of events in 1998 as we attempt once
more to achieve the full implementation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions on Iraq.

After December 1998, it took the Council almost
a year to reach agreement on a new resolution.
Resolution 1284 (1999) was adopted by a vote of 11 in
favour and 4 abstentions. It provided for the suspension
of most sanctions if Iraq cooperated fully with
UNSCOM's successor, the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC).
Almost three years have passed since that resolution
was adopted, but UNMOVIC has been unable to
resume its inspections. Today, even though UNMOVIC
can return to Iraq without the legal necessity of a new
resolution, a consensus is developing that there may be
wisdom in obtaining agreement on a new resolution
before the return of inspectors.

First, resolution 1284 (1999) was not adopted
unanimously. Three permanent members and one non-
permanent member abstained because of ambiguities in
that resolution. This also underscores the need to
secure Council unity and the will to enforce the
decisions of the Council, which is ultimately more
important than passing new resolutions. Indeed, in a
statement delivered on his behalf yesterday by Deputy
Secretary-General Louise Frechette, the Secretary-
General also emphasized the importance of Security
Council unity.

Secondly, we must recognize that the geopolitics
of this issue have shifted since December 1999. A
Security Council that does not recognize new
geopolitical realities will inevitably become a Council
that is unable to carry out its work effectively. We note
that in the statement delivered on his behalf by the
Deputy Secretary-General the Secretary-General also
said that the Council may "choose to pass a new
resolution strengthening the inspectors' hands so that
there are no weaknesses or ambiguities". Indeed, the
Secretary-General considered that such a step would be
appropriate.

The events of 11 September have also brought
new focus to the threat posed by weapons of mass
destruction. Singapore attaches great importance to this
question. In our view, the emphasis of any new
resolution should be on disarming Iraq of its weapons
of mass destruction, in compliance with the decisions
of the Security Council. The return of United Nations
inspectors is the first step towards Iraq's compliance
with all Council resolutions. But inspections per se are
not the goal. The final goal is to ensure that Iraq does
not retain any weapons of mass destruction and that it
does not revive any such weapons programmes in that
regard.

We believe that United Nations weapons
inspectors must have all the rights of inspection that
would enable them to achieve these goals. We urge Iraq
to cooperate fully with UNMOVIC and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to enable
their inspectors to perform effective inspections and
monitoring. This means giving immediate,
unconditional and unrestricted access to all sites,
including presidential sites, without exception.
Unfettered access and the provision of solid evidence
matching Iraq's declarations will provide a high level
of confidence that Iraq is complying with its
obligations to eradicate all weapons of mass
destruction.

We note that the Government of Iraq has yet to
provide its confirmation of the points of understanding
reached in the Vienna talks on the practical
arrangements for inspections, as outlined in the joint
letter of 8 October from Mr. Hans Blix and Mr.
Mohamed ElBaradei. We urge the Government of Iraq
to do so unequivocally and without delay. As Mr. Blix
told the Security Council at its informal consultations
on 15 October, the simplest way to clear up remaining
points would be to affirm the contents of the joint
letter.

At the same time, UNMOVIC and IAEA must
ensure that all inspections are carried out, as Mr. Blix
has repeatedly put it, in an effective but correct
manner. Today, the stakes are very high. The difference
between successful and unsuccessful inspections may
be the difference between war and peace. Mr. Blix
therefore bears a heavy burden. However, we have full
confidence in him and his team, and his long
experience, professionalism, judgement, impartiality
and temperament are eminently suited to the task
ahead. It is therefore essential that the Security Council
not attempt to micromanage him as he carries out his
tasks. As one of our colleagues said in the Council's
informal consultations, we should strengthen his hand
and not tie his feet.

Even as we focus on the important question of
disarming Iraq's weapons of mass destruction, we must
not lose sight of the human dimension of the Iraq issue.
Singapore attaches great importance to improving the
humanitarian situation of the people of Iraq, who have
suffered greatly over the past decade. Security Council
resolution 661 (1990) was adopted 12 years ago.
Although the sanctions were aimed at the Government
of Iraq, the innocent people of Iraq have borne the
heaviest burden of sanctions, due largely to the
Government's continued non-compliance with Council
resolutions. Furthermore, after more than a decade,
Kuwaiti and other families continue to be deprived of a
sense of closure on the issue of missing Kuwaitis and
third country nationals.

In an effort to address the humanitarian needs of
the Iraqi people, the oil-for-food programme was
established under resolution 986 (1995) of April 1995.
It has been in effect since December 1996 and has
made a considerable difference in the lives of the Iraqi
people. But it is not a perfect system. It has had to be
modified over the years to meet the humanitarian needs
of the people. The revised procedures for the Goods
Review List adopted in resolution 1409 (2002) of May
2002 were another step forward in the efforts to further
improve that system. But the current shortfall in
funding for humanitarian contracts due to the fall in oil
exports is of great concern. We will work with our
colleagues in the Council to urgently address the
factors contributing to the drop in exports. This is an
urgent issue.

According to the latest figures of the oil-for-food
programme, Iraq would need to export about $7 billion
worth of oil during the current phase which ends on 25
November, to meet its humanitarian programme budget
of $5 billion. Since the current phase began on 30 May
2002, only $3.3 billion worth of oil has been shipped.
In other words, exports would have to be doubled in
half the time to meet the programme's target.
The oil-for-food programme was conceived as a
temporary measure to provide for the humanitarian
needs of the Iraqi people. It is not a substitute for
normal economic activity in Iraq. It will end as soon as
the Government of Iraq has fully complied with
relevant resolutions. Therefore, Iraq's full compliance
with relevant Council resolutions provides the path for
sanctions relief.

We urge Iraq to cooperate fully with UNMOVIC
in identifying and accounting for all of its weapons of
mass destruction programmes. Under paragraph 22 of
resolution 687 (1991), the embargo on Iraqi exports
will have no further force or effect once the Council
agrees that Iraq has complied with all the requirements
relating to its weapons of mass destruction
disarmament obligations. It is also important to recall
that resolution 687 (1991) notes in paragraph 14 that
these actions to be taken by Iraq "represent steps
towards the goal of establishing in the Middle East a
zone free from weapons of mass destruction".

We stand at a crossroads on this issue. Only one
path will bring us towards peace. If Iraq refuses to
meet its disarmament obligations, it will most certainly
take itself down the other path. This is an outcome that
all of us would like to avoid. The final choice therefore
lies with the Government of Iraq. The people of Iraq
have suffered for far too long. We urge this
Government to make the right decision at this critical
moment.

