The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of France.

There are already 25,000 dead, 250,000 wounded,
more than 250,000 refugees and more than 1 million
Syrians displaced within their own country - including
more than 2 million people directly affected, often
without food, electricity, medicine or water. In the
courageous and magnificent country of Syria, the
situation is increasingly intolerable. I regret to say that
that is essentially because Mr. Bashar Al-Assad wants,
against all odds, to retain power through barbaric
repression and savage fighting. He is indiscriminately
using heavy weapons, helicopter gunships and fighter
jets against his population, even threatening to use his
stockpiles of bacteriological and chemical weapons.

Given that situation, which is an affront to the
human conscience, France's conviction is that we
need to do our utmost and try everything possible to
put an end to the violence and, from the humanitarian
perspective, bring relief to the civilian population. That
is the point of today's meeting.

Many are already acting to provide material support
to the refugees, together with the United Nations,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, Europe and others. I specifically
commend the efforts of Deputy Secretary-General
Eliasson and United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees Guterres. For its part, France is working
on the humanitarian front while also working on the
political front by providing support to the opposition.
On the diplomatic front, we are providing support to
Mr. Brahimi and trying to put an end to the stalemate
and divisiveness that to date have impeded international
action under a Security Council mandate.

Bearing witness and responding is what we are
doing - a moral obligation in the face of the raging
violence. It is also a duty of solidarity vis-a-vis the
suffering of Syrians and of the people hosting them.
And it is a necessity with regard to security, given the
risk of destabilization for the entire region. By bringing
Council members together today we wanted to place
each country represented here before its responsibilities.
As speakers have mentioned, we are thousands of
kilometers from towns that have just begun to enter our
public discourse - Darayya, Aleppo, Homs, Dara'a
and Damascus - martyred cities that are mourning
their dead and wounded.

We receive news of suffering and distress on a
daily basis. An unacceptable humanitarian situation
prevails in the Syrian Arab Republic, but it also exists
in neighbouring countries. That is why I wanted them
to be represented here. I saw it personally when I visited
Jordan, Lebanon and Turkey. Those neighbouring
countries, in addition to Iraq and the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, whom I thank for
being here, have come here to provide their direct
testimony. No one will henceforth be able to claim that
they did not know.

There is emotion in my voice, as in others', and
there is anger. I know that anger is shared by many
people worldwide who cannot understand why we allow
Mr. Bashar Al-Bassad to murder his people in this way,
or why the Security Council of the United Nations has
to date been unable to ensure neither security nor unity.

What can we do in the short term? The urgent
need is, above all, humanitarian. The divisions in the
Security Council should not prevent us from acting to
provide relief with respect to the humanitarian tragedy
in Syria.

Allow me to turn, for a moment, to the Syrian
authorities represented here to remind them of their
obligations stemming from international law and
international humanitarian law. The use of heavy
artillery against one's own people constitutes a crime,
as do extrajudicial executions, arbitrary arrests,
forced disappearances, torture and violence against
medical personnel. It would appear that Mr. Al-Assad
is perpetrating them all. Those crimes should not go
unpunished. Many of us believe that the International
Criminal Court should consider this matter so that
those responsible can be tried.

I would also remind the representative of
Damascus here that access for humanitarian workers
to the population must be guaranteed. To date, because
of the growing insecurity as well as restrictions by
the current authorities, humanitarian workers still
do not have free access to those areas where civilian
populations are in distress. Some of those organizations
have even been forced to reduce their staffing levels.
I therefore call on the representative of Damascus
to comply with the agreement reached on 28 May
with the United Nations to ensure the provision of
humanitarian assistance. Local and international
non-governmental organizations - whom I join the
Council in commending - the Red Cross and Red
Crescent Movement and United Nations humanitarian
agencies must have free access to all populations.

I also call on the representative of Damascus to
implement the humanitarian pause that the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) has for months
called for to enable humanitarian workers to evacuate
and treat the wounded, as well as to guarantee security
for medical workers in order enable them to have
access to all those who have been wounded, rather than
arresting or even killing them.

Earlier this week, I met with an international
organization of Syrian doctors that was clandestinely
and very courageously providing care to people on the
ground. Those doctors have already lost almost 100
of their colleagues, and they report that some 700 of
them have been arrested, with no news of them to this
day. They treat and operate on children, women and
innocent civilians whose blood is flowing because the
authorities have attacked them. And what reason do the
authorities cite when they come to arrest them? They
say they are arresting them because they have blood on
their hands. Of course, it is the blood of the wounded
who these doctors are in fact trying to save.

Given the refugee situation, outside assistance is
being organized, and our meeting today is aimed at
stepping up that mobilization. As many have said today,
the international community must support the host
countries, which are undertaking enormous efforts,
as well as the humanitarian workers, United Nations
agencies, local and international non-governmental
organizations and the Red Cross and Red Crescent
Movement, in their difficulttasks. Clearly, neighbouring
countries alone cannot assume the burden posed by the
presence of Syrian refugees on their territories.

Turkey, in solidarity with the Syrian population,
is dealing with a significant influx of refugees. Jordan
has issued an appeal, together with local United Nations
agencies, to procure international assistance. In the
light of the influx of refugees, the threat exists for a
destabilization in the political and security situation.
In Lebanon, as we all know, the needs are enormous
and the seeds of discord are present. Lebanon must be
protected from the risk ofa spillover ofthe Syrian crisis.
In Iraq, as we have heard, the situation is challenging.

Like a number of countries here, France is
mobilizing efforts for the Syrian people and the States
of the region. Beyond our support to non-governmental
organizations, the ICRC and United Nations agencies
such as the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, we have deployed a special
surgical group to the Zaatari camp in Jordan. Our
doctors and surgeons are also providing assistance to
victims of the fighting and to refugees fleeing conflict
zones.

However, as every speaker has pointed out,
more financial resources are needed. France initially
earmarked just over €3 million for refugees and
humanitarian assistance in Syria. As the situation has
continued to worsen, I should like to announce that we
have decided to increase our support by €5 million.
We have also succeeded in having the European Union
increase its humanitarian assistance. That will bring
the overall total to €100 million to finance the response
to the Syrian crisis. France will of course assume its
share of that, namely, over €20 million.

The refugee situationis challenging forneighbouring
countries. It is serious. However, it should not lead us
to overlook the dramatic plight of many Syrians in their
own country. I am referring in particular to numbers
that speakers have already cited: the more than 1 million
people - some say nearly 2 million - who have been
displaced, or directly affected, and have found refuge
in very precarious and often unbearable conditions in
areas freed by the Free Syrian Army. Turkey has raised
the possibility of establishing buffer zones for the
displaced persons - an that idea needs to be studied.

Concerning displaced people, France has decided
to step up its support to the local solidarity networks
operating on the ground and laying the groundwork
for the Syria of tomorrow. We see that the courageous
citizens of a growing number of villages, cities and
regions have freed themselves from the yoke of the
Al-Assad regime and have begun to organize. The
needs in such liberated zones are significant and
include food, trash disposal and access to education
and care. We believe that the international community,
as represented here, is duty-bound to come to their
assistance. This week, French President Francois
Hollande announced our decision to provide direct
assistance to the revolutionary committees that are
organizing the liberated areas and to establish specific
aid for these populations.

Of course, we cannot be content with a purely
humanitarian approach. For, as many speakers have
underscored, the humanitarian and political issues
are related, even if we indeed need a specifically
humanitarian effort.

On the political front, atransition needs to be quickly
undertaken. To reach that goal, as the Council knows,
France encourages the opposition to form a transitional
Government to serve as Syria's legitimate representative.
Such a Government - which is obviously not up to us
to appoint it - should be broadly representative and
guarantee the rights of all communities. We have also
said that we would recognize that Government once it
is formed.

I would like to say to those who have especially close
relations with the Al-Assad regime that, as everyone
knows, the regime will fall. However, the longer that
the conflict is allowed to fester, the longer the stalemate
will persist and the longer the transition will take; and,
in the end, the greater will be the risk of destabilization
for the entire region owing to a conflict that would no
longer be local, but regional and even international in
character.

To those who support the regime I say that if they
continue to do so, they will doubtless lose in every
respect. Mr. Al-Assad will fall. When that happens,
in the eyes of Syrians, the Arab world and all global
opinion, they will be guilty of being accessories to a
longstanding crime. They should instead do everything
possible to respond to the humanitarian tragedy, put an
end to the violence and join us in working towards a
timely political transition.

In its presidency of the Council, as I said earlier,
France sought this ministerial level meeting to help solve
the humanitarian issues, to urge all parties to live up to
their responsibilities and to send a message of support
and solidarity to the suffering Syrian people from its
friends. I hope that that message will be heard. We
know that the Council is divided. Nevertheless, there is
no other path than abiding by international law. France
remains true to its commitment to that path and asserts
the necessity of the United Nations and the Security
Council taking acting towards a settlement of the Syrian
crisis. That is necessary now and it will be necessary
when in the future Syria will have to be rebuilt as a free,

peaceful and democratic country - the Syria for which
a majority of Syrians are so bravely fighting today. We
must rise to the level of those fighters' courage.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

