Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Under-Secretary-
General Stephen O'Brien for his briefing today and for
his commitment to the work he has undertaken, which
we fully support.

The conflict in Syria is entering its seventh year
and the humanitarian situation there continues to be
very worrying. To date, according to a report from the
World Health Organization on 3 April, about 400,000
people have died and 1.5 million have been injured
since the conflict began. According to reports from the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
3.5 million people are in need of humanitarian aid.
We are very concerned about the fact that, despite the
ceasefire that has been implemented in accordance
with resolution 2336 (2016), attacks on civilians and
civilian infrastructure by some of the parties involved
in the conflict have continued. It is deeply regrettable
that more than half of the public hospitals and primary-
care centres in Syria have closed or are functioning
only partially and have found their capacity reduced
even further by indiscriminate attacks on civilian
infrastructure. We reiterate firmly that the agreements
reached under the ceasefire must be complied with and
respected, and that all the parties involved are under an
obligation to ensure the safety and integrity of those
caught up in the conflict.

We commend the fact that in the inter-agency
humanitarian assistance plan for April and May, 71.7 per
cent of the places to which admission was requested
were approved, and we urge all parties to make every
effort to ensure that humanitarian assistance reaches all
the people provided for in the plan, without obstacles
or restrictions and whether or not the areas are easy or
difficult to access. We are very disturbed by the fact
that the security forces of the parties to the conflict
continue to remove first-aid, obstetric and paediatric
equipment and other items from the medical supplies in
the humanitarian assistance convoys, thereby reducing
their capacity and effectiveness and hurting those who
are in urgent need. We would like to remind them that
they must allow unconditional access to humanitarian

assistance, guarantee and safeguard the convoys'
security and integrity and refrain from considering
them as military objectives.
We would like to acknowledge the important work
that the Russian Centre for Reconciliation of Opposing
Sides in the Syrian Arab Republic has been doing,
both as a guarantor of security in the deployment of
humanitarian assistance and in evacuating people from
areas where armed clashes have occurred. We would
also like to acknowledge and commend the work being
done to alleviate the humanitarian crisis facing the
Syrian people by the staff of the various humanitarian
agencies and entities such as the International
Committee of the Red Cross, the Syrian Red Crescent,
the Office ofthe United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, UNICEF and the International Organization
for Migration, among others.

We deplore the fact that in March more than 450
people, including women and children, died and
hundreds more were injured in Da'esh's dastardly
attacks, in clashes between the parties to the conflict,
and in military operations of the forces on the ground
that are fighting Da'esh. We also condemn the criminal
and cowardly car-bomb attack of 15 April on the town
of Al-Rashidin, which killed more than 120 people,
including innocent women and children, who were
part of a group of 5,000 civilians being evacuated to
Aleppo. The perpetrators of that terrible act should
be duly investigated, prosecuted and punished. With
regard to the attacks on 4 April in Khan Shaykhun, the
Plurinational State of Bolivia firmly condemns the use of
chemical weapons or of chemicals as weapons, acts that
are unjustifiable and criminal regardless of their motive
or where, when and by whom they are committed. The
use of chemical weapons is a violation of our obligations
under international law. We demand that the attacks be
subject to an independent, impartial, unpoliticized, full
and conclusive investigation and that those responsible
be duly prosecuted and severely punished.

In that regard, we reiterate our firm condemnation
of all acts of terrorism as criminal and unjustifiable.
It is our unequivocal belief that any counter-terrorism
action should be carried out in coordination with the
Government so as to prevent the death of innocent
civilians, in full respect for all the provisions of
resolutions 2254 (2015) and 2336 (2016). In that context,
we recognize the tremendous effort being made by the
Government and the Syrian people in their struggle
against Da'esh, which is a war they are waging on
behalf of all of us.

Finally, we reiterate that the Plurinational State
of Bolivia firmly and clearly believes that the only
option for resolving this conflict is through a political
process that is inclusive, orderly and led by the Syrian
people, and we reaffirm our support for the progress
made at the Astana and Geneva meetings, which will
continue in May. We have high expectations that these
forums for dialogue will help us achieve definitive and
lasting peace.

