Mr. Djani (Indonesia): My delegation would like
to join Ambassador Jerry Matjila in paying tribute
to Ambassador Vitaly Churkin for his services to
the Council as we honour him today, two years after
his passing.

My delegation would also like to join other
delegations in thanking Mr. Nickolay Mladenov,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
and Personal Representative of the Secretary-General,
and Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief
Coordinator, for their briefings. Today's briefings are
of great importance as they follow the recent important
incident of the termination of the mandate of the
Temporary International Presence in Hebron (TIPH),
less than one month ago.

The briefings provide a succinct demonstration
that the situation is tense and fragile and that the
cycle of violence is still escalating. After listening to
the two briefers, I have the impression that people are
continuing to die - money is being withheld and a
number of children have died in the past few months.

Today, I will focus on three points.

First, regarding the termination of the
TIPH - at a time when international attention is
focused on developments on the situation on the ground,
the TIPH was abruptly been terminated. This is another
in the series of policies in the occupied Palestinian
territory that defy common sense and logic. Sadly, each
time we need to do or see something positive, what is
offered is something negative.

Take Hebron as an example. The basic fact that
we need to bear in mind is that the presence of the
occupying Power is wrong and illegal. It is also wrong
to transfer the settlers there as this clearly violates
international humanitarian law. It is furthermore
wrong that the settlers and the occupying Power
commit violence against the Palestinian people, in
addition to the fact that the occupying Power is under
obligation by international law to protect Palestinians
in all parts of the occupied territory. There are many
other wrongdoings and violations of human rights that
we could mention, such as restrictions of movement,
expansion of settlements and so on.

Despite all of this evidence before our eyes, the
TIPH was closed. Am I exaggerating ifI say that this
phenomenon defies my logic? Yet statements have been
made affirming the legality of the occupying Power's
decision on these issues. Moreover, the Council has
failed to express its position regarding this development
and I must say that this has been an unpleasant way for
us, as Indonesians, to end our first month in the Council.
We again express our regret that the Council has failed
to express its position in the form of a presidential
statement, due to an objection by one member.

The closure of the TIPH is a very sad development.
For over two decades, the civilian presence of the
TIPH greatly helped to mitigate tensions between the
Palestinians and Israelis in Hebron. At a time when
Palestinians were left defenceless, it offered them
a minimal sense of protection. These unnecessary
and unilateral provocations harm not only the
Palestinians - as they are intended to - but the very
hopes and prospects of peace.

We fail to see any sign in the region that justifies
the decision of the Government of Israel not to renew
the mandate of the TIPH. Violence continues in many
places, particularly in Hebron, where a group of
extremist settlers attacked several Palestinian homes,
injuring 48-year-old Hisham Saifan and his 10-year
old son. On a bypass road near the village of Silwad,
an Israeli soldier fired live ammunition at a group of
young Palestinians, killing a 16-year old boy, Ahmed
Othman Hamed.

The potential for violence is real and at any time
may trigger an incident similar to the 1994 massacre
that resulted in the call for an international presence
in resolution 904 (1994). But do we need to wait for
another massacre? Are the continued use of force by the
occupying Power and the policies of arbitrary detention
and restriction of movement, the 11 years of Gaza's
blockade, and so on, not sufficient? In the past year,
more than 200 Palestinians lost their lives and more
than 20,000 were injured. What other justifications
does this body need to react appropriately to activities
that take the lives of innocent people? The Palestinians
are defenceless, they are victims and are not equal in
capacity to the occupying Power. It is our responsibility
to fill the gap.

Secondly, regarding the humanitarian
situation - the humanitarian situation in the occupied
territory is also deteriorating and more assistance is
needed, particularly for Gaza Access to health care,
clean water and other basic necessities is being hindered.
As I mentioned earlier, the already dire situation has
been aggravated by massive casualties since the Great
March of Return last year.

Apart from Gaza, one ofthe targets ofhumanitarian
support is the vulnerable H-2 area in Hebron, which
was formerly covered by the Temporary International
Presence in Hebron. We need to anticipate the impact
of increasing settlement activity in this area, more
displaced Palestinians and further settler violence. In
a report dated 13 February, for instance, the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs points out
that 55 Palestinians, including 20 children, have been
forcibly evicted by the Israeli authorities from their
homes in the Karm Al Jaouni area since late 2008.

Among the various grave physical, social, economic
and emotional impacts on Palestinian families, one of
the saddest is how the children concerned are often
then unable, or afraid, to return to school, as they bear
the burden of psychological scars that may last for life.
Moreover, we join others in the call for the international
community to continue to assist the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East, including in terms of its financing.
The socioeconomic situation of Palestinian children is
at stake.

The third point is the silence of the Council.
The occupied Palestinian territory is breaking apart,
settlement activity is increasing, and the situation is
heading towards a one-State solution, even as we see no
prospects of a political solution. The lives and freedom
of the Palestinians are at risk because of our inaction.

No steps have been taken to implement resolution
2334 (2016). Actions prohibited under the resolution
have been taken but totally ignored, at the expense of
the victims. My question is, has the Council ever faced
such contempt before?

We stress that the expansion of settlements, the
increasing violence, the inflammatory rhetoric and
many other violations are a blatant affront to the
authority of this body. Instability in the occupied
territories has a negative impact on the region and
beyond, including in Indonesia. It will be impossible
to bring about peace in the region if a just and lasting
solution is not ensured.

Indonesia reiterates its call for an intensification
of international and regional efforts, based on United
Nations resolutions and the Quartet road map, the
Madrid principles and the Arab Peace Initiative, to end
the Israeli occupation, which has existed since 1967.
We call on countries to honour resolution 2334 (2016)
and not move their diplomatic presence to Jerusalem.
Moreover, I wish to reiterate Indonesia's request for
another written report of the Secretary-General on
the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016). The
aforementioned violations, and many others, deserve to
be addressed in the context of comprehensive reports.

Let me close by calling on both sides, particularly
the occupying Power, to stop the provocations
and inflammatory rhetoric. These not only violate
resolution 2334 (2016), but also fuel the conflict and the
violence against the Palestinian people. I believe that
all Members of the United Nations are peace-loving
States and speak the same language. Inaction is not a
language. It is a threat to peace.

