Mr. Shingiro (Burundi) (spoke in French):
Naturally, before I begin my statement, I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened this
emergency meeting on the situation in Burundi, during
which the Council adopted a presidential statement
on the situation (S/PRST/2015/13). Allow me to also
welcome the presence of Mr. Feltman, Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, with whom I meet often to
discuss the situation in my country.

The Government of the Republic of Burundi fully
appreciates the efforts undertaken by the international
community to support the Burundian people on their
path towards free, inclusive and peaceful elections. It is
within that framework that the Government of Burundi
welcomed the appointment of a new facilitator, namely,
Mr. Abdoulaye Bathily, after his predecessor, Said
Djinnit, was forced to step down by opposition parties
hostile to the holding of elections.

With respect to the electoral timetable, the
Government has accepted a postponement of the
elections three times, following recommendations by
various partners, including the Summit of Heads of
State of East Africa, which was held in Dar es-Salaam,
United Republic of Tanzania, on 31 May 2015. That
was done to provide the necessary time to the political
parties that had refused to participate in the elections
and, as a result, were not prepared for them.

Nevertheless, given the fact that, in any of the
countries represented here today, elections are the basis
for independent democracy, even if the Government
agreed to the principle of dialogue with all political
partners, such a dialogue could not take place outside
the parameters of the Constitution. If it did, the
authority responsible for holding the elections, in
other words, the head of State, would be accused of
high treason under article 117 of the Constitution, on
which, of course, he swore an oath before taking up his
functions as President of the Republic.
Furthermore, the people of Burundi, our political
partners and the political coalitions present on the
ground, which have been in full campaign mode for
more than two months now, are tired of the successive
postponements of the elections and are increasingly
impatient and eager to start the elections. They cannot
accept that their leaders' civic rights are being violated
according to the whims of certain political parties and
certain ill-intentioned private individuals who wish
to further postpone this major electoral event in our
country.

Therefore, as already stated, the following
timetable is one that has been pushed back as far as
constitutionally acceptable to avoid a constitutional
vacuum and political disorder. First, the election
of communal counsellors and deputies will be held
on 29 June 2015, that is, on Monday. The electoral
campaigns for those communal administrative elections
ended today. Then the election of the President of the
Republic will take place on 15 July 2015 and the election
of senators on 24 July 2015. That whole calendar
takes into consideration the constitutional limits and
deadlines. Postponing the elections beyond those
dates would leave the Government in a constitutional
vacuum, which no one wants.

The Government of Burundi is surprised by the
behaviour of those politicians who dare to say that
they would like the elections to be postponed once
again. We wonder what kind of postponement they
want at this precise moment. They also say that they
want an electoral calendar based on a consensus
among all stakeholders. We would wish to inform you,
Mr. President, that the Constitution of Burundi makes
no provision for the consensual establishment by
politicians of the electoral calendar. It is the prerogative
of the Independent National Electoral Commission to
establish that calendar, as stipulated in article 91 of
the Constitution; any other approach would breach the
Constitution. The Commission, which is responsible for
organizing elections, has been able to comply with that
provision. It consulted the stakeholders on 8 June, and
the discussions at that meeting were taken into account
when the current electoral calendar, which is quite
simply the last one possible under the Constitution of
the Republic of Burundi, was drafted.

In accordance with the current electoral process and
taking account of the radical opposition's intransigence
in wanting to postpone the elections at every turn,
the Government of Burundi had to choose one of two
options. The first was to postpone the elections and
voluntarily accept being left in a constitutional vacuum,
the repercussions of which no one has so far been able
to predict. The second option was to proceed with the
elections as planned, in accordance with the calendar
resulting from the third postponement, which complied
with the recommendations and conclusions of the
ministers of the East African Community (EAC) and
South Africa, who visited Burundi on 16 June to assess
the implementation of the recommendations of the EAC
Summit, held in Dar es-Salaam, Tanzania. The Summit
recommendations were that the Government of Burundi
should follow the current timetable, because the first
two postponements were sufficient, and that it should
respect the constitutional deadlines on account of the
constitutional vacuum that could ensue after 7 July,
at the end of the term of the communal councils, the
only bodies authorized to elect members of Parliament.
All of the foregoing is by way of explanation of the
Government's approach, which is to proceed with the
elections within the deadlines set in the Constitution.

With regard to the recommended political dialogue,
I would remind delegations that the Government's
successive postponements of the elections and the
measure suspending the implementation of the
warrants for the arrest of the organizers of the violent
demonstrations are further proof of the Government's
good faith, while the opposition has made no such
gestures in return. The Government, then, is making
every effort and many concessions, whereas opposition
groups, behaving like spoilt, demanding children, have
been unable to make concessions and their attitude has
become more uncompromising over time. They have
gone as far as to call into question Mr. Djinnit, not for
objective reasons but simply to delay the dialogue.

That dialogue, which is also part of the peace
process, will of course be held, even after the elections,
which are essential to lasting peace. The Government
is waiting only for the arrival in Burundi of the team
appointed at the Summit of Heads of State of the East
African Community to steer the dialogue so that it can
monitor the situation closely from Bujumbura.

As for the security climate of the elections,
the programme for the disarmament of the civilian
population is functioning as it should, and the
Government would like to point out that two
instructions were issued to the National Disarmament
Commissionjust after the Dar es-Salaam Summit: first,
to increase the rate of recovery of all weapons held by
groups affiliated with the political parties. In addition
to the 100,000 weapons already recovered by the
forces of law and order, the Government has recently
been able to accelerate such recovery to stabilize the
security situation in the country for the establishment
of a favourable climate for the elections. Secondly,
to achieve even better results, the Government has
invited all social partners to contribute to that recovery
so that no one feels excluded from security matters,
particularly in this very sensitive electoral period. The
Government would like to assure the population and
the international observers that every effort has been
made to ensure security at every stage of the elections.

The part of the current electoral campaign that
concerns the administrative communes has finished,
but the campaign as a whole is ongoing, and all political
parties, or at least the majority, are participating, except
for the radical opposition. I can also inform you that
more political parties are participating in this campaign
than in 2010.

The Government is making particular efforts to
enable refugees to return. It has already dispatched
delegations, including at the ministerial level, to
neighbouring countries to encourage refugees, who are
fleeing not war but rumours, so that they can return.
Between 35,000 and 40,000 refugees have already
returned to Burundi, a considerable number.

Before I end my statement, I would like to return
quickly to certain aspects of the regional dimension,
something to which I repeatedly refer. A team of EAC
ministers, dispatched by the heads of State of the
region and South Africa, visited Burundi on 16 June
to evaluate the implementation of the recommendations
of the 31 May Summit. The ministers concluded that
the current electoral calendar should be respected and
that any further postponement would not be productive.
When proposals are received from outside Africa for
the postponement of the elections, which are due to
be held in 48 hours, we can only wonder why there
are such divergences in regional positions. Since the
ministers who recommended adherence to the current
calendar were dispatched by the heads of State, to
contradict such special delegates would call into
question those heads of State. It is important that the
decisions of regional stakeholders be respected. No one
can claim to love the Arusha Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in Burundi more than the Tanzanians.
The Agreement was negotiated and signed in Arusha,
Tanzania, and the Tanzanians are its guarantors. They
know us; we were once refugees in Tanzania, so no
one can claim to uphold the Agreement better than the
Tanzanians, South Africans or others in the region. If
the Tanzanians, therefore, propose a calendar on behalf
of EAC, it should be accepted by everyone, because the
Tanzanians know the region better than anyone.

I must also mention one important point very
quickly. You know what is happening in our country;
sometimes we read about it on the Internet, sometimes
we read reports, but a certain amount regarding the
situation has been left unsaid. We are aware of what
I might describe as macabre plans, drawn up by some
of our partners - a minority, since the majority of our
partners act in good faith - with a view to applying
in Burundi the same plan as in Burkina Faso. That
plan consists in provoking violent demonstrations,
which are to be followed by chaos and, subsequently,
a coup d'e'tat to resolve the chaos, followed in turn
by a transitional Government, precisely in line with
the model used in Burkina Faso. Burundi, however,
resisted the 13 May coup d'e'tat, and the plan, designed
to establish a transitional Government and impose on
Burundi the leaders favoured by those partners, failed.
We have documentary proof to that effect. Their current
plan is also designed to apply the approach followed in
Cote d'Ivoire. It would consist in endlessly postponing
the elections in Burundi in order to bring about a
constitutional vacuum. That vacuum would culminate
in a very weak transitional Government, which could
lead to rebellions breaking out left and right, which
would ultimately lead to the kind of situation that
occurred in C6te d'Ivoire, and we all know how that
worked out.

In such a situation, the Government of Burundi is
responsible for the security and peace of its people. It
cannot resign itself to collapsing into an institutional
vacuum and the abyss that would clearly result. That
is why we will press on with our elections on Monday
in order to enable the overwhelming majority of the
population - more than 95 per cent wish to see the
elections held - not to be held hostage by a radical
minority that does not want elections and that wants a
transitional Government, so it can take office without
going to the polls. That is the situation. Those are the
two plans that exist, as can clearly be seen. I wanted to
share that with the Council rather than keep it to myself.

In conclusion, I would like to inform the Council
that, unfortunately, some of our troops deployed with the
African Union Mission in Somalia have been attacked
and have died on the field of battle. Our soldiers have
done excellent work in Somalia in order to help our
brothers there restore peace, and we are always ready to
sacrifice our troops in order to achieve our shared goal
ofrestoring peace in brother countries such as Somalia.

Such attacks, rather than discouraging our troops, have
worked to redouble their energy and determination to
help eliminate Al-Shabaab,

The meeting rose 111333011117.
