Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President for holding this important debate. It gives
us the opportunity both to reflect on the past year and
to look to the year ahead.

I want to thank the Secretary-General for his
excellent briefing, which clearly demonstrates that the
contemporary challenges we are addressing are highly
relevant, not just to the Security Council or the rest of
the United Nations, but to the whole world.

The Security Council has engaged this year on a
number of conventional threats to peace and security,
including North Korea's nuclear weapons programme
and Da'esh in Syria and Iraq, but those conventional
threats have been fueled by contemporary challenges
that we all face. North Korea's illegal missile
programme is partly funded by modern slavery. Syrian
terrorists spread their poisonous messages and plan
transnational attacks using the Internet. In fact, it is
hard to find a situation on our agenda where peace and
security dynamics are not bound up with contemporary
transnational challenges. The illicit trading of natural
resources in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the enslavement of migrants in Libya, smuggling in the
Sahel, drug flows in Colombia, ecological and climate
stress in the Lake Chad basin - the list goes on.

If we want to tackle these conventional threats
effectively, the United Nations and its Member States
must also consider contemporary transnational
challenges. These challenges do not care about national
borders. As our world becomes more connected, so too
will the challenges that we face. Therefore, to succeed
we must confront them together. To counter these
challenges, we must act at home, in partnership and
multilaterally. We cannot hope to prevent conflicts,
sustain peace or enable development otherwise. I should
like to illustrate the action that the United Kingdom is
taking in each of these areas with three examples.

First, at home we are tackling illicit financial
flows. Globally, these are estimated to be worth up to
$1.6 trillion a year. Our national crime agency believes
that tens or even hundreds of billions of dollars are
laundered through the United Kingdom. They include
the proceeds of armed groups, terrorists, organized
crime and corrupt officials in predatory States. These
proceeds fuel further conflict and are a barrier to peace
and stability. This year, we passed the Criminal Finances
Act, which ensures that we are better able to tackle this
illicit financing and consequently promote peace.

Secondly, through our partnerships we are tackling
climate change, which is recognized by the Security
Council as a factor that can aggravate existing threats
to international peace and security. We have partnered
with others to improve their resilience to the impacts of
climate change. In one project, we support 13 countries
in integrating risk-reduction and climate adaptation
into Government policies and institutions. This reduces
their instability and safeguards our collective security.

Finally and perhaps most importantly, we are acting
multilaterally, including here at the United Nations. Let
us consider the universal issues of modern slavery and
human trafficking. We know that these appalling human
rights abuses are most prevalent in conflict zones and
that they feed instability. We have sought to respond
and will continue to do so through the Security Council,
the General Assembly and the Human Rights Council.
Working through these multilateral organizations
allows us to connect the dots and to better address
the complex and multifaceted challenges that we are
confronted with. We must all endeavour to do more and
do it better here at the United Nations.

Ifthe United Nations itselfis the rise to the challenge,
we must support the Secretary-General in his ambitious
reform programme to join the United Nations up so that

it can act more effectively and more efficiently at the
heart of a rules-based international system. The risk of
too much reform or too rapid reform is dwarfed by the
risk of not enough reform or too slow reform. We need
to get on with the reform to sustain peace better, to
meet the Sustainable Development Goals and to protect
the human rights that we cherish. Success in these
interlinked areas will depend on our ability to escape
silos and tackle the challenges coherently.

I have a simple wish for the year ahead. I hope
that as Member States deliberate over the Secretary-
General's reform proposals, they will remember that
as we sit and debate this important issue, millions of
far less fortunate people confront insecurity, forced
displacement, rights violations, hunger and poverty as
a single reality. They do not recognize them as isolated
issues, and neither should we. Let us therefore take
responsibility at home, build partnerships overseas and,
most importantly, enable the United Nations to respond
ever more effectively to these challenges so that we can
achieve a safer and more secure world for all.

