Mr. Gombo (Chad) (spoke in French): I would like
to commend you, Mr. President, for convening this
open meeting on the situation in Syria. I would also like
to thank Ms. Kang Kyung-wha, Assistant Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs, and Mr. Antonio
Guterres, United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, for their detailed briefings.

The Syrian conflict will soon enter its fifth year,
as the security situation continues to deteriorate and
the humanitarian toll becomes worse by the day, with
more than 200,000 civilians dead and a high number
of refugees and internally displaced persons, without
real prospects for a political settlement. Bombs, mortar
attacks, explosive devices, along with a lack of food
and water, are becoming the daily plight of civilians in
Syria. It is unacceptable that the parties to the conflict
continue to violate human rights and to target peaceful
civilians and infrastructure. All parties must respect
the rules of international humanitarian law and the
relevant provisions of resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165
(2014) and 2191 (2014). The Government of Syria has
the obligation under international law to ensure the
free movement of assistance and access to vulnerable
populations, as well as the protection of humanitarian
workers and their facilities.

With the increasing deterioration of the
humanitarian situation, the international community
must do more, be united and bring pressure to bear on all
the Syrian parties to lift the obstacles to humanitarian
assistance and allow unhindered access to all areas in
need. We would like to pay well-deserved tribute to all
United Nations humanitarian agencies and partners,
who are carrying out their work under very difficult
and often dangerous circumstances. We encourage the
international community to increase its assistance and
to do more to support United Nations humanitarian
agencies in order to allow them to help populations, in
particular during the winter, which is especially harsh
in the area.

We continue to think that there are no military
solutions to the Syrian conflict and that it is vital to
actively search for an appropriate political solution that
would put an end to the suffering of the people. Against
that backdrop, Chad supports the tireless efforts of
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special Envoy ofthe Secretary-
General, who is doing his utmost to negotiate with the
parties in Aleppo to provide better humanitarian access
and to clear the way for an exit out of the crisis. Chad
also supports the efforts made recently by Russia and
Egypt, which made it possible to bring together Syrian
stakeholders to seek political solutions to the crisis.

In conclusion, we underscore that the humanitarian
tragedy in Syria should tug at our collective conscience.
All regional and international efforts should be
geared towards finding solutions. We believe that a
comprehensive and definitive solution to the Syrian
conflict should also address terrorism in the region,
which is a serious threat to international peace and
security.

