Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): I would like to begin
by expressing my sincere appreciation for your
leadership, Madam, in convening the meeting on this
year's Human Rights Day. I also thank the Security
Council for its decision to take up the situation in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea for the second
time. The decision reflects the wish ofthe vast majority
of Member States who voted in favour of General
Assembly resolution 69/188, on the situation of human
rights in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
My gratitude also goes to the Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs and the High Commissioner for
Human Rights for their sobering briefings.

Japan has requested to participate in today's
meeting out of concern for the persistent human
rights violations by the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea, not only upon its own citizens but also on
foreign nationals, including many Japanese.

The ground-breaking report of the commission of
inquiry on human rights in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea (A/HRC/25/63), made public in
February 2014, shed light on the reality of the situation
on the ground from the perspective of the mistreated,
the powerless and the voiceless in the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea. Based on the report, the
Security Council discussed the situation of human
rights in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea for
the first time in December last year (see S/PV.7353). It
was a historic step forward.

The international community has continued to
make the utmost efforts to improve the situation.
The Office of the High Commissioner opened a field
Office in Seoul, in June. I am very encouraged by the
statement by the High Commissioner for Human Rights
that the Seoul Office has begun collecting testimonies
and documenting developments in the human rights
situation. In November, the Third Committee adopted
yet another draft resolution calling for the improvement
of the human rights situation in the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, with 112 Member States
voting in favour. The draft resolution will be adopted
in the plenary of the General Assembly next week.
Unfortunately, as the High Commissioner for Human
Rights mentioned in his briefing today, the human
rights situation in the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea remains unchanged. We are deeply concerned
about that predicament.

Some delegations have argued that this issue has
no relevance to international peace and security. And,
on that point, the statement just made by the President
was very powerful and persuasive. Because we strongly
disagree with that argument, let me add some elements.
As Under-Secretary-General Feltman pointed out,
serious human rights violations serve as a warning sign
of instability and conflict. According to the commission
of inquiry report quoted by many previous speakers,
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea "seeks
to dominate every aspect of its citizens' lives and
terrorizes them from within." (A/HRC/25/63, para. 80)
The authorities of that country force ordinary citizens
to suffer from fear and want, while diverting resources
to nuclear and missile programmes, in violation of
Security Council resolutions. The failure of any State to
abide by Security Council resolutions and the universal
principles of respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms should raise legitimate concerns on the part
of the Security Council. High Commissioner Zeid Al
Hussein clearly stated today that the human rights
situation in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
poses a threat to international peace and security.

Human rights violations not only affect citizens
of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. The
commission of inquiry report states that hundreds of
nationals from the Republic of Korea, Japan and other
States have been abducted by the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea and denied the right to leave the
country.

I thank those speakers who expressed solidarity with
the families of the abductees. Japan had high hopes last
year when the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
promised to commence investigations into all Japanese
nationals in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea,
including abductees. However, almost 18 months have
passed since then. This issue must be resolved without
delay. Japan emphatically demands that the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea return all abductees as soon
as possible through an expeditious investigation. It is
essential that the Security Council remain seized of the
situation in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
We strongly urge the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea to respond in good faith to the concerns raised by
the Council and to improve its human rights situation,
which, we believe, will lead to stability in the region.

