Mr. Apakan (Turkey): Let me begin by thanking
the three distinguished Chairmen of the Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373
(2001) and 1540 (2004) for their comprehensive and
informative briefings. We highly appreciate the
valuable work undertaken by these Committees.

Today, terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations and the proliferation of the weapons of
mass destruction continue to pose serious threats to
international peace and security. No country is immune
from such cross-border threats. In other words, there is
no room for complacency. We should therefore act in
an even more steadfast manner and strive to increase
the effectiveness of our endeavours.

As Ambassador Mayr-Harting said, the 1267
sanctions regime has, in the last decade, proven to be
an effective tool in countering Al-Qaida and Taliban
terrorists and other individuals and entities affiliated
with those groups. We believe that the regime has been
instrumental in preventing many possible terrorist
attacks through the action of placing more than 500
names on its consolidated list.

At this stage, we need to concentrate our efforts
on further strengthening the sanctions regime. In this
regard, the rulings of national and regional courts
concerning some of the names on the list constitute a
priority area that requires further and careful attention.
The follow-up resolution to resolution 1822 (2008),
which is to be adopted before the end of this year, will
provide a good opportunity to take the necessary steps
in this respect.

In this context, Turkey will pursue a constructive
and flexible approach, so that the principles of due
process and fairness are taken into consideration, as
called for by some court decisions and without
prejudging the final decisions of the 1267 Committee.

We are also looking forward to concluding the
review process of the consolidated list in June 2010.
With the active contribution of the Monitoring Team,
the Committee has already reviewed a significant
number of the names. We hope that with the
finalization of the review process, the consolidated list
will better reflect the current threats and thus become a
more credible instrument in coping with the challenges
that the Chairman has indicated in this context.

With respect to the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, we are pleased that, under the
chairmanship of Ambassador Vilovie, it has been doing
a remarkable job in terms of monitoring the
implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624
(2005). I would also like to acknowledge Mr. Mike
Smith, Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate, and his professional and
hardworking team for their support and contributions
to the work of the Committee.

That having been said, there are still deficiencies
in the implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001) and
1624 (2005), stemming from the lack of either political
will or capacity. In our view, one of the main
challenges of the Committee is to make sure that
Member States fully understand their obligations
pursuant to those resolutions and take the necessary
measures to implement them. In this regard, the
dialogue between the Committee and Member States
should be intensified, so as to make it possible for the
Committee to carry out its monitoring and assistance
tasks more effectively.

For our part, Turkey will actively strive to
achieve further progress in this direction. We are
grateful to the Chairman for the good example set forth
by the Committee. Our focus will be on practical
measures that could be taken either to expand the scope
of some of the already existing arrangements or to fill
in the identified gaps in implementation.

Since its adoption, resolution 1540 (2004) has
emerged as an important component of the global

09-606 1 2
non-proliferation and counter-terrorism regimes. We
are pleased that the level of implementation of the
resolution has improved remarkably under Ambassador
Urbina's able chairmanship of the 1540 Committee and
thanks to the diligent work carried out by the Expert
Group. That said, Turkey continues to support a
comprehensive review of the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). Comprehensive review, in our
opinion, is a continuous process. Our efforts should
therefore continue unabated.

We believe that the country visits and outreach
events such as conferences, seminars and workshops
organized at the regional and subregional levels are
also highly beneficial. Thus, we support the
continuation of such activities within the framework of
all three Committees.

Before concluding, let me emphasize again that
countering terrorism and the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction in an effective way can only be
achieved through seamless cooperation among all
Member States in an integrated approach. I would like
to reiterate the determination of my country to continue
to actively take part in the work of all the three
Committees and to lend every support.

