The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation.

The Russian delegation found it possible today
to support the short-term technical extension of the
mandate of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mission (JIM) on the use of chemical weapons in
Syria. We are grateful to the authors of resolution 2314
(2016) for their understanding of our position, which
has enabled us to preserve the constructive spirit of
the work on the Syrian chemical-weapons dossier, as
represented by resolutions 2118 (2013) and 2235 (2016).

We took this step in the belief that during the
interval provided for in the new resolution, Council
members will be able to have a thorough discussion
of possible ways to improve the JIM, based on the
experience that has been gained, and to address the
systemic shortcomings that were revealed during the
presentation of the reports on its results. We submitted
our detailed comments on them to a wide audience after
the Council's consultations on 27 October, and they are
available to all, so I will not repeat them now. We do
not intend to be severely critical of the Mechanism's
leadership, since we realize that it was obliged to present
at least some of the results of its work and was not able
to do that convincingly, given the circumstances.

No one should resort to chemical weapons. The
scale of the threat of chemical terrorism in the Middle
East should put the international community on alert
and force it to come up with an appropriate response.
Thanks to the serious military conflicts in the region,
terrorists have learned to synthesize complex poisonous
agents and are able to transport them across borders,
exploiting weakened State control and often with
assistance from outsiders. We firmly believe that in
such circumstances, the JIM's geographic scope should
not be limited to Syria alone and that it should focus its
thrust on the military and chemical danger posed by
non-State actors in general and terrorists in particular.

It would make sense to invite Syria's neighbours to
cooperate fully with the Mechanism in its fulfilment
of its mandate and to inform it about any activities of
non-State actors relating to chemical weapons. It should
trace occurrences and conduct impartial investigations.
This will mean collaborating productively with all
the States in the region, many of which are already
experiencing the negative effects of chemical
terrorism attacks.

If at the next stage of this discussion the members
of the Security Council consider the JIM's continued
work under a reoriented mandate appropriate, it will be
important to avoid the politicization of the issue that has
so far seriously hindered the work of the Mechanism.
Everyone should understand that this is not a toy for
yet again enabling someone to criticize the Syrian
Government, which, as we know, has already begun to
investigate the JIM's findings at the national level.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

