Mr. Satoh (Japan): First of all, I would like to
express our appreciation for your thoughtfulness,
Mr. President, in coming to New York to chair this
important meeting. I consider it very appropriate for
the Foreign Minister of a country of the Association of
South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) to preside over
today's debate, for it is very important for independent
East Timor to have close relationships with ASEAN
countries.

At the outset, I would like, on behalf of the
Government of Japan, to offer our heartfelt
congratulations to the people of East Timor, who have
achieved independence today. On this independence
day, Prime Minister Junichiroh Koizumi sent a
congratulatory message to the people of East Timor, in
which he stated:

"Being a national of an Asian country, I am
deeply touched by the fact that East Timor,
having struggled through a long, painful journey,
enters upon a new era this day... We would like to
express our profound respect to the people of East
Timor for their efforts and courage to date."

Prime Minister Koizumi, on his visit to East
Timor on 29 April, also agreed with Mr. Xanana
Gusmao and Mr. Mari Alkatiri, who today have
respectively become the first President and the first
Prime Minister, that Japan and the independent East
Timor would build a forward-looking and close
relationship. Prime Minister Koizumi further declared
that the Government of Japan would continue to extend
its active support for East Timor's nation-building
efforts towards self-reliance and national
reconciliation.

The Government of Japan has been making
efforts to play a leading role within the international
community in supporting East Timor, and it is already
the largest donor in terms of actual disbursements. The
Japanese Government has extended $120 million for
reconstruction and development, as well as for
humanitarian assistance, on the basis of its pledge to
provide $130 million over three years, which it made at
the first donor conference, which it hosted in Tokyo in
December 1999. In addition, at the donor conference
held in Dili on 14 and 15 May 2002, the Japanese
Government expressed its intention to extend
approximately $60 million over the next three years for
reconstruction and development, as well as for
humanitarian assistance.

An engineering group of 680 troops, including
female members, from Japan's Self-Defence Forces is
participating in the United Nations peacekeeping
operation and engaging in the construction and repair
of roads and bridges, which is also expected to
contribute to the reconstruction and development of
East Timor.

What the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) has achieved
in East Timor is a success story of which the United
Nations should be proud. I would like to express the
Japanese Government's admiration and appreciation to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, and to the other members
of UNTAET for their leadership and their dedicated
efforts.

The Government of Japan supports resolution
1410 (2002), which the Security Council adopted on 17
May 2002, establishing the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor (UNMISET). Japan will
continue to provide assistance to ensure that
UNMISET will be able to conduct effective activities
for the stability and development of independent East
Timor. In that respect, I would like to congratulate our
trusted friend, Ambassador Kamalesh Sharma, on his
assumption of the office of Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for East Timor, as head of
UNMISET. We expect that he will demonstrate
outstanding leadership for the success of the Mission.

Although in the case of East Timor it was indeed
appropriate that the United Nations peacekeeping
operation ran the interim administration, I would like
to take this opportunity to state anew the position of
the Government of Japan that the modalities of future
peacekeeping operations should be considered in the
light of each individual situation. Ways of funding
multifaceted missions that include a civilian
component should also be considered on a case-by-case
basis.

It is clear to everyone that after independence
East Timor will face a number of difficult challenges.
With that recognition, I would like to point out again
that it is important for the leadership of East Timor to
lead their country in solidarity; that it is important for
the people of East Timor to participate in the efforts for
nation-building, taking their country's development as
a matter of their own responsibility; and that it is
important for the international community to continue
its support for East Timor.

I would like to emphasize, in particular, that the
support of the international community and the
development of good, cooperative relations between
East Timor and neighbouring countries are
indispensable for the stability and prosperity of East
Timor.

The Government of Japan, for its part, is
determined to spare no effort to continue to play an
important role in the international efforts to support
East Timor.

