Mr. Naseer (Maldives): I would like to start
by congratulating the Egyptian delegation on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council,
and thank it for convening today's debate to coincide
with the high-level thematic debate on the United
Nations, peace and security, organized by the President
of the General Assembly. This is indeed an opportune
time to discuss this important issue of countering the
narratives and ideologies of terrorism, which is at the
heart of the war against terrorism.

It has become increasingly evident that the
psychological weaponry used by various terrorist
groups to propagate their narratives and ideologies
to recruit supporters and fighters are equally if not
more dangerous than the bombs and guns they use in
attacking civilians. Ideology can have more lasting
and deep-rooted impacts, which are far more complex
to address and resolve. Yet a greater proportion of
resources allocated for combatting terrorism have been
spent on combat operations. While combat operations
are important and necessary, we now recognize
that defeating terrorist ideologies is the lynchpin of
eliminating the global threat of terrorism.

To do that, countries need to get a full grasp of the
ideology of terrorism. We need to understand why a
reasonable individual holding a decent job can be so
easily convincedto becomeahumanweaponinthe hands
of the terrorists. We need to ask hard questions about
whether the injustices and inequalities and such racial
or religious prejudices as the Islamophobia at national
and international levels are giving the terrorists an
easy excuse to assault the principles, norms and values
that we have cherished for centuries. We have to gain
a deeper understanding of the ideas that are fuelling
and driving terrorism. Only a correct analysis of the
situation will lead to developing the right strategies and
tools to eliminate the menace of terrorism.

The United Nations is ideally placed to lead
the global efforts aimed at combatting the ideas that
drive terrorism. As the primary body mandated by the
Charter to maintain peace and security, the Security
Council's role is key within the Organization. Although
various resolutions have been adopted by Council over
the years, there is still much to be done to address the
root causes.

Resolutions 1624 (2005) and 2178 (2014) are
important steps in the right direction. At the same time,
we must also quickly finalize the draft comprehensive
convention on international terrorism, which is
currently being discussed in the Sixth Committee. And
we should work collectively to overcome the stalemates
in the negotiations, finalize and implement this draft
treaty, which has been in the works for almost 10 years.
Most importantly, the United Nations system can help
countries to work collaboratively. It can help Member
States cultivate the values of respect and the importance
of promoting peace at every level in society.

The Maldives enacted its counter-terrorism
legislation in October last year in an effort to stop
Maldivians engaging in terrorist activities. The law
restricts the publication and distribution, even through
media channels or the Internet, of any materials
that could incite terrorist acts or propagate terrorist
ideologies. Pursuant to this law, President Abdulla
Yameen Abdul Gayoom formulated a comprehensive
national policy to counter terrorism and militant
radicalism in the country. And in February this year,
President Yameen established the National Counter-
Terrorism Centre. The Centre is mandated to formulate
counter-terrorism guidelines and procedures based
on the analysis of international benchmarks and
best practices. It is prepared to gather and analyse
intelligence on terrorism activities from all agencies
and implement recommendations. It is also seeking to
identify radicalized elements within the communities
and run targeted rehabilitation programmes for those
in need.

Our vision is clear and our commitment is strong
in stopping, defeating and eliminating the menace of
terrorism. To achieve this end, the Maldives and the
rest of the world needs the leadership of the United
Nations to counter the ideologies that shape and drive
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.

