Mr. Hyseni: Very briefly and, in a way, quite
reluctantly, I will continue to take a few more minutes
of the Council's time in reaction to a few quite
misleading allegations.

Very generally, on the rule of law and the
commitment of the Government of the Republic of
Kosovo to fighting organized crime and corruption, no
one should doubt that determination. The very fact that
one can see tangible action on that front shows how
determined the Government of the Republic of Kosovo
is. We are working closely on that with all international
presences, especially the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX).

The game of figures - 200,000 or 250,000
displaced persons - continues. We have informed the
Council of the real figures many times. The United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees reports of
1999 included not only Serb internally displaced
persons or refugees, but all of them. But, really, it is
not about numbers; again, it is about the determination
of the Government of Kosovo to seeing progress in the
repatriation of all of its citizens, especially the
numerous Serb citizens still outside the borders of our
country.

We have protected the cultural heritage and
religious heritage of all ethnic communities in Kosovo
for centuries, and we are going to continue to do so.
Nothing can stand in the way of our protecting cultural
heritage, and we will continue to take over those duties
from the highly respected Kosovo Force units that have
been giving us a hand in this very important task.

I need to inform the Council that we long
tolerated illegal mobile telephone service providers in
a part of our country for the sole reason of not
disturbing some members of our country. Those illegal
telephone service providers have been removed in an
effort to restore law and order in that part of our
country.

At the same time, we have undertaken very
tangible and successful efforts to make sure that all
members of the Serb community in that part of Kosovo
will swiftly have access to means of communication.
The public telecom company has offered thousands and
thousands of SIM. cards and telephones free of charge
to the members of the Serb community.

Unfortunately, there was an illegal, violent attack
on legal telephone providers in that part of our country,
and that is unacceptable. Indeed, the perpetrators
removed the antennas of the IPKO and Vala
companies - which are legal, licensed telephone
service providers - instead trying to use the services
that those companies offered. We have invited the
Republic of Serbia to enter into roaming agreements
with very serious telephone companies in Kosovo, and
we are open to that.

I wish to say just a little more on regional
cooperation and dialogue. I need to re-emphasize very
strongly yet again that Kosovo is ready to sit and talk
with the authorities in Belgrade on many issues of
26
mutual concern. Kosovo and Serbia will continue to be
where they are as close neighbours, and they need to
work together for a future common good and a future
European perspective - not only a common Kosovo-
Serbia European perspective, but also a regional
European perspective.

