Mr. Akram (Pakistan): First of all, let me
congratulate you on behalf of the delegation of
Pakistan on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. We are confident that
with your well-known skills, this will be a most
successful month for the Council.

I would also like to express our appreciation to
the Ambassador and the delegation of Panama for their
successful presidency last month.

We appreciate the convening of this open debate
on Afghanistan. Two years after the London
Conference, it is opportune to have a strategic review
of the progress in the implementation of the
Afghanistan Compact. A peaceful and stable
Afghanistan is crucial to regional and international
peace and security. As the country most affected by the
decades of instability in Afghanistan, Pakistan has a
direct and vital stake in the success of the efforts of the
international community in Afghanistan.

We appreciate the overall quality of the analysis,
objectivity and recommendations of the Secretary-
General's latest report on Afghanistan. While avoiding
dramatic description, the report is reflective of the
challenges and the realities on the ground. It provides a
useful overview of the situation which is relevant to
the Council's discussion, particularly with regard to the
renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). There
have been many successes, which must be appreciated
and consolidated. There are deficiencies in several
areas. However, what is most needed is better
implementation, through enhanced coordination and
the fulfilment of reciprocal commitments by
Afghanistan and its international partners.
We believe that the key to success lies in
pursuing a comprehensive approach, with emphasis on
building Afghan capacity to assume greater control and
ownership with regard to security, governance and
development issues. We are pleased to note that that is
also the central theme of the report of the Secretary-
General.

The deterioration of the security situation in parts
of Afghanistan is a common concern. As is clear from
the present and previous United Nations reports, the
factors contributing to insecurity and instability are
diverse, complex and often interrelated. They also vary
from region to region. Therefore, there is a need to
follow approaches that are responsive to the challenges
in each region. Increasing the strength of the troops of
the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF)
would help in the short term. However, for sustainable
solutions, it is essential to focus more on building the
national capacity of Afghanistan in the security sector,
together with parallel endeavours aimed at political
reconciliation, reconstruction and development.

A more coherent and feasible counter-narcotics
policy is required, one that is more responsive to the
underlying economic, social and political aspects
linked to increased poppy cultivation. That is essential
if we wish to deny an important source of funding to
insurgents and other anti-Government elements.

Extending State authority and improving
governance are also fundamental in restoring the
confidence of the population in the ability of the
Government to respond to their basic needs. The efforts
of the Afghan Government in that regard merit our full
support.

Security and governance issues cannot be
divorced from development. As the report notes,
despite progress in various social and economic
indicators, the level of development is low, particularly
at the provincial and district levels. Making security a
prerequisite for development and assistance could
prove to be counter-productive. We believe it is
important to pursue the development track while
security is being addressed. The launch of the
Afghanistan National Development Strategy will be an
important milestone and a major source of hope for the
Afghan people. The international community must
ensure adequate resources for its implementation. We
hope that it will also inculcate a new culture of
08-26923
assistance that is demand-driven and channelled mostly
through the Afghan Government.

All these efforts to improve security, governance
and development will have a greater impact if they are
carried out in a politically propitious environment. The
Afghan-led efforts for national reconciliation can play
an important role in that regard and should be
encouraged.

The agreements already reached, and other
policies and measures being considered to promote
regional economic cooperation, will benefit
Afghanistan and all the countries of the region.
Pakistan is an important partner in this endeavour. We
will also host the next regional economic cooperation
conference on Afghanistan.

The safe and voluntary return of all remaining
Afghan refugees, more than 2 million of whom are still
hosted by Pakistan, should also be accorded high
priority. We welcome the emphasis placed in the report
on increased assistance to create conditions conducive
to the return of the refugees. However, we do not agree
with the Secretary-General's observation that the fact
that over 80 per cent of the refugees have been in exile
for more than 20 years could be a factor inhibiting their
return. All refugees should return to their homeland.

We appreciate the central and impartial role of
the United Nations in coordinating the international
efforts in Afghanistan. We welcome the appointment of
Mr. Kai Eide as the Secretary-General's Special
Representative. UNAMA's efforts should be focused
on its core mandate in Afghanistan. We agree with the
Secretary-General that UNAMA's existing mandate
should be retained. We have also noted the areas
identified by the Secretary-General as priorities for
UNAMA. These should be carefully considered to
ensure that they are totally consistent with UNAMA's
current mandate and that they take into account the
views of the host Government and others concerned.
Given the realities on the ground, it is essential to
avoid placing responsibilities on the United Nations
that it may be not in a position to discharge and that
could affect its neutrality and credibility.

Pakistan remains strongly committed to helping
Afghanistan to achieve sustainable peace and
development. Our destinies are interlinked. We seek to
strengthen our close, friendly relations with
Afghanistan, based on reciprocity and mutual respect
for each other's sovereignty and territorial integrity.
08-26923

We want peace and greater prosperity for both our
peoples. Our cooperation with Afghanistan is
multifaceted. It is characterized by dialogue and
regular exchange of visits at the highest levels. We are
also trying to help reconciliation through the peace
jirga, whose next meeting will be held in Pakistan.

Pakistan is a major contributor to Afghanistan's
reconstruction and economic development. A number
of projects identified in consultation with the Afghan
Government have been implemented in various fields,
including infrastructure development, education and
health, in addition to capacity-building initiatives and
training and scholarship programmes. We shall
consider ways and means of designing our future
assistance in accordance with the priorities of the
Afghanistan National Development Strategy. Our
bilateral trade with Afghanistan totals $1.5 billion. We
shall continue to support Afghanistan's integration with
regional economic cooperation efforts. Indeed, the
success of these endeavours requires peace and
stability in Afghanistan and the region.

Pakistan's ability to contribute to peace and
stability in Afghanistan and in the region will be
enhanced following the recent fair and open elections
in Pakistan and the assumption of office by a popularly
elected Government. We hope that these will lead to
closer coordination and consensus on a strategy for
success in Afghanistan and in the region.

