Mr. Mielus (Poland): At the outset, I would like
to thank Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
Michel Kafando; Ambassador Jurg Lauber, in his
capacity as Chair of the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission; and Ambassador Fatima
Kyari Mohammed, Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations, for their valuable briefings.

I would like to focus my intervention on three
issues: first, the political process; secondly, human
rights aspects; and, thirdly, the socioeconomic situation.

The political situation still remains a matter of
serious concern for us, especially as the presidential
elections planned for 2020 are approaching. The risk
of the further escalation of violence and ethnic tensions
persist, and it is the role of the Burundian authorities
to ensure that the electoral process will be free, fair,
transparent and truly inclusive.

The prevailing situation in Burundi has serious
regional security implications. Poland continues to hold
the position that concerted regional support for resolving
the crisis is crucial. We hope for collective leadership and
unity of purpose to prevent the resurgence of violence in
Burundi. Poland commends all the efforts made by the
East African Community and the facilitator, Benjamin
Mkapa, to enable the inter-Burundian dialogue, and
hopes that this process will lead to a widely accepted
road map that sets the path for the holding of credible
and peaceful presidential elections scheduled for mid-
2020, in the spirit and the letter of the Arusha Peace
and Reconciliation Agreement.

We remain concerned about the human rights
situation in Burundi, which could undermine any
initiative for reconciliation, peace and justice. Poland
supports the efforts of the United Nations, the African
Union and the countries of the region to effectively
improve the situation on the ground in that regard.
Poland once again calls on the Government of Burundi
to take tangible steps to restore cooperation with
international human rights mechanisms, mainly the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights and the Commission of Inquiry on
Burundi of the Human Rights Council. At the same
time, we urge the Burundian authorities to improve
good governance, ensure media freedom and open
up democratic space ahead of the elections scheduled
for 2020.

The ongoing political impasse has also had a
negative impact on the economy and the humanitarian
situation in the country. We commend the efforts made
by the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission to bring about a sustainable improvement
to the lives of Burundian society. At the same time,
Poland welcomes the continuation of the process of
repatriating refugees under the tripartite agreement
with Tanzania and the Office ofthe United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees. However, we emphasize
that such a process needs to be voluntary and based on
individual choices.

In conclusion, Poland still believes that the Arusha
peace agreement remains the main instrument for
achieving peace and stability in Burundi and in the
whole Great Lakes region. In the face of renewed
tensions and the deadlock in the inclusive dialogue,
it is crucial to address the current challenges on a
sustainable basis and enable elections to be held in 2020
in satisfactory conditions. In that context, the situation
in Burundi continuously requires the special attention of
the Security Council and the international community.

