Mr. Matjila (South Africa): We wish to welcome
the Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Mali to the Council today. We are
pleased that he could join us in today's discussion and
are looking forward to a briefing later on.
I wish to thank Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Mali and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
for his comprehensive briefing and also to thank him
and his team for the excellent work they are doing
in Mali.

In the context of recent developments, I would like
to take this moment to convey our sympathy to the
Government and the people of Mali for the lives lost
due to the prevailing security situation in the country,
particularly the violence that broke out in the Mopti
region on 9 June, in which people perished. We urge
the Government of Mali to investigate those atrocious
acts and to bring the perpetrators to justice.

My intervention today will focus on three issues:
the security and humanitarian situation in Mali; the
role of the United Nations in Mali through MINUSMA;
and the very encouraging developments in the political
process in Mali.

First,weremain seriouslyconcernedthatthe security
situation continues to deteriorate in both northern and
central Mali, as demonstrated by increased terrorist
attacks and intercommunal clashes and violence. It is
disturbing that incidents of intercommunal violence are
increasing. They have ravaged communities, displaced
people and worsened the humanitarian situation in Mali.
In that regard, we encourage the Malian authorities to
bring those communities together in pursuit of peaceful
intercommunal dialogue and reconciliation led by the
people of Mali, with the support of the region and
international community.

It is therefore important to address the root causes
and conditions that have given rise to this situation in
Mali including, inter alia, the absence of State authority
in some parts of the country, porous borders, extreme
poverty, exclusion, inequality and environmental
impacts. It is equally important to acknowledge the
impact of the situation in the Sahel, particularly in
Libya, which is also contributing to the destabilization
of Mali and the Sahel region as a whole. We wish to
emphasize that enhanced efforts on cross-border
cooperation among the countries of the region should
continue to be encouraged to address these challenges.

Complex conditions continue to pose challenges
for humanitarian work to be performed effectively
and deserve the serious attention of the international
community. We therefore wish to urge the international
community to provide the necessary support for the
effective implementation of the 2019 humanitarian
response plan for Mali.

Despite the fragility of the situation, we are
encouraged by the progress made thus far on the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
processes in Mali. We are pleased to learn from the
briefing by the Special Representative that the training
of the Malian forces will take place soon. Those
positive developments will allow for the redeployment
of the reconstituted Malian defence and security forces
in northern and central Mali, improving security in
those regions. We also welcome the operationalization
of the Truth, Justice and Reconciliation Commission's
national investigation team, which will expedite the
realization ofjustice, healing and peace.

Secondly, with regard to the role of the United
Nations in Mali, South Africa commends the continued
efforts of MINUSMA to discharge its political and
security mandate in Mali. We therefore support the
recommendation of the Secretary-General on the
renewal of the mandate of MINUSMA for another 12
months, until 30 June 2020.

We take note of the Secretary-General's options for
the potential significant adaptation of MINUSMA and
recommendations to enhance its support in the centre
of Mali. However, it is our considered view that any
recalibration of MINUSMA must be predicated by
a review of the security situation in Mali as a whole,
including in the centre. This is important so as to avoid
a potential vacuum that will exacerbate instability and
insecurity in Mali and the entire Sahel region. We are
also of the view that should MINUSMA be expected
to play a role in central Mali that exceeds the support
recommended, it should be able to request additional
capacities and resources based on a thorough assessment
of conditions on the ground.

We appreciate the cooperation of MINUSMA
with other security forces in the country, including the
Malian Defence and Security forces, the Joint Force of
the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-S Sahel), French forces
and the European Union missions in Mali. The Council

previously discussed the challenges faced by the G-5
Sahel Joint Force regarding existing arrangements with
MINUSMA to support its operationalization. South
Africa reiterates its support for the recommendations of
the Secretary-General regarding the support the United
Nations should provide to the G-5 Sahel Joint Force.

Thirdly, on the political process, our delegation
welcomes the signing of the political agreement
between the Government of Mali and opposition
parties, which has resulted in the appointment of a
new, inclusive Government of national unity and of the
Prime Minister. These political processes, anchored by
the recently established Government of national unity
and the emerging consensus among the Malian people,
reassure all of us and indicate that the walk towards a
new Mali has begun, and the Council should support
it. It is therefore trusted that these changes will lead
to stability, sustained peace and prosperity for all
Malians, as envisioned in the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali.

South Africa wishes to encourage Malian
stakeholders to continue to engage in dialogue to
ensure the implementation of the peace agreement. We
also encourage all Malian stakeholders to take up the
opportunities to participate in an inclusive national
conference to finalize the constitution, reflecting the
institutional reforms envisioned in the peace agreement.
We call in particular for the inclusion of women and
ordinary people in that dialogue process.

We welcome the processes that have recently
taken place to ensure the establishment of the northern
economic development zone, including the submission
of the related legislation to the National Assembly,
as well as the associated funding mechanism for this
undertaking. South Africa believes that a holistic
development approach, including the upliftment of the
living standards of the people of Mali andjob creation,
particularly youth employment, will contribute
significantly to resolving the complex challenges in
Mali. The soon-to-be-launched all-Malian national
inclusive conference to dialogue and clarify and take
Algerian agreement to all the peoples and corners of
Mali is a sign of a new positive attitude among the
Malian people - political parties, civil society, women,
youth and communities. All Malians will win; no one
will be a loser.

In conclusion, it is clear that the situation in Mali
requires collective support to address the multiple and
complex challenges facing the country. The Council
must continue to extend its support through MINUSMA
and the efforts of the Economic Community of West
African States and the African Union. That support will
assist the people of Mali to achieve peace and lead the
developmental plans as envisioned by their Government.

