Mr. Vote-Bernales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like, first of all, to thank Ambassador Alvaro de
Soto, Personal Representative of the Secretary-
General, for his detailed briefing on the situation in the
Middle East. The Gaza ceasefire agreed in November
between the Prime Minister of Israel, Ehud Olmert, and
the President of the Palestinian Authority, Mahmoud
Abbas, as well as the meeting on 23 December between
the two leaders, gave rise to new hope that negotiation
would replace violence. Despite the daily difficulties
and the fragility of the situation, we trust that those
initial steps will be consolidated and lead to a new
phase that will encourage action and leadership by
those in Israel and Palestine who advocate a negotiated
solution.

As the Quartet pointed out after its meeting on
2 February, the parties must fully implement the
measures to which they agreed and must avoid taking
any action that could affect the various issues that are
to be resolved through negotiations in the context of
the Road Map and other relevant agreements.

Concerted and consistent activities on the part of
international community are required in support of
those efforts. That is why we welcome the Saudi
Arabian initiative, which facilitated an agreement
towards the formation of a government of national
unity in Palestine. In this context, it should be recalled
that, if it is to be an effective interlocutor, the new
Palestinian government will have to act in accordance
with the three basic requirements formulated by the
Quartet and endorsed by the Security Council.

A comprehensive effort to resolve the various
crises and conflicts in the area is necessary. It is,
primarily, the parties directly involved that must take
constructive steps to reduce tensions. We trust that the
tripartite meeting to be held in Jerusalem on Monday,
19 February, will help to strengthen the renewed
momentum for political dialogue, which we must all
encourage and support.

Furthermore, it is essential to move ahead with
the adoption of measures aimed at creating a
favourable environment for the promotion on both
sides of a genuine political mobilization to set in
progress a process designed to put an end to the
occupation of territory and to move towards the
establishment of a Palestinian State, living side by side
in peace and security with Israel.

With regard to Lebanon, resolution 1701 (2006)
must remain the framework for tackling the root causes
that prevent that country from achieving stability and
gaining sovereign control of its territory. We support

the activities of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon in maintaining peace along the Blue Line. We
also support its leadership role in the tripartite
meetings that are designed to prevent any single act
from leading to undesirable confrontation. However,
we must not lose sight of the latent factors capable of
giving rise to tensions, including border violations,
renewed armed clashes and other destabilizing
activities.

In this context, my delegation would like to
associate itself with the Secretary-General's
condemnation of the terrorist attack against innocent
civilians that occurred this morning in Lebanon.

The Security Council has devoted particular
attention to a number of requirements for Lebanon
aimed at the restoration of its sovereignty and
independence. These include the inquiry into the
terrorist attack that cost former Prime Minister Rafik
Hariri his life and, more recently, the international
tribunal that the Council authorized to try those
responsible for that and other criminal attacks as part
of an agreement to be ratified in accordance with
Lebanon's domestic constitutional procedures.

Once again, we urge the countries in the region to
adopt a prudent and constructive attitude aimed at the
promotion of dialogue and stability in Lebanon, whose
security situation is critical for regional stability and
peace.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm our
conviction that conflict in the Middle East can be
resolved only through political negotiation and on the
basis of agreements reached by the parties and
recognized by the international community. That is
why we believe that the Quartet remains the most
relevant mechanism to mobilize all of the actors
concerned towards dialogue and firm understandings.
We reaffirm that the Road Map is the inescapable
reference point on which any initiative to give
momentum to the peace process between Israel and
Palestine must be based.

