The President: I should like to inform the Security
Council that I have received letters from the representatives
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Canada, Colombia, Croatia,
Egypt, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Japan, Malaysia,
Morocco, Norway, Pakistan, the Republic of Korea,
Slovenia, Spain, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Turkey and Ukraine, in which they request to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The President: I welcome the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sacirbey
(Bosnia and Herzegovina) took a seat at the Council
table.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nobilo
(Croatia) took a seat at the Council table.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Karsgaard
(Canada), Mr. Londono-Paredes (Colombia),
Mr. Elaraby (Egypt), Mr. Kharrazi (Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr. Owada (Japan), Mr. Razali (Malaysia),
Mr. Snoussi (Morocco), Mr. Biarn Lian (Norway),
Mr. Kamal (Pakistan), Mr. Park (Republic of Korea),
Mr. Tu'rk (Slovenia), Mr. Yanez-Barnuevo (Spain),
Mr. Maleski (the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia), Mr. Celem (Turkey) and Mr. Zlenko
(Ukraine) took the seats reserved for them at the side
of the Council Chamber.


The President: I have received a request dated
22 November 1995 from Mr. Vladislav Jovanovic to
address the Council. With the consent of the Council, I
would propose to invite him to take a seat at the Council
table.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Jovanovic
took a seat at the Council table.


The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/1995/977, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Argentina, France, Germany, Honduras,
Indonesia, Italy, Oman, Rwanda, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States
of America; and document S/1995/978, which contains
the text of a draft resolution submitted by Argentina, the
Czech Republic, France, Germany, Honduras, Italy, the
Russian Federation, Rwanda, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States
of America.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/ 1995/972, which contains the
text of a letter dated 20 November 1995 from the
Permanent Representative of the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to vote on the two draft resolutions before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolutions to the vote.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I shall first call on those members of the Council
who wish to make statements before the voting on both
draft resolutions.


