Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): At this first
open meeting of the Council during the month of
September, I would like to extend to you, Madam, and
to the rest of the United States delegation our warmest
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council for this month.

I would like also to convey to Ambassador John
Sawers and the United Kingdom delegation our great
appreciation for their leadership in conducting the
work of the Council in August. I congratulate President
William Clinton on his appointment as United Nations
Special Envoy for Haiti and thank him for his
statement. I thank Mr. He'di Annabi, head of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH),
for his comprehensive briefing. I welcome and thank
Prime Minister Michele Duvivier Pierre-Louis of Haiti
for her participation in the Council's debate today.

My delegation is pleased to note the progress
achieved during the reporting period in the five
benchmark areas of Haiti's consolidation plan, as
manifested in the holding of senatorial elections, the
passage of key legislation and the pursuit of an
inclusive dialogue on a number of key issues that the
country faces. We also take positive note of the
vigorous efforts undertaken by President Preval to
establish the four commissions to consider issues of
national interest which, we believe, will facilitate the
achievement of the benchmarks and bring about
tangible changes in the country.

In spite of those positive developments, we
remain deeply concerned about the fragility of the
security environment and the lack of progress in the
realization of economic, social and cultural rights in
Haiti. We are troubled by reports that children continue
to suffer as a result of criminal acts, with minors
reported to be victims in numerous rape cases, while
child trafficking for the purpose of sexual or economic
exploitation continues unabated. The political and
economic shocks, coupled with the severe natural
disasters that hit the country in 2008, have not only
worsened the already dire economic conditions, but
have also hindered the full implementation of the
Government's strategy.

At this critical juncture, we hold that the full
engagement of the Haitian leadership and people, and
the execution of a sound and comprehensive
socio-economic strategy that seeks to mobilize
domestic resources, generate growth, create
employment, reduce poverty and improve the living
conditions of the people are of paramount importance
to Haiti. My delegation supports the Secretary-
General's assessment that there is an urgent need to
support the Haitian authorities in the implementation of
targeted social and economic agendas aimed at
addressing the extreme vulnerability of the country and
its people, especially food insecurity, which is
affecting nearly 2 million Haitians.

To ensure security and stability in Haiti, the
international community's strategy for the country
should focus on enhancing the Haitian National Police,
strengthening national and local governance and the
rule of law, and placing the country on the path to
recovery and sustainable development. In this
connection, we urge donors to fulfil the pledges made
at the high-level donor conference hosted in April by
the Inter-American Development Bank in Washington,
DC.
We wish to take this opportunity to stress our
great appreciation for President Clinton's continuing
efforts to attract foreign investment and gather
international support for Haiti. We are convinced that,
with his vast experience and his proactive engagement
in the country, President Clinton, in his capacity as
United Nations Special Envoy for Haiti, will make
worthy contributions to enabling the Haitian
Government to address its current political, economic
and security challenges.

While noting the primary responsibility of the
Government and the people of Haiti for their country's
stabilization process, we commend MINUSTAH's
admirable work in helping maintain stability and
re-establish security in Haiti. The continued presence
of MINUSTAH remains indispensable with a view to
avoiding possible setbacks or reversals in the
implementation of the consolidation plan.

We support the Secretary-General's
recommendation to extend the mandate of the mission
for an additional year, until 15 October 2010. However,
in view of the progress made in strengthening the
Haitian security forces and developing a handover
strategy for MINUSTAH's operational responsibilities,
we share the View that it is necessary for the mission to
reconfigure its components and adjust to changing
circumstances on the ground.

