Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): Speaking on behalf
of the humanitarian penholders, I thank Mr. Ging for
his briefing and I pay tribute to the tireless efforts of
humanitarian workers saving lives on the ground in
Syria every day. Too many brave humanitarians have
been killed on duty.

We meet today as there are alarming signs of a
pending military offensive in north-western Syria.
Over the past two weeks, we have already witnessed
attacks on educational and health-care facilities,
including three schools supported by UNICEF. In the
first half of 2018, there were 38 reported attacks against
health facilities in Idlib. These are clear violations of
international humanitarian law.

All parties, including Syrian allies, need to be
reminded of their obligations under international
humanitarian law to protect civilians and civilian
objects and comply with the principles of distinction,
proportionality and the avoidance of unnecessary
suffering. Civilian areas, buildings dedicated to
education, including schools, and hospitals and medical
facilities must not be subject to direct attack or used
for military purposes, and humanitarian and medical
personnel must be respected and protected.

We note with deep regret the continued lack of
implementation of resolution 2401 (2018), presented by
Sweden and Kuwait and adopted unanimously by the
Council some six months ago (see S/PV.8188). We stress
that Security Council resolutions must be respected.

Idlib is a de-escalation area, established by
the Astana guarantors. One after the other of the
de-escalation areas has turned into escalation areas.
Of the estimated 2.9 million people living in Idlib and
surrounding areas, more than half of the population
are internally displaced persons (IDPs), many of whom
have already fled not only once, but several times,
including from other de-escalation areas. A staggering
2.1 million people in Idlib and surrounding areas are
in need of humanitarian assistance. Increased military
escalation would have catastrophic consequences and
could lead to a humanitarian disaster. We therefore
urge all parties to abide by the de-escalation agreement
in Idlib and call upon the Astana guarantors to uphold
their commitments regarding de-escalation and
humanitarian access. We must ensure that Idlib will not
become the next Aleppo or eastern Ghouta.

We remain deeply concerned by the continued lack
of humanitarian access. In the last reporting period,
only four inter-agency convoys were dispatched. The
Syrian authorities must be compelled to do more. We
encourage those with influence and those who engage
in dialogue with Damascus to step up advocacy for
the signing of facilitation letters for convoys, United
Nations regular programming to all areas, including
areas that have recently changed control, and approval
of visas for United Nations staff, including those of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
We also note that the cross-border modality remains an
absolute lifeline for the many people in need in Idlib,
and commend the efforts of the United Nations and
partner organizations in that regard.

In Syria, horrible war crimes continue to be
perpetrated on a daily basis. Civilians, women and
men alike, as well as children, continue to be targeted
in blatant disregard for human life and dignity and in
violation of international law. In the military operations
to retake control of the south-west, indiscriminate
aerial bombardment and artillery shelling, including
against schools and hospitals, have frequently been
used. We are also shocked by the attacks perpetrated by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in Suwayda on
25 July, such as the abduction of women and children.
This highlights yet again the need for accountability,
and we reiterate our full support for the Commission
of Inquiry, as well as the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Those Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011.

All displaced Syrians have the right to return, but
the assessment of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) is that
conditions for the voluntary repatriation of Syrian
refugees are not yet in place. It is the responsibility ofthe
Syrian authorities to create an environment propitious
for a safe, voluntary and dignified return of refugees
and IDPs, in accordance with international law and
the principle of non-refoulement. UNHCR has a clear
mandate to protect refugees. The return of refugees and
IDPs must be managed by the United Nations with all
relevant parties, in line with international humanitarian
law. We fully support the work of the United Nations,
including UNCHR, and agree with its assessment. In
this regard, we also express our continued concern
regarding the Syrian Law No. 10.

Finally, we reiterate our support for a United
Nations-facilitated political solution, in line with
resolution 2254 (2015). That is the only way to ensure
a sustainable solution to the crisis in Syria, to end the
suffering and to address the legitimate concerns of all
Syrians. Furthermore, only once a credible political
transition is firmly under way and when conditions
for the safe, voluntary and dignified return of refugees
and IDPs are in place will the international donor
community be ready to assist in the reconstruction
of Syria.

To conclude, let me emphasize that Sweden and
Kuwait have been significant donors to the Syria
humanitarian response over the years and we will
continue to contribute. As co-penholders, we will also
continue to do our utmost to help alleviate the suffering
of the Syrian people, remind the Syrian parties of
their obligations under international law, including
international humanitarian law and human rights law,
and ensure that the Council upholds its responsibility
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.

