Ms. Menendez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Naturally, Spain also associates itself with the
statement to be made by the Permanent Representative
of Ireland on behalf of the European Union.

Very important events have taken place in
Kosovo in recent weeks - the inter-ethnic violence,
from 17 to 20 March, and the publication of the
Standards Implementation Plan for Kosovo.

As to the former, Spain unequivocally condemns
the ethnic violence that led to loss of life, destruction
of property and religious and spiritual heritage of
Orthodox Serbs, and the attacks on KFOR and on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). These events must be investigated
and the perpetrators brought to justice in order to
prevent a recurrence. What has happened is a serious
setback in the process of normalization and the
fulfilment of the standards for the province of Kosovo.
We believe that authorities of the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government should take good note
of this and make it their duty to do everything within
their power to guarantee the rights of members of all
minorities in Kosovo. The perpetrators of these violent
acts must be made aware that force is never a means to
achieve political goals.
Regarding the Implementation Plan, we repeat
our support for the "standards before status" policy,
which remains the core of the international
community's activity in Kosovo. Accordingly, the
publication of the Plan means a step forward in the
fulfilment of the standards. But we believe that this
should not induce anyone to think that everything is
going on as usual, just as before, because the violence
of March has done serious damage to the fulfilment of
the standards, and therefore to the Plan. Accordingly,
we believe that the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and UNMIK should be invited to
review and, if necessary, strengthen those aspects of
the Plan that have been most seriously hampered by the
events of March, especially as regards the return of
refugees and freedom of movement.

Finally, we reiterate our support to Mr. Holkeri,
UNMIK and KFOR in their efforts to ensure
application of resolution 1244 (1999). We believe that
the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government need to
be reminded of their primary and fundamental
responsibility to ensure fulfilment of the provisions of
the Implementation Plan.

