Mr. Kafando (Burkina F aso) (spoke in French): I
would first like to congratulate you, Madame
President, on your country's assumption of the Security
Council presidency for the month of February. I also
wish to thank you for organizing today's important
debate on the interdependence between security and
development.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
made by the representative of Egypt on the behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement.

The debates of the Security Council on
peacekeeping and peacebuilding strategies and post-
conflict reconstruction reflect the importance of linking
security and development.

It has been well established that no development
can occur in an unsafe and unstable environment. The
Secretary-General rightly mentioned that fact in his
1998 report on the causes of conflict and the promotion
of durable peace and sustainable development in Africa
(S/1998/318).

The Security Council should therefore place
considerable emphasis on development issues in its
approach and its deliberations. Today's conflicts and
threats to peace are highly complex, as evidenced by
socio-political crises, including in Somalia, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Sudan, and
can undermine and even decimate development efforts.

Similarly, the hunger riots sparked by the
multifaceted crises that we have experienced in recent
years; the specific acts of violence and even terrorism
fuelled by despair and misery; and other current events,
to name but a few, prove today more than ever that
peace, security and development form a whole. For that
reason, together they contribute to putting and keeping
the issue of human security at the heart of the debate.

Security can no longer be viewed only through a
politico-military lens. We must henceforth take into
consideration the new dimensions of security that lead
to the full development of the individual. And, because
they can be a source a conflict, it falls to the Security
Council to fully understand what they represent and, in
coordination with the Secretary-General and the other
relevant bodies of the United Nations, to detect the
early signs of tension and crisis. In other words,
prevention must take its proper place among the
strategies we use to ensure peace and security by
promoting sustainable development and equitable
access to the benefits of growth, including youth
employment and women's full enjoyment of their
rights.

In countries in conflict or emerging from
conflict - where everything must be rebuilt,
particularly in matters of security, basic social services,
State justice institutions and economic activity - a
timely, effective and appropriate response of the
international community is critical to avoiding a
resurgence of violence and a return to chaos.
Peacekeeping and peacebuilding must take a central
place in the actions of the United Nations and the
international community as a whole. To that end, the
role of the Security Council is to interact with the other
relevant organs of the United Nations and, as
necessary, to establish and strengthen its existing
complementary and interactive relations with them,
especially the Peacebuilding Commission, so as to
ensure that greater account is taken of peacebuilding in
the peacekeeping phase.

In this context, we reiterate the recommendation
of the Security Council in its presidential statement of
12 February 2010 (S/PRST/2010/2), concerning the
establishment of peacebuilding plans with clear
objectives to allow each mission to achieve its goals
and move beyond peacekeeping into peacebuilding.
Furthermore, we welcome the fact that the Security
Council stressed the importance of ensuring that
mandated peacebuilding activities are undertaken as
soon as possible in every peacekeeping operation, in
coordination with the United Nations country team and
taking due account of security questions and the
priorities of the host country. We must take greater
advantage of successful transitions to ensure that these
recommendations be implemented.

In this interaction, we welcome the role of the
Peacebuilding Commission and other organs, agencies,
funds and programmes of the United Nations, as well
as the strategic partnerships and arrangements with
certain institutions, such as the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund. It is also important that
cooperation continue with regional and subregional
organizations, which can bring added value to the
search for solutions to the threats to the domestic
security and stability of States.

There is no doubt that particular attention should
be given to activities and programmes dealing with the
reintegration of refugees and internally displaced
persons, the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants, and security sector
reform in order to create the conditions conducive to
relaunching economic activity. The success of such
programmes requires greater inclusion of all sectors of
society, particularly the most vulnerable groups
represented by women and young people. Furthermore,
efforts should be pursued to improve coordination and
coherence among all actors.

In conclusion, we express the hope that the
recommendations emanating from this debate will
ensure that the interdependence between security and
development will be duly taken into account in the
deliberations of the Security Council. We are confident
that the involvement and efforts of the United Nations
system and the entire international community will
increasingly contribute to identifying the relevant
answers to the need to establish a framework of peace
and security that promotes development.

