Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes the adoption of today's important
resolution 2220 (2015). We thank Lithuania for the
leadership and tenacity it has shown on the issue, with
efforts that build innovatively on resolution 2117 (2013),
which was the Council's first on small arms and light
weapons.

Today marks a substantial step forward in the
saving of lives from the scourge of small arms and
light weapons, and four elements of today's resolution
deserve particular attention. The first is its review of
the work of the United Nations departments and entities
that address the issue of small arms and light weapons.
Second is the concrete proposals it makes for increasing
those bodies' effectiveness in future. Third is the
important recognition in the text ofthe disproportionate
impact that such weapons have on women and children,
and fourth is its further acknowledgement of the positive
impact of the Arms Trade Treaty. On that point, the
United Kingdom maintains that the Treaty is the most
effective international tool for creating a responsible
and secure international trade in these weapons, and
we once again urge all States to support and accede to
the Treaty.

Finally, we regret the fact that several Council
members found themselves unable to support today's
resolution. For decades, global policy on conventional
weapons has focused on the obligations and responsible
behaviour of exporting and importing States. That is the
best way to moderate illicit transfers and proliferation.
Contrary to some arguments, we do not think that ill-
defined and practically unenforceable new statements
by the Council on the subject of non-State actors
can in any way improve the situation on the ground.
Despite those disagreements, however, we urge all
Member States to focus on the overall value of today's
resolution, which offers tangible actions for addressing
the scourge of small arms and light weapons across all
regions of the world, particularly in Africa.

