I thank the President of the International Committee of the Red Cross, Mr. Peter Maurer; the Executive Secretary of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification, Mr. Ibrahim Thiaw; and Land Ambassador Ms. Inna Modja for their informative and insightful briefings. The significance of the link between climate change and peace and security was first addressed in the Security Council 13 years ago, in 2007 (see S/PV.5663), during the United Kingdom's presidency of the Council, and today it is more relevant than ever. In order to improve people's livelihoods in Africa, including in the Lake Chad basin region, it is important to address this link more efficiently. Many of the countries vulnerable to climate change do not have the capacity to cope with climate-related security risks and need assistance from the international community. There are tools available; the key is to use them. In order to understand the consequences of climate change in armed conflicts, such as in the Sahel region, data is a fundamental prerequisite. We need reliable and accurate information. Therefore, it is important to improve the collection and quality of data and to find, inter alia, innovative solutions to analyse the exacerbating role that climate change plays in the context of armed conflicts and humanitarian emergencies. That will allow for both better risk assessment and better risk management. Also, it will enable a systematic approach to including climate-related security risks in the work of the Security Council - an approach that is urgently needed and an idea that could become a reality if the Security Council were to receive systematic reporting by the Secretary-General on climate-related security risks. It is clear that climate change poses a real and current threat to peace, security and stability in many regions around the world, including the Sahel region. Populations that depend on economic activities such as farming, herding and fishing are extremely exposed to such risks and are affected by food insecurity. Climate change brings competition for energy and natural resources. Therefore, it is important to create well-designed resource-management policies and to invest in building the resilience of the most affected regions. However, the implications of climate-related security risks are not just a local or a national problem but a cross-border phenomenon, and day by day the latter worsens in areas with permeable borders and insufficient State authority. Consequently, this calls for duly multilateral coordination and an uncompromising humanitarian response, including better implementation of international human rights law and international humanitarian law. In order to effectively respond to security threats posed by climate change in the Lake Chad basin region, we need comprehensive national, regional and international collaboration, as well as strengthened coordination and integration within the United Nations and its agencies and missions. Finally, it is important to continue our efforts to find pertinent solutions. That is not a quick fix, but it is the only way forward.
