Mr. Qian Qichen (China) (interpretation from Chinese): At the outset, I wish to congratulate you,
Madam President, Foreign Minister of Italy, on your
stewardship of this important meeting at the level of
Ministers for Foreign Affairs.

It is of great significance for us on the occasion of
the fiftieth anniversary of the founding of the United
Nations to have an exchange of views here on how the
Security Council can be more responsive to the new
situation and play a more effective role.

 

In the past 50 years since the founding of the United
Nations, and particularly in recent years, the Security
Council has played a useful role in easing regional conflicts
and promoting the peaceful settlement of international
disputes. Summarizing the history of this period, we believe
that the purposes and principles of the United Nations
Charter embody the universally recognized principles of
international law. Whenever these principles are observed,
the Security Council is able to play its due role. Otherwise,
it would suffer setbacks or failures. As an important means
available to the Security Council for the maintenance of
international peace and security, the United Nations peace-
keeping operations have grown in number, scale and terms
of reference in recent years. We believe that in either
preventive deployment, dispatch of peace-keeping forces or
post-conflict peacemaking, the Security Council must
strictly abide by the United Nations Charter and the norms
governing international relations, particularly those
important principles of respect for State sovereignty, non-
interference in the internal affairs of other Member States,
peaceful settlement of disputes, impartiality, and seeking the
prior consent and cooperation of the parties concerned.
Otherwise, instead of achieving the expected positive
results, peace-keeping operations would become fruitless
and could even become bogged down in a dilemma.
Reviewing the practice in recent years, we see that the
United Nations operations in Cambodia and Mozambique
were successful and that those in Somalia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina were not. We need to draw lessons from them.
We always believe that however complicated a dispute
between States or an internal conflict in a country may be,
we should encourage the parties concerned to seek peaceful
solutions through negotiation and dialogue, for this is the
only right and effective way to a comprehensive and
durable settlement. The practices of imposing sanctions,
using military force or even expanding a war in order to
stop it are not conducive to a settlement. On the contrary,
they will only complicate the situation and add to the
difficulties in reaching an eventual settlement.

It should also be pointed out that the regional conflicts
in the world today have complex causes. It is both
unrealistic and impossible for the United Nations, including
the Security Council, to resolve all the problems. Therefore,
the Security Council should take into full consideration
what the United Nations and its Member States can afford
in terms of human, material and financial resources and act
within its capacity.

We are in favour of appropriate and rational reforms
of the Security Council to enable it better to meet the needs
of developments both inside and outside the United
Nations. We believe that in addition to enlarging the
Council's membership and enhancing the transparency of
its work, communication and coordination between the
Council and the General Assembly and other agencies
should also be strengthened so that its decisions can better
reflect the collective interests and common aspirations of
all the United Nations Member States. Only in this way
can the resolutions and decisions of the Security Council
receive broad-based support from the United Nations
membership and thus acquire greater authority.

As a permanent member of the Security Council,
China supports its efforts to maintain international peace
and security in accordance with the mandate entrusted to
it by the Charter. As an old Chinese saying goes, "By
reviewing the past, one can gain new knowledge". On the
fiftieth anniversary of the founding of this world body we
hope that the Security Council, by reviewing the past and
summing up experience, will better fulfil the lofty duties
the Charter has conferred on it on its historic march
towards the new century. This is a major test for the
Security Council and also, to a larger extent, for the
international community's ardent expectation of it. China
is ready to work together with other Member States to
this end.

