Mr. Kayinamura (Rwanda): We join other delegations in thanking Belgium for convening today's debate. We also thank the briefers for their insightful briefings (see S/PV.8723) and welcome the ministers who spoke here today. We thought it would be useful if Rwanda shared its own experiences. In the aftermath of the genocide, Rwanda had to think about the genocide itself and the tasks of healing, reconciling the people and carrying out justice. Rwanda had to seek justice to move forward after that terrible and most disturbing time in our history. The process of seeking truth and justice is not about reprisal, but rather about healing, educating and building relationships on the strength of communities and collective interests. Rwanda has learned that ensuring transitional justice and developmentcontributes to transformations that bring sustained and meaningful improvement to people's lives. Our transitional justice involved a full range of processes and mechanisms associated with our society's attempt to come to terms with a legacy of large-scale past abuses in order to ensure accountability, serve justice and achieve the reconciliation we needed. The Government of Rwanda was quick to note that a prompt response to the country's problems was the primary responsibility of the Rwandans themselves. A homegrown and traditional solution, rather than a classic judicial one, to their demands was needed to redress the more than | million lives lost and the thousands of cases piled up. In order to address the issue of the thousands of accused still awaiting trial and to bring about justice and reconciliation at the grass-roots level, the Rwandan Government re-established the traditional Jnkiko Gacaca, commonly known as the Gacaca courts. We can happily say that it was a Rwandan solution to a Rwandan problem that we had to address. The high degree of popular participation generated a sense of legitimacy among the population that, as result, brought conflicting groups back together to move the country forward. The Gacaca trials promoted reconciliation by providing a means for survivors to learn the truth about the death of their family members and relatives. It also gave perpetrators an opportunity to confess their crimes, show remorse and ask for forgiveness in front of community members. Rwandans considered the Gacaca courts to be homegrown and that they fit into the underlying objective of accountability, as well as balancing justice, truth and peace and security in Rwanda. For Rwandans, the Gacaca courts allowed ordinary Rwandan men and women to play a central role in the proceedings and outcomes of the entire process, which in fact sped up the backlog of cases. In that way, the Gacaca courts allowed Rwandans to own the justice process and work together to find solutions to move forward. Today the returns manifest themselves in a growing economy and in a society in which the rights to a dignified life are continuously embraced in our pursuit of unshakable peace and unity. Rwandans can attest that the Gacaca process played a key role in advancing peace and reconciliation in the country. It is important that we recognize that national or homegrown initiatives such as the Gacaca courts should be supported, as they have a more direct and sustainable impact on affected populations. Those initiatives, often referred to as transitional justice, are most cost-effective, can more effectively contribute to unity, reconciliation and peacebuilding, and have a positive effect on broader justice reform. To sustain the gains fromtransitional justice, Rwanda has promoted inclusive and intentional leadership, defined by three key pillars - unity, accountability and thinking big. Those pillars have instilled in each and every Rwandan a sense of responsibility towards sustaining our collective gains and the discipline needed to work towards our shared goal of realizing peace and security in the country. Rwanda has also adopted inclusive policies and structures and created platforms - many of which were homegrown solutions, at all levels - to encourage community involvement in nation-building efforts and ownership. In conclusion, in post-conflict situations, it is not a flat principle that classic solutions will often redress the situation. In Rwanda we have learned that transitional justice can heal and contribute to reconciliation and sustained peace, especially if it is context-based. In 10 years, Gacaca courts tried more than 1.9 million suspects. But beyond the numbers, Rwanda's experiment in mass community-based justice shed light on what happened in their local communities in the 100 days, helped families find the bodies of their loved ones, whom they could otherwise not have found, ensured that tens of thousands of perpetrators were brought to justice and set reconciliation in motion. The Gacaca trials also served to promote forgiveness and gave perpetrators the opportunity to confess their crimes, show remorse and ask for forgiveness in front of their entire community.
