Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I should like to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of April. We are certain
that you will conduct our work effectively. We look
forward to working and cooperating with you this
month.

I would also like to thank colleagues who took
the floor before me for their kind words addressed to
my delegation. I also wish to thank Mr. Hedi Annabi,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his comprehensive and significant briefing. We
commend the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH) for its efforts, under his
leadership, to establish security in Haiti.

Haiti has long been one of the most important
items on the agenda of the Security Council. It remains
on the agenda because Haiti has yet to recover from
conflict. The security situation continues to be fragile.

The economic and social fabric has been destroyed by
hurricanes and other natural disasters, which have
produced enormous financial losses and affected the
living conditions of most of the people of Haiti. This
requires a coordinated effort by the international
community to promote development and economic
progress, which are crucial to stability and the building
of peace in Haiti. However, that can be achieved only
through a clear development strategy, to be established
by the Government of Haiti and implemented with the
support of its international partners.

We have taken note of positive developments and
the steps taken by the Government, including its call
for national reconciliation and dialogue, its efforts to
expand State administration throughout the country and
its joint legislative agenda for 2009. We also welcome
the ongoing improvements in the security situation and
the work of the Haitian National Police, as well as the
decline in criminal activity, in particular kidnappings.
We commend coordinated efforts by the Government
and the National Police to establish a stable
environment where overall security and political
progress can flourish.

We agree with the Secretary-General that there
have been encouraging developments, but these remain
fragile and liable to be reversed. That is why we are
concerned at the continuing political divisions. We call
upon the Government of Haiti and all political leaders
to come together, in particular with respect to their
dispute on reform of the 1887 constitution, through
dialogue and reconciliation, and to take the
constructive path of cooperation. We hope that the first
round of senatorial elections, to be held on 19 April,
will be successful.

We know that the series of destructive hurricanes
and tropical storms that recently struck Haiti created
enormous difficulties for Haitians and added to the
economic and social burden borne by the Government.
We saw this during our visit to Haiti: everyone the
Security Council mission met made it clear to us that
security and economic development are indivisible. For
that reason, all Haitian elements and Government
institutions should coordinate, with the support of the
international community, so that Haiti can meet the
challenges it faces both in the security sphere and in
the economic and social realm.

In our view, it is important that the proposals
outlined by Professor Paul Collier with respect to
poverty reduction and the long-term economic
recovery of Haiti be accorded due attention with a view
to making economic progress. In that regard, we
believe that Haiti's neighbours and the other countries
of the region can play an important role, in parallel
with the efforts of the international community, donor
countries and the United Nations country team, in
improving economic and social conditions for the
people. This is closely linked with the achievement of
sustainable stability in the country.

We agree with the Secretary-General that
assistance will be effective only if the Haitians
themselves face the long-term challenges with the
same spirit and determination they have shown in the
aftermath of last year's destructive hurricanes and
tropical storms. We hope that the Washington donor
conference will be successful and will yield the
financial assistance that is needed.

