Mr. Jiang Jiang (spoke in Chinese): To begin
with, I warmly welcome the guests from the African
countries and regional organizations. I would also like
to thank the delegation of Cameroon for making
arrangements for this open meeting and for preparing
the relevant documents for this meeting.

There are numerous countries and abundant
resources in Central Africa, whose peace and stability
has always been among the major concerns of the
Security Council. In recent years, the United Nations
has made progress, to different degrees, in its
peacekeeping operations in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Angola and the Central African Republic.
However, the situation in Central Africa remains grave.
Armed conflicts are yet to be completely settled.
Poverty and disease are still ravaging countries in the
region. Economic reconstruction is a long-term,
arduous task.

Today, it is of great significance for the Security
Council to conduct exchanges of views with African
countries, as well as with the regional organizations,
strengthening cooperation and maintaining regional
peace and security.

We are very pleased to see that in recent years,
African countries have exerted themselves greatly in
playing their role in the collective security system, in
jointly preventing conflicts and in cooperating to
promote development, which has gained broad
acknowledgement from the international community.
The African Union, established in July this year,
is a reflection of the strong desire of African people to
seek settlements to African issues through collective
self-reliance. There is a multitude of economic,
regional and cooperation organizations. And, in recent
years, mechanisms for maintaining peace and security
have also been established, which have played a major
role in neutralizing regional conflicts.

The conflict of Angola has basically come to an
end and the peace process has good prospects. For all
of this, African regional organizations should be
credited for their efforts.

The conflict of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is moving in the right direction. The United
Nations, as well as South Africa as the third party
monitoring mechanism, are playing a pivotal role.

The Central African regional organization has
recently decided to dispatch a monitoring force to the
Central African Republic, which will surely help to
alleviate the situation there.

We have always believed that the Security
Council, as the main organ for maintaining
international peace and security, has an inescapable
responsibility for settling such issues in Africa.
Therefore, we support the idea that the Security
Council, in settling issues relating to conflicts in
Africa, should strengthen its cooperation and
coordination with the African Union, as well as with
other subregional organizations, and pay due heed to
the views of the African people and jointly work out
strategies for settling the conflicts in question.

It is our hope that the relevant missions of the
United Nations, as well the offices, should further
strengthen their communication, coordination and
cooperation with the African Union and the other
subregional organizations of Central Africa.

In the same vein, we believe that the realization
of peace and security is intricately linked with the issue
of development. Poverty and economic gaps have, to a
great extent, resulted in the underdevelopment of
countries in Central Africa. They are both the root
causes and among the consequences of the incessant
conflicts there.
The international community should pay close
attention to the issue. It should be acknowledged that
economic globalization has had a negative impact on
African countries and it is a fact that these countries
are being increasingly marginalized.

Only by increasing development aid, including
budgetary humanitarian assistance, to these African
countries and by assisting these African countries in
developing their economy, in ridding themselves of
poverty and in consolidating post-war peace, can a
solid basis be laid for a comprehensive settlement of
the conflicts.

We welcome and support the New Partnership for
Africa's Development adopted by African countries in
July last year. We were also very happy to see that, this
year for the first time, the General Assembly jointly
considered items relating to peace, conflict and
development in Africa, which shows that the United
Nations is paying more attention to settling African
issues.

The promotion of peace and development in the
African region and strengthening our cooperation with
African countries are important parts of China's
foreign relations. The Sino-African Cooperation
Forum, established in October 2000, and its follow-up
activities have functioned smoothly. The Chinese
Government has always, within its capacity, provided
necessary support to African countries. China has
signed a debt reduction agreement in the amount of $10
billion with more than 30 countries of Central Africa
and other subregions, and has essentially implemented
its commitments.

The Chinese Government recently decided to
increase its participation in the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC). In the future, the Chinese
Government will continue to strengthen its consistent
cooperation with Central African countries, support the
United Nations in strengthening its cooperation and
coordination and make further efforts to achieve peace,
stability and development in the region.

