Mr. Amorim (Brazil) (interpretation from French):
At the outset, Mr. President, I should like to say that we
are greatly honoured to see you, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Gabon, presiding over the Security Council.
Your presence among us ensures that our work will be
conducted wisely and effectively. I also want to express
my best wishes to Ambassador Dangue Rewaka, who will
be guiding us this month. I should also like to pay tribute
to Ambassador Alain Dejammet for his effective
presidency of the Council in the month of January.

Since the adoption of resolution 1136 (1997), there
have been favourable developments in the situation in the
Central African Republic. We note, for example, the letter
of President Patasse, contained in the latest report of the
Secretary-General, which represents an important step in
the right direction. We also want to stress the crucial role
played by President Omar Bongo in the peace process.

However, despite all of the efforts undertaken by the
signatories of the Bangui Agreements, and in particular
those of the Inter-African Mission to Monitor the
Implementation of the Bangui Agreements (MISAB),
whose neutral and impartial contribution deserves our full
recognition, there are elements that are not necessarily
favourable to the peace process. The fact that the leaders
of the Groupe des onze partis politiques de l'opposition
(Group of Eleven) and the four groups of affiliated trade
unions have decided to withdraw from the preparatory
committee for the conference is a new cause of concern.

The draft resolution under consideration, which we
support, would extend the authorization for the operation
of MISAB until 16 March. Furthermore, the Council
supports the intention of the Secretary-General to appoint
a special representative for the Central African Republic
and encourages the Secretary-General to proceed with this
appointment without delay. We are convinced that a
special representative will be able to make a significant
contribution to the peace process.

With regard to the establishment of a United Nations
peacekeeping operation, the draft resolution provides that
a decision be taken by 16 March on the basis of the
report that the Secretary-General is to submit by 23
February. This report should contain a proposal regarding
the structure, goals and financial implications of

 

establishing a peacekeeping operation in the Central African
Republic.

Of course, the primary responsibility for the peace
process remains with the various political actors in the
Central African Republic. In that context, President Patasse
has a central role to play. I am sure that, in the light of
actual developments on the ground, the international
community will be prepared to play its part in the process
of reconciliation and national reconstruction in the Central
African Republic.

