Mr. Mminele (South Africa): My delegation would
like to congratulate Senegal on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council and to expresses its appreciation
for the convening of this important and timely debate on
peacekeeping operations and the asymmetrical threats
facing them. We would also like to thank the Minister

for Foreign Affairs of Senegal and Deputy Secretary-
General Jan Eliasson or his pertinent remarks.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries and wishes to make the
following additional remarks in its national capacity.

In the 70 years since the establishment of the
United Nations, the need for the Organization to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war
has never been greater. This is manifested by the
proliferation of conflicts and the deployment of more
than 125,000 personnel in 38 United Nations political
and peacekeeping missions.

South Africa holds the View that peacekeepers
should be deployed in support of political or peace
processes, thereby working for the objective of
sustainable peace. We wish to state from the onset
that it remains the primary responsibility of States to
protect civilians within their borders, including against
terrorist threats. As emphasized in the 2015 report
(see S/2015/446) of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations, United Nations missions should
not be mandated to conduct military counter-terrorism
operations, because they are not suited for such actions.

The nature of conflict is evolving and new
asymmetrical threats to global peace and security
continue to emerge, which threaten the peace and
stability of States and regions. Recent acts of terrorism
across the world and against peacekeeping missions
have exposed the callous and heinous nature of
terrorism. South Africa stands firmly with the rest of
the international community in its condemnation of
such attacks and reiterates its stance that terrorism,
in whatever form and from whatever quarter, must
be condemned.

The United Nations is presently deployed in a
multitude of environments where it faces asymmetric
and violent threats, as in Somalia, Libya, Mali, Iraq
and Afghanistan. As the organ entrusted with the
deployment of United Nations peacekeeping operations,
the Security Council must ensure that these operations
are fully resourced and entrusted with the appropriate
mandate in order to respond to the context-specific
environments in which they are deployed.

As a troop-contributing country, South Africa
believes that we have a responsibility to ensure that
our troops have the capacity to operate in a secure
environment. In the context of asymmetrical threats
where our troops and United Nations personnel are
vulnerable and the mandate of the peace operation is
threatened, the mission must be sufficiently resourced
and equipped to protect itself and defend its mandate.
Also, ifpeace processes are obstructed and non-military
protection tools are inadequate, peacekeeping missions
with an explicit mandate to protect civilians must
play their part in the protection of civilians, including
through the use of force, as part ofa robust response to
these threats.

Clarity must also be sought with regard to the
concept of stabilization. Numerous missions seem
to struggle in finding a working balance between
stabilization and military tasks, bearing in mind that
stabilization requires additional civilian and police
activities within the ambit of security sector reform.
There is therefore a need for greater understanding
surrounding the context and planning of a peacekeeping
mission before deployment.

Furthermore, in this modern age, we should
make use of all relevant resources, including the use
of technology, in order to enhance the effectiveness
of United Nations peace operations in responding to
asymmetrical threats. The deployment of the Force
Intervention Brigade of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is a credible example ofthe success that could be
achieved to address potential threats to a peace mission.

South Africa recognizes that the primary
responsibility for international peace and security
lies with the Security Council. However, at the same
time, it is often regional organizations, such as the
African Union (AU), that are the first responders and
deploy early in order to stabilize conflict situations, as
necessary, thereby enabling the United Nations to deploy
when conditions are more favourable. Concerning,
therefore, is the reluctance of the Council to fully fund
AU-led peace operations that are carried out on behalf
of the international community. In that regard, South
Africa calls for the use of United Nations-assessed
contributions to secure predictable, sustainable and
flexible financing for AU peace operations authorized
by the Security Council.

In conclusion, my country reiterates its view that
terrorism and violent extremism cannot be defeated
militarily and cannot be dealt with solely through the
use of force or coercive measures. We believe that the
only way for collective efforts to succeed is to address
the root causes through international cooperation.
Promoting political solutions aimed at resolving
conflict and creating the conditions for a better future
for all over the long term will go a long way towards
countering asymmetrical threats.

