The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Japan.

I thank Prosecutor Bensouda for her briefing and
the presentation of her twenty-sixth report on Darfur,
as well as for her dedication and leadership. Japan
is committed to the fight against impunity and to
supporting the International Criminal Court (ICC).
I would like to assure the Prosecutor of Japan's full
support for the work of the Office of the Prosecutor.

In 2005, Japan, as a Security Council member,
supported resolution 1593 (2005) in the light of the
serious violations of human rights committed in
Darfur. Japan believed that there was a role for the ICC
to bring those perpetrators to justice. Cooperation with
the Court is vital for the ICC to function effectively and
produce successful outcomes. Japan once again calls
for the full implementation of resolution 1593 (2005),
which requires the full cooperation of the Government
of the Sudan and all other parties. The continued failure
to implement resolution 1593 (2005) will undermine
the credibility and legitimacy of the Council. Follow-
up on non-compliance is seriously needed.

While huge challenges remain in Darfur, such as
the political process and the humanitarian and human
rights situation, we have seen encouraging changes in
both the situation in Darfur and the behaviour of the
Government of the Sudan. There have been no open
confrontations recently and the cooperation of the
Government of the Sudan has significantly improved.
We commend the efforts made by the Government of
the Sudan, the African Union and the United Nations
in that regard.

Those efforts must continue. However, regrettably,
not much progress has been achieved on the work of the
ICC concerning Darfur due to the lack of cooperation.
Japan emphasizes that the Government's obligations
under resolution 1593 (2005) with regard to cooperation
with the Prosecutor and the ICC remain unchanged.

I would like to conclude by reiterating Japan's
continued support for the activities of the ICC. Japan
will be leaving the Council at the end of this month, but
we will continue to look forward to concrete progress
on the issue.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Sudan.

