Mr. Mayong Onon (Malaysia): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening and presiding over today's
meeting. My delegation is grateful to the Special
Coordinator, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his important
briefing and reflections.

Malaysia associates itself with the statements to be
delivered by the representative of Venezuela on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement and by the representative
of Uzbekistan on behalf of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation.

Malaysia deplores the violent clashes between the
Israeli security forces and Palestinians on 21 July in
the West Bank, which left three Palestinians dead and
injured many others. Those clashes in the West Bank
further complicate the already volatile situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories. We call on all parties to
refrain from actions that could further escalate tensions
in Jerusalem's old city.

We condemn in the strongest terms the closure of
the Al-Aqsa Mosque on 14 July by the Israeli authorities.
We join other member States in demanding that Israel
refrain from any action that would alter the status of
the Islamic holy site. We reiterate our call for Israel to
provide unrestricted access for Muslim worshippers
to the Al-Aqsa Mosque. We also urge Israel to cease
any action that can have the effect of changing the
status quo of the Islamic holy sites. The sanctity of the
religious sites must be respected. In that regard, we
also commend and support the efforts of the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan and custodian of the holy sites of
Jerusalem to restore calm in the holy city.

We are extremely disheartened to learn of the plans
announced by Israel to increase the development of
housing units in East Jerusalem to a rate of over 30 per
cent more than in 2016, as highlighted by Mr. Mladenov
earlier today. That is a clear violation of resolution 2334
(2016). We recall the pronouncement by the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian people, asking for the quarterly report ofthe
Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016) to be produced in writing. The report must
outline where the parties were in compliance. In cases
of non-compliance, concrete measures must be detailed
to ensure the full and effective implementation and
enforcement of the resolution.

We continue to look forward to seeing a written
report on the implementation of the resolution. Let
us make good on the historic Council action that
reflected the urgency and conviction to reverse the
negative trends that threaten the peace and viability
of the two-State solution. We must now focus on the
implementation of existing resolutions, including on
settlements, as well as on all acts of violence against
civilians and further incitements.

Being detached and apathetic to the developments in
the occupied Palestinian territory is no longer an option.
In that regard, Malaysia welcomes the positive initiative
undertaken by the United States in facilitating a water-
supply arrangement between the Palestinian Authority
and the Israeli Government for Palestinians in the West

Bank and Gaza, the respected United Nations and
Egyptian initiative to facilitate the provision of fuel for
the supply of electricity and the concrete commitments
made by Qatar on reconstruction in Gaza.

As we mark 50 years ofthe illegal Israeli occupation
of Palestine, the international community owes it to
the Palestinian people to mobilize its political will and
explore other peaceful, legal and diplomatic avenues
available to us to end the longest-running occupation in
modern history. Let us not be condemned by history by
virtue of being a by-stander.

Finally, Malaysia remains committed to playing a
constructive role to realize the two-State solution. We
reiterate our long-standing support for the inalienable
rights of self-determination for the Palestinian people
and a just, comprehensive and final solution to the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict.

