Mr. Terzi di Sant'Agata (Italy): Allow me first
to take this opportunity to express my sincere
appreciation to the Ugandan presidency of the Security
Council for taking the initiative of convening this
crucial debate on peacebuilding and for the invitation
to take the floor. I would like to thank the Secretary-
General for his timely report (S/2009/304) and his
remarks. I would also like to thank Ambassador
Heraldo Mufioz, Chairperson of the Peacebuilding
Commission; Mr. Jordan Ryan, Assistant Administrator
and Director of the Bureau for Crisis Prevention and
Recovery at the United Nations Development
Programme; and Mr. Alastair McKechnie, Director of
the Fragile and Conflict-Affected Countries Group at
the World Bank, for their important briefings.

I would like to align myself with the statement
delivered by the Swedish Presidency of the European
Union.
As underlined by the Secretary-General, the post-
conflict phase offers a window of opportunity that can
be essential in supporting countries previously
involved in conflict in developing a path towards
normalcy. However, in the phase of developing such a
path, the situation often remains fluid and the peace
fragile. Getting the timing and sequencing right among
priorities requires a delicate balance, as the Secretary-
General puts it. A coordinated approach is therefore
needed, as are the definition of clear priorities and
flexible tools and the availability of quickly deployable
human and financial resources.

In that light, the revision of the terms of reference
of the Peacebuilding Fund is very welcome. The
international community as a whole should collaborate
in that process at the multilateral and bilateral levels.
Peacebuilding should be conceived as a single process
in which everyone can participate and contribute in an
integrated manner. That is the spirit in which the 2005
World Summit decided to establish the Peacebuilding
Commission.

Italy welcomes the Secretary-General's report,
since it represents a true road map for activities to be
performed in the aftermath of a conflict - a real
policy document for all the actors involved. The
principle of national ownership is central. The
peacebuilding intervention should be anchored at the
country level - again, as stated by the Secretary-
General - with the engagement of all the actors
involved. That means an inclusive process sensitive to
the requests of civil society.

The fundamental role of regional and subregional
organizations - in particular, the African Union -
must also be emphasized, as must the need to develop
forms of collaboration within the United Nations.
There is a need to improve the effectiveness and
coherence of the United Nations system's response,
along with the concept of accountable United Nations
leadership on the ground.

An effective peacebuilding effort requires the
capability on the ground to deploy civilian experts as
well. We are encouraged by the positive assessment of
the Standing Police Capacity, which constitutes a
useful reference for building a rule-of-law standing
capacity. Quite rightly, another review has been
proposed on how the United Nations can help to
broaden and deepen the pool of civilian experts.
The Peacebuilding Commission was created in
2005 to fill the gap between peacekeeping and post-
conflict rehabilitation. It plays a central role by
bringing coherence to the recovery of countries
emerging from conflict. That is why it was decided that
the Peacebuilding Commission should be an advisory
body not only for the General Assembly, but also for
the Security Council.

An interesting suggestion has been made by the
Secretary-General that the Security Council consider
more proactively the advice of the Peacebuilding
Commission. We subscribe to this suggestion. It is an
important point which aims at enhancing the
consultative role of the Commission vis-a-vis the
whole United Nations system and as the principal
organ responsible for the definition of mandates and
for conflict management.

Our approach to peacebuilding seeks to foster
political and democratic stabilization while stimulating
economic growth. In this framework, Italy's assistance
in the energy sector in Sierra Leone is one example of
the possibilities that we have at our disposal. Another
example involves the fight against drugs and crime, an
endeavour that is critical to peacebuilding. During its
tenure in the Security Council, my country actively
promoted the inclusion of these aspects in the
mandates of the United Nations Offices in Sierra Leone
and Guinea-Bissau, and contributed to a number of
security sector reform and rule of law initiatives led by
the Economic Community of West African States, the
United Nations Development Programme and the
United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in
Guinea-Bissau.

My country intends to strengthen its technical
support for the work of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) in West Africa. A task
force of selected police officers of the Guardia di
Finanza, Italy's customs police, will be deployed in
Dakar within the framework of UNODC's law
enforcement capacity-building programme in the fight
against illicit drug trafficking.

As the country chairing the G-8 this year, Italy
has been actively engaged in fulfilling the commitment
taken by the G-8 at Sea Island and Hokkaido. In the
G-8 leaders' declaration, emphasis was placed on the
need for a comprehensive approach to peacekeeping
and peacebuilding. During the G-8 meeting in Trieste,
prior to its meeting in L'Aquila, the G-8 foreign
ministers welcomed the Secretary-General's report on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of
conflict - the report we are discussing today - and
encouraged all relevant actors to consider its
recommendations.

