Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): First of all, I
should like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting and to thank Mr. Annabi for his briefing,
which provided us with an update on the situation in
Kosovo.

We regret that the meaningful progress achieved
at the institutional level by the political process in
Kosovo, with the gradual transfer of competencies to
the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government, is not
matched by similar progress in the security sphere. The
complex situation still faced by Kosovo is a matter of
some concern.

My delegation strongly condemns the recent acts
of violence. As briefed by Mr. Annabi this morning,
the murder of children and the daily intimidation of
vulnerable persons are an attack against the crucial
process of democratic reforms. Those acts must not be
allowed to undermine the peace process and the efforts
to build a multi-ethnic and democratic society in
Kosovo. We appeal for an immediate end to violence.

We would like to underline that it is the
responsibility of Kosovo leaders to decisively curb
ethnic violence. We urge them to work with the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) with a view to improving the security
situation in Kosovo, particularly through the
strengthening of local police and by adopting measures
to fight organized crime.

We welcome the efforts undertaken by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the
Contact Group to stop the cycle of violence. In that
regard, we deem it very important to push forward the
disarmament of the population, taking advantage of the
synergies provided by the amnesty programme recently
started by UNMIK, which allows the citizens of
Kosovo who possess illegal weapons to surrender them
to law enforcement authorities. It is clear that the
proliferation of weapons fosters violence, organized
crime and terrorism.

It is important to continue to strengthen the rule
of law, to support the return of refugees, to push
forward on respect for minority rights and to press on
with economic development. Those goals should
continue to serve as priorities and should be promoted
by all parties in accordance with resolution 1244
(1999) and the Constitutional Framework in order to
build a multi-ethnic and tolerant community with a
solid economic foundation and functioning democratic
institutions.

My delegation also expresses its hope that the
parties will deepen their commitment to democratic
values and the rule of law; that the meaningful,
constructive dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina on
practical matters of mutual interest takes place and will
be further expanded to include political issues; and that
concrete results are achieved without much delay.

To conclude, we wish to reiterate our full support
for the "standards before status" policy. Its postulated
targets are essential to the political process designed to
determine Kosovo's future in accordance with
resolution 1244 (1999), establishing a multi-ethnic and
democratic society.

