Mr. Mahugu (Kenya): At the outset, let me state
that my delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution extending the mandate of the United Nations
Preventive Deployment Force (UNPREDEP) for a final
period of nine months, up to 31 August 1998. Kenya is
Security Council 3539111 meeting
Fifty-second year 4 December 1997

proud to have been associated with this important mission
since its inception in 1995, contributing some of our best
military officers as observers. We will continue to support
this and other peacekeeping operations around the world.

The presence of UNPREDEP in the region has
brought about an improvement of the relations between
Macedonia and some of its neighbours. Since their
deployment five years ago, UNPREDEP personnel have
worked hard to prevent the spillover into Macedonia of
conflicts occurring elsewhere in the region. In the process,
UNPREDEP has promoted conflict resolution among the
various political forces and ethnic conununities.

UNPREDEP has also endeavoured to reach out to the
vulnerable segments of society through institution-building
and experience- sharing. As stated in the Secretary-
General's report, these initiatives have played an important

- role in building confidence between the people of the host
country and the mission. Other United Nations missions,
present and future, may wish to benefit from this approach,
which has proved to be effective in creating a good
working environment between the mission and the people
of the host country. In this regard, we wish to thank the
men and women of UNPREDEP for the commitment and
dedication that they have demonstrated in the performance
of their duties.

My delegation welcomes the signing of the joint
statement by the leaders of 11 political parties on three
major issues, ameng them the country's relations with its
neighbours. This is a positive development and is quite
encouraging. However, much more remains to be done in
order to achieve longnterm peace and stability in
Macedonia. Furthermore, peace and stability in Macedonia
will continue to depend largely on developments in other
parts of the region. The slow progress in the
implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, which has underscored the need for a
long-term commitment by the international community in
that country, is a case in point.

We therefore share the views that developments in the
neighbouring countries and the inherent threats they pose
to Macedonia. are unpredictable. For example, the fact that
there are 3,500 Bosnian refugees in Macedonia while only
252 refugees have gone back to Bosnia and Herzegovina
could be an indication of the level of insecurity in that
country for returning refugees.

We support the Secretary-General in his observation
that there is continued need for a long-term commitment by
the international community in Macedonia. In this regard,
we welcome the macroeconomic programmes being put
in place by, among others, the Bretton Woods institutions
and the United Nations Development Programme. These
progratnrnes are critical for Macedonia's long-term
development.

In supporting the final, nine-month extension of
UNPREDEP's mandate, we have taken into account the
fact that the host country itself has requested such an
extension. In addition, the active support and. cooperation
of the host Government and ethnic forces in that country
is commendable. This suggests that the parties in
Macedonia recognize the important role that UNPREDEP
continues to play in preventing the spillover into
Macedonia of conflicts occurring elsewhere in that
region.

