Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I wish to
welcome Foreign Ministers Vuk Jeremie and Enver
Hoxhaj and to thank them for their statements. I also
thank Special Representative Farid Zarif for his
comprehensive briefing.

As the situation in Kosovo over the past few
months - stable yet fragile - has already been
addressed in detail by the Foreign Ministers'
statements and by the Special Representative's
briefing, I will focus my statement on three specific
aspects.

First, there is the will for compromise showed by
Serbian and Kosovo authorities in arranging for Serbs
in Kosovo to vote in Serbian parliamentary and
presidential elections with facilitation by the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), a process that has taken some months to be
finalized and agreed upon. Their cooperative attitude
must be noted and commended, as the event could have
had, and still can have, negative consequences in terms
of security and stability in parts of Kosovo.

We therefore call on Belgrade and Pristina to
continue to fully cooperate with OSCE and other
international actors, as well as on all parties to avoid
any actions or statements that could increase tensions.
The OSCE's involvement in the process must be
sincerely applauded. We also welcome the very
positive role played by the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and the Kosovo
Force in that context.

As to Serbian local elections, in spite of
Belgrade's decision not to hold them in Kosovo, two
municipalities in northern Kosovo nevertheless held
them. We note very positively the Serbian authorities'
statements that the results would not be recognized, as
well as Kosovo authorities' restraint on the matter.

Secondly, there is a need for clearer and more
effective application of the agreements reached on
different issues through the Belgrade-Pristina dialogue.
As Portugal and others have recurrently advocated, that
dialogue is paramount for the achievement of progress
between Serbia and Kosovo in areas essentially
pertaining to everyday life for thousands of people. Not
only the international community and the European
Union, but also - first and foremost - the two parties
themselves must not allow the momentum to be lost.
We therefore call upon the parties to renew their efforts
to achieve an understanding on the practical aspects of
the implementation of the various agreements. Progress
in this regard can further relations between Serbia and
Kosovo and the European perspectives of each. We
expect the dialogue to be resumed in full after the
Serbian elections.

Thirdly, Portugal deeply regrets and condemns
reported attempts to damage Serbian religious,
historical and cultural heritage in Kosovo. This is not,
as some might be led to believe, a minor issue; it looms
large on the overall situation in Kosovo and can turn
underlying tensions into open clashes. It is incumbent
on the Kosovo authorities to protect such heritage, and
all efforts must be undertaken - supported by
international forces if necessary - for its safeguarding
as the responsibility for their security is transferred to
the Kosovo Police.

Finally, allow me to briefly address the report on
the activities of EULEX, particularly in regard to the
activity of the Special Investigative Task Force. As a
matter of principle, we have always maintained that
opacity and impunity are obstacles to lasting peace. In
this sense, Portugal commends the efforts already
undertaken by EULEX, and welcomes the recent
activity of the lead prosecutor and head of the Special
Investigative Task Force. Portugal takes note of the
reported level of willingness to cooperate on the part of
all quarters contacted so far by the lead prosecutor,
notably from the Albanian Government, which has
taken positive steps in offering to cooperate with the
Task Force, the Serbian War Crimes Prosecutor and the
lead prosecutor of the International Tribunal for the
former Yugoslavia. Portugal supports the work carried
out by the Task Force and considers that it is through
thorough, transparent and comprehensive
investigations that the truth behind those horrifying
allegations can be fully uncovered. That must be the
wish we all share.

Serbia has been granted candidate status to
European Union accession in early March. Portugal is
proud to have been at the forefront of the promotion of
this step, which we believe is not only deserved by
Serbia, but also necessary for the regional stability and
prosperity that we associate with European integration.
This is, we hope, a decisive step towards the
progressive complete integration of the Western
Balkans into the European Union. As regards Kosovo,
we note positively the recent launch by the European
Commission of a feasibility study for a stabilization
and association agreement between the European
Union and Kosovo, thus opening an important phase in
their relations.

