Mr. Negroponte (United States of America): We
are delighted, Sir, that you are presiding over our
Council meeting today. We also want to thank Under-
Secretary-General Guehenno for his comprehensive
briefing.

We were pleased to join the Council last Friday in
supporting the presidential statement welcoming
Special Representative Holkeri's "Standards for
Kosovo" paper and a review mechanism to assess
Kosovo's progress towards meeting the eight
internationally endorsed standards. We look forward to
the rapid completion of the implementation plan, which
will provide specific and measurable benchmarks and
indicators for achieving the standards.

It is important to stress that only when substantial
progress towards meeting the standards has been
made - as outlined in the standards for Kosovo and
the implementation plan - can the international
community begin to address the question of Kosovo's
future status. If the comprehensive review called for by
mid-2005 determines that Kosovo's progress in
achieving the standards is insufficient, then another
review date will be set. The international community
stands ready to assist Kosovo in that endeavour.

In order to keep the focus on achieving the
standards, there should be no decision on process or
outcomes of status discussions until the standards are
met. Such a transparent approach to handling Kosovo's
future status will give an incentive to Kosovo to make
real progress on the standards. At the same time, it will
guarantee that the outcome of Kosovo's future status
can be determined only in the overall context of
resolution 1244 (1999).

It is important now for Kosovo's Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government to focus on achieving
the standards. As a first step, we call upon all parties to
resume a direct dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina. Such a dialogue is one of the eight standards,
and it can provide tangible benefits for citizens of both
Kosovo and Serbia in the areas of transportation,
energy, missing persons and internally displaced people
and refugee returns.

Previous Council meetings on Kosovo have
focused on the series of violent attacks that occurred in
late summer, which targeted primarily members of the
minority Serb community and law enforcement
officials of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We are troubled that, yet
again, we must address this issue. The deadly 24
November 2003 attack against three Kosovo police
service officers, and the recent attack in North
Mitrovica, against Prime Minister Rexhepi and
international representatives, are the latest examples of
violence that endangers the future of Kosovo. We call
upon all in Kosovo to refrain from violence. We
reiterate the need to work within the legitimate
institutions of Kosovo to address political grievances.

We call upon law enforcement officials in Kosovo
to redouble their efforts to find the perpetrators of these
violent incidents. In particular, we also call upon the
citizens of Kosovo to cooperate with the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) and the Kosovo Police Service in their
investigations of these crimes. To meet the standards
and to ensure respect for the rule of law, substantial
progress must be made in solving murders and assaults
against members of ethnic minorities and law
enforcement officials.

Although Kosovo has made notable progress in
achieving a multi-ethnic democracy, much remains to
be done. The United States remains committed to
standards before status, and looks forward to assisting
UNMIK and the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government in their effort to implement Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999).

