Mr. Corr (Ireland): I, like others, would like to
say how glad we are to see you, Sir, presiding over our
deliberations again today. I should also like to very
warmly praise the dynamic and at all times courteous
and efficient leadership by Colombia - Ambassador
Valdivieso and everyone involved in the Colombian
team - of the Council over the past month. It was a
presidency marked at all times not only by efficiency
but by consideration of different viewpoints and
courtesy, thereby contributing greatly to the work of
the Council this month. My delegation has greatly
appreciated it.

I would also like to thank the presidency for this
wrap-up discussion; it is a very useful and worthwhile
initiative. Held periodically, it can allow the Council to
take stock of the issues before it and of its approach to
them. We therefore welcome it. I would also like to say
that we found very valuable three particular themes
that have been mentioned by other members this
morning - these were referred to in the paper
circulated before the meeting.

The first was the Princeton Club discussion on
regional approaches to conflict management in Africa.
Events such as that allow for an intellectual analysis
and a conceptual approach to issues that can often be
lost in the day-to-day details, and we felt that it was
very useful.

My delegation would also very much like to
welcome the open debate held earlier this month on
small arms that led to the presidential statement we
have just adopted, and also to congratulate the
presidency on concluding work on the resolution on
conflict prevention, in which, of course, Bangladesh
was instrumental at an earlier stage, as it was
throughout the process, in advancing the issue.

The point has rightly been made that all
presidencies are interconnected. That theme emerged
this month. Clarity of focus was provided by the
presidency as we approached our work, in particular on
issues such as East Timor and Kosovo, in view of the
impending elections; the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, which we discussed yesterday; and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, which we discussed
following the Framework Agreement of 13 August.
That led to a presidential statement of support, which
my delegation warmly welcomed.

In the context of the discussion on the Middle
East, which was mentioned by several earlier speakers,
Ireland felt that it was fully appropriate for the Council
to hold the discussion, given the circumstances and the
fact that members - and other Member States - were
given the opportunity to state their views on the
situation. We heard many constructive statements
during the debate. We share the View that it was
unfortunate that the Council was unable to speak
collectively on the matter.

In terms of procedure, I would like to echo briefly
two or three points that have already been made. First,
my delegation welcomes the increasing practice by the
Secretariat, which we experienced several times this
month, of producing more written material in advance
of meetings and restricting the oral presentations to
providing, in general terms, an overview of the
situation. This is especially relevant in the case of
particular agenda items that appear regularly -
monthly, in terms of the Council agenda. We would
also tend to favour, if it were possible, the provision in
advance of more detailed briefing notes, which at times
might allow the Council to deal with issues more
rapidly. This is not in any sense a criticism - we find
the notes very helpful. Such a practice would be a
purely procedural measure that would, perhaps, allow
more substantive contributions by Council members
and also enable the issue to be dealt with at times more
expeditiously, given the number of speakers on many
issues.
Secondly - and this has arisen before in our
consideration of procedure - it is clear that certain
items need not be addressed every month.

My delegation has taken the View that, as a
general rule, items should be addressed only when
there is something specific to report on. Otherwise,
they can be dealt with under any other business. This
was also a feature of this month, and it is something
that we welcomed.

In conclusion, there is always - each month, but
beyond that, in the ongoing work of the Council and in
the interconnection between presidencies - a balance
of substance and procedure. It is not always easy to
achieve the right balance. We felt that this balance was
achieved this month. For that reason, we warmly
congratulate the presidency.

