Mr. Chungong Ayafor (Cameroon) (spoke in French): Cameroon welcomes the convening today, at
the request of the Government of Papua New Guinea,
of this public meeting on the situation in Bougainville.
We appreciate the excellent briefing given by Mr.
Sinclair, who brought to our attention some very useful
information on recent developments in the peace
process in Bougainville. We welcome also the
important information given to us by the representative
of Papua New Guinea. These briefings are testimony to
the unstoppable momentum of the peace process.
However, challenges remain with respect to the
establishment in Bougainville of an autonomous
Government and to the holding of a referendum.

The completion of stage II of the weapons
disposal process on 30 July last represents a significant
step towards peace. We welcome the firm commitment
of all the parties to this conflict, since the signing of
the Lincoln ceasefire agreement, to work to restore
peace and in particular to develop a new political
dynamic on the island - one that is more respectful of
the character and of the deep-seated convictions of the
185,000 men and women of Bougainville.

The excellent work of UNPOB remains vital to
achieving this objective. We also appreciate the
manifold and valuable role played to date by Mr.
Sinclair, Head of UNPOB, and his team, particularly in
speeding up weapons collection and helping to promote
the constitutional process and to better inform the
people of the stakes involved.

Regarding the Government of Papua New
Guinea, its commitment to peace has recently been
reflected in a number of actions and initiatives, which
we View very favourably. Such is the case of the
withdrawal, with the help of Australia, of the national
Defence Force from Bougainville; of the participation,
which we View positively, of the Government of Papua
New Guinea in the Bougainville constitutional
consultation process; and, above all, of the respect for
the terms of the memorandum of understanding that
envisages a mechanism for consultation between them
on all aspects of implementation of the autonomy
arrangements.

We also particularly appreciate the excellent work
done by the States members of the Peace Monitoring
Group (PMG), which have contributed to stability and
to restoring confidence in the peace process over the
past five years.

The creation on the margins of the 30 June 2003
Sydney, Australia, meeting of Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of the Pacific Islands Forum of the
Bougainville Transition Team, which broadly inherits
the competencies and means of the PMG, gives us the
assurance that the risk that the peace process will break
down is under control. In that regard, we wish to
commend the Pacific States, particularly Australia,
New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, Fiji and Vanuatu, for
their noteworthy commitment to peace in Bougainville.
We call on them to continue those efforts in order to
accompany that province towards peace and
development.

But to achieve that, the population of
Bougainville will need to give the international
community further indications of its will for peace. In
fact, the success of coming stages depends mainly on
that will and on that commitment to peace, as is only
proper.

Concluding the constitutional process;
completing stage III of weapons disposal, which should
lead to a final decision on the fate of the weapons
collected in stage II; and the holding of elections
leading to the establishment of an autonomous
Government: those are all steps that urgently involve
the people of Bougainville. For our part, we are certain
that they will be able to meet those challenges within a
time frame that is in keeping with the UNPOB
mandate, which will end on 31 December 2003.
However, we must not lose sight of the fact that the
ultimate objectives of the entire peace process are the
development and the well-being of the people of
Bougainville.

Until now emphasis has been placed on the
political aspects of the process. The parties to the
conflict, the international community and the various
parties must make more of a commitment in the future
to economic processes, without which peace and
stability would be illusory. Therefore, the programme
for the reintegration of former combatants will need to
be a priority task if we wish to maintain, throughout
the transition, a spirit of consensus that takes account
of the particular situation of the parties and that
ensures a climate of law and order. We welcome the
actions already taken in that regard by the donor
community, and the United Nations Development
Programme particularly.

Peace in Bougainville is possible. It is within our
grasp. One last effort is necessary to achieve it, and we
are confident that the people of Bougainville and the
international community will be able to achieve it,
transforming this challenge into a new success for
peace and development.

