The United Arab Emirates thanks the delegation of the Niger for organizing today's meeting on the important topic of the role of the International Organization of la Francophonie (OIF). My country is proud that its status was elevated from observer member to associate member by a unanimous decision of the States members of the OIF at la Francophonie's summit in Yerevan in October 2018. The importance of regional organizations in promoting peace and security and preventing conflict has been widely recognized by the international community. Regional organizations have a unique advantage over outside organizations in their better understanding of the peace and security challenges arising in their own regions. The geographical proximity and close historical and cultural ties among their members give regional organizations a distinct ability to play a constructive role in the pursuit of peaceful solutions to conflicts. The United Arab Emirates applauds the commendable efforts by the International Organization of la Francophonie in support of United Nations initiatives undertaken to tackle challenges in French- speaking countries. In the light of today's debate, the United Arab Emirates would like to make three recommendations. First, the Security Council should strengthen its cooperation with regional organizations in the area of preventive diplomacy in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. We have seen success stories in this regard, particularly with regional organizations on the African continent, including, most recently, the decisive role played by the Economic Community of West African States in the Gambia. Swift action by regional organizations in response to early-warning signs is not only one of the most effective ways of addressing peace and security issues, but it is also the most cost-effective, considering the significant drain on United Nations resources when the Organization has to enter conflict-management mode. Secondly, we encourage continued progress in enhancing consultation and coordination between the United Nations and regional organizations on peacekeeping. We welcome the recent collaboration between the Department of Peace Operations, the Department of Operational Support and the OIF aimed at building the capacity of peacekeepers and promoting multilingualism in field operations. The OIF has been an important advocate for increased participation of women in peacekeeping and peacebuilding. To that end, the United Arab Emirates has been playing its part by providing multilingual training to female military officers from countries in Asia and Africa, including French-speaking countries. This commitment reflects our conviction that more women peacekeepers means more effective peacekeeping. The United Arab Emirates was also proud to co-sponsor resolution 2538 (2020), which the Security Council adopted last month. Thirdly, we believe that regional organizations should step up their efforts aimed at mainstreaming and highlighting the positive work of young people on issues of peace and security. In this regard, we commend the work of the OIF in supporting youth networks involved in conflict prevention and peacebuilding. Indeed, the meaningful inclusion of youth in decision-making processes not only leads to a more peaceful and dynamic society, but also provides alternatives to the cycles of extremism and violence that have ensnared many countries. My country's record in empowering youth stands as a testament to how youth can form the cornerstone for an open, tolerant and thriving society. Finally, the United Arab Emirates reaffirms its strong commitment to continuing to support cooperation with regional and international mechanisms so as to achieve our shared goal of global peace, security and prosperity for the benefit of all humankind. It is only through a truly global partnership that we can find political solutions to the world's long-standing or protracted conflicts.
