Miss Durrant (Jamaica): My delegation joins in
welcoming the High Representative for the
Implementation of the Peace Agreement in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We wish to thank him for his very
enlightening briefing. We also found his report to the
Secretary-General extremely useful and informative.

While we appreciate that there have been several
positive developments, it is clear that much remains to be
done. In his statement to the Council last November the
High Representative focused, inter alia, on the issues of
property, the development of election law and common
institutions, and their implications for the promotion of
the national interests of a sovereign State. Today he drew
our attention to the areas of economic reform, the
acceleration of the return of refugees and displaced
persons, and the consolidation of institutions.

When looked at as a whole, Mr. Petritsch's two
presentations and his written reports indicate that the
Office of the High Representative and other organizations
responsible for the implementation of the Dayton accords
are faced with monumental challenges, particularly as
they relate to entrenching a multi-ethnic society with
multi-ethnic institutions. My delegation fully recognizes
that success is contingent upon the cooperation of the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina and their leaders, as
well as on the continued commitment and support of the
international community. We therefore need to re-

 

emphasize our expectation that the political will expressed
at Dayton will be followed up in practice.

My delegation believes that peace and stability in
Bosnia and Herzegovina are inextricably linked to peaceful
coexistence and reconciliation. Without these, efforts at
long-term sustainable economic development will not
succeed. The implementation of the New York Declaration
of 15 November 1999 is, in my delegation's view, central
to the process currently under way in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. In that declaration, commitment to the
Dayton-Paris accords was reaffirmed, as was commitment
to the establishment of a permanent election law and to the
creation of a national passport and of the framework for the
State Border Service. We note that some efforts have been
undertaken in respect of the permanent secretariat.
Regrettably, there has been limited progress in other areas;
indeed, the implementation of the State Border Service had
to be imposed in January by the Office of the High
Representative.

My delegation would wish to hear more about the
laws on asylum and immigration and on refugees and
displaced persons that were passed by the Parliament in
November 1999. And we ask whether these laws have
contributed to the development of a proper legal framework
on refugees and displaced persons.

My delegation is pleased that the second municipal
elections were held, as scheduled, in April. This should
have a positive impact on the democratic process in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and should increase the accountability of
politicians to the electorate. This, we hope, will lay the
groundwork for the eventual development of a multi-ethnic
national government.

We believe that the consolidation of efficient State
institutions is of fundamental importance to the long-term
development of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and we are
therefore concerned at the slow pace of the adoption of
legislation, as noted in the High Representative's report.

Jamaica continues to attach importance to the rule of
law and judicial reform. There have been positive
developments in judicial reform, particularly the move
towards the creation of an independent and impartial
judiciary through the completion of laws regulating the
selection of judges and prosecutors. The cooperation of all
the relevant domestic organs in Bosnia and Herzegovina is
of critical importance in these reform efforts. Training is
also important and must be one of the pillars of judicial
reform. In this regard, we note the efforts of the Office of
the High Representative to promote the establishment of
a nationwide structure for judicial training, and we would
be interested in hearing more about the work of the joint
advisory board which was formed under the auspices of
the Council of Europe in February of this year.

We believe that judicial reform and the restructuring
of the police force are linked. In order to effectively
promote the rule of law, the judiciary and the police force
must work in tandem. It is therefore encouraging to note
that there has been movement towards a multi-ethnic
police force, as we were advised at the open briefing of
the Council in March. These efforts must continue. At the
same time, the issues of trafficking in persons and of
domestic violence have to be forcefully addressed.

My delegation also wishes to emphasize the
importance that we attach to the cooperation between the
Office of the High Representative and the International
Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia. This has
resulted in the apprehension of several individuals. We
hope that the lack of funding will not delay action on
missing persons and on exhumations.

It is encouraging to note that the rate of minority
returns has increased. We recognize the efforts that are
being made to create the conditions necessary for the
reintegration of refugees and returnees. One example is
the property law implementation plan launched in October
1999. We urge that efforts at depoliticization of the
process continue, and we commend the Office of the
High Representative, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, among others, for
their work in seeking to remove impediments to the return
and reintegration of refugees and internally displaced
persons.

We are, however, concerned at reports of obstruction
to minority returns and urge the Office of the High
Representative to continue to target political interventions
to unlock refugee potential. The establishment of effective
mechanisms that will allow returnees to restore their
property and occupancy rights and their access to personal
documents is essential and should be actively pursued.
The inclusion of returnees in reconstruction programmes
in a non-discriminatory manner must also remain a
priority.

As the High Representative reminded us, jobs and a
secure economic future are increasingly important issues
for the ordinary citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is

 

therefore of concern to my delegation that problems of
unemployment, education and administrative integration
remain, and we hope that these will be actively addressed
in the coming months. Programmes of capacity-building
and technical assistance will undoubtedly be useful in
helping returnees and internally displaced persons to
integrate.

We were interested to learn from the Secretary-
General' 5 latest report that the United Nations Development
Programme has been seeking to secure funds to support a
three-year framework for capacity-building and technical
assistance and has also been involved in the village
employment and environment programmes. We would
appreciate hearing from the High Representative about
progress in capacity-building, as we believe that this will be
the only real foundation for the creation of an enabling
environment.

Finally, my delegation wishes to express its support
for the work of the High Representative, the United Nations
and other organizations in Bosnia and Herzegovina and we
encourage them to continue their efforts to restore peace
and stability and to promote sustainable development.

