Mr. Al Bayati (Iraq): Allow me at the outset,
Mr. President, to congratulate you on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council this month. I
am confident that your wisdom and competence will
continue to contribute to the success of the Council. I
would also like to extend my thanks to your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of the
Russian Federation, for his wise leadership in steering
the Council's work last month.

I would like to add my voice to that of all
member States in welcoming the statement of the
Under-Secretary-General, Mr. Pascoe, and the
statement of Ambassador Khalilzad on behalf of the
multinational force in Iraq - MNF-I.

My delegation has considered the report of the
Secretary-General on the activities of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), as
contained in document S/2008/266. I would like to take
this opportunity to express appreciation for the role
played by the Mission, led by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, to assist the people and the Government of
Iraq. We wish him success in his duties.

My delegation would like to make the following
comments on the development in Iraq during the past
three months.

We have seen during this last period the
ratification of important laws such as the Justice and
Accountability Law, which replaced the
de-baathification law and has helped the reconciliation
process. In February, the Council of Representatives
endorsed the Iraqi General Amnesty Law and the law
of the provincial councils' authorities and approved the
general budget of 2008. The implementation of the
Amnesty Law is one of the main elements in the
attempt to move towards national reconciliation and to
create an atmosphere of stability and to restore security
in Iraq. It has also provided a new impetus to the
political process and a strong incentive to re-shape the
map of Iraq.

It should be noted that the relevant Iraqi
authorities, in cooperation with the judicial authorities,
are working continuously to examine the files of
detainees, including in Amnesty Law, and to follow the
rehabilitation of those who were released. Dozens of
investigative committees have been set up to work
intensively on the implementation of the Amnesty Law
and to expedite the release of those included in it and
to allow their return to their families and communities
to participate in rebuilding their country. Of the 37,000
detainees under custody of United States and Iraqi
forces and who are included in the Amnesty Law,
28,242 have been released in the period since the
enforcement of the Amnesty Law began in February up
to 10 April.

Concerning the approval of Iraq's 2008 budget,
which amounted to $48 billion, the Iraqi Government
will issue a supplementary budget at the end of June to
add $5 billion, due to the increased income of Iraq as a
result of the high prices of 011. That will contribute to

08-3196]
enhancing the State's ability to provide basic services
to Iraqi citizens and to support displaced families, to
strengthening the subsidies of those included in the
social welfare network and to carrying out
reconstruction projects.

We must point out that Iraq has ratified the
United Nations Convention against Corruption, and,
under the auspices of the United Nations, an anti-
corruption convention was held in Baghdad in March
2008, where the Iraqi Government said that the danger
of corruption is no less than that of terrorism to the
reconstruction of Iraq.

With regard to the Iraqi Government's efforts to
improve the living standards and alleviate the burdens
of Iraqi citizens, the Council of Representatives has
passed a law to increase salaries of all State and public-
sector employees to ensure better living standards for
all Iraqis.

The Council of Ministers has also launched a
series of initiatives to create new job opportunities that
contribute to the revitalization of economic activity
and address the problem of unemployment - for
example, by providing small and soft loans to citizens.
For that purpose, the Government has allocated
$60 million to each governorate and $100 million each
to Baghdad, Mosul and Basra. Those initiatives also
include expanding the network of those covered by
social protection programmes, for which the Cabinet
has decided to create 130,000 jobs, which should be
filled by the end of May 2008. That is in addition to the
2,000 job opportunities provided by the Ministry for
the Environment in its demining campaign.

With regard to the Iraqi Government's efforts to
assist Iraqi refugees and internally displaced persons,
the Ministry for Displacement and Migration, in
coordination and cooperation with the High
Commissioner for Refugees, is working to provide
assistance to them. I would like to take this opportunity
to express our sincere appreciation for the efforts made
by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). The
Government has announced the allocation of grants in
the amount of ID150,000, for a period of six months,
for families forcibly displaced from their homes. The
Government has also begun to establish 300 housing
units in the province of Al-Amara, which are to be
distributed to displaced families. The Iraqi Government
has an initiative in place with UNHCR to develop a

08-3196]
national strategy to assist Iraqi refugees in
neighbouring countries, and it has also pledged to
provide the appropriate atmosphere to secure the return
of Iraqis to their country to participate in the
reconstruction process. In that regard, I would like to
express our gratitude to the countries hosting Iraqi
refugees. We stress our keenness to make every effort
to normalize the situation in Iraq and provide the
appropriate atmosphere to secure their return.

My delegation would like to highlight the
development of the security situation throughout Iraq
in the light of recent military operations carried out by
the Iraqi armed forces. The Iraqi Government is
determined to limit weapons to the hands of the
Government, disband militias and ensure that there is
no army except for the Iraqi army. It is also determined
to continue to pursue gangs, outlaws and terrorists who
have not laid down their arms, in order to eliminate all
criminal activities.

At the same time, the Iraqi Government reiterates
its position: to rely on the rational political dialogue
required for reconciliation and to ease the political
tension. It has called upon all those who take up
weapons against the Government and civilians to lay
down their weapons and to allow Iraqi citizens to live
freely in their country. It has also emphasized that it
will not hesitate to pursue all criminals who threaten
civilians.

My Government stresses that the recent military
operation carried out by the Iraqi armed forces is a
message to all outlaws that they can no longer be
above the law. The Government is determined to fight
to prevent their activities of murder, robbery, assault on
public assets, oil smuggling, organized crime, the
infiltration of Government agencies and the spread of
corruption at many levels.

The Iraqi Government emphasizes that those
operations do not target any particular political current,
but rather are a message to the world in general and to
the Iraqi people in particular. That message reflects the
justice and neutrality of the Iraqi Government and its
non-sectarian orientation in punishing all outlaws and
sustaining those who abide by State law.

The recent military operations had the support of
the Iraqi people and all political blocs, which stood
firmly with the Government and its various security
agencies in response to the militias and outlaws
regardless of their affiliation. They valued the role
played by the security forces to enforce law and order
in Basra and other provinces. That is a significant
development in the political process towards
strengthening national unity and establishing
democratic life.

Nevertheless, the Government will continue to
devote its efforts and resources to relieving the troubled
areas subjected to military operations and to work
towards improving basic services for all people in
various regions and provinces. The Council of Ministers
has decided to allocate $350 million for the provinces of
Baghdad, Basra and Mosul, to support service projects.
One hundred million dollars has also been allocated to
support service projects in Sadr City, as well as
$50 million for the Al-Shaala district of Baghdad.

At the political level, my Government is
determined to bring into being a Government of
national unity on a nationally agreed upon basis. The
immediate return of the various political blocs that have
withdrawn will accelerate the formation of the national
unity Government. Despite difficulties and challenges,
the political process is moving forward, democratic
transformation, positive political developments and
co-existence among the Iraqi people will all pave the
way for reconstruction projects in Iraq.

After all the wars, the deterioration in the security
situation and the destruction of infrastructure, it is
important to recognize the efforts of the Awakening
Councils and the tribes and their significant and
effective role with the Iraqi security forces in order to
provide protection to troubled areas, reduce violence in
Iraq and undermine the acts of Al-Qaida and other
terrorist groups in Iraq. The Iraqi Government has
pledged to integrate eligible members of the
Awakening Council into Iraqi security forces, in
accordance with a Government plan.

With regard to the national reconciliation process,
the Iraqi Government has announced that that approach
is not so much a political slogan as a comprehensive
strategic vision to reconstruct Government agencies on
a correct basis. The process will emphasize the culture
of dialogue and tolerance and the process of
renouncing disagreement and moving on from the past.

The national reconciliation process has resulted
in the formation of 49 supporting councils. Thirteen
councils are yet to be established in a number of Iraq's
provinces and cities that used to be hot spots. The
councils receive full support from the Government.

Reconciliation efforts have led to containing
more than 35,000 former members of armed groups
and Al-Qaida. Today they are participating in the
Awakening Councils side by side with the Iraqi armed
forces, in order to establish security and stability. The
Government has provided the injured members of the
councils with special grants, in addition to the
retirement rights that are given to members of the
security agencies.

Also, the Government has reinstated more than
98,000 members of the former army to serve in the
current army and guaranteed the right to retire to more
than 21,000 members. Retirement funds have been
granted to more than 48,000 members of dismantled
agencies. Moreover, 5,000 job opportunities to work in
various civilian agencies were created for former
members of the military-industrial sector with
postgraduate degrees.

The past few months have witnessed increased
regional activity as regards the situation in Iraq. In
addition to the expanded meeting of Iraq's
neighbouring countries held in Kuwait on 22 April
2008, the three working groups - concerning security,
energy and refugees - that emerged from the Sharm
el-Sheikh meeting have met in Damascus, Istanbul and
Amman. All those meetings supported the efforts of the
Iraqi Government to establish security and stability,
disband and disarm the militias and confront terrorism,
which threatens several countries in the region. Such a
threat requires collective efforts to confront its dangers
and consequences.

The victory in Iraq and our country's war against
violence and terrorism will not be confined to Iraq
alone, but will also enhance the security and stability
of the entire region. The Prime Minister of Iraq
addressed the Kuwait meeting with a message
requesting all neighbouring countries to increase their
efforts to prevent the infiltration of terrorists into Iraq
and to eliminate their sources of funding. The Prime
Minister further requested the forgiveness of debts and
a reduction in the percentage of compensation in order
to send a positive message to the Iraqi people: that
brotherly countries have the genuine intention to assist
them in overcoming the obstacles and difficulties they
are facing and in expediting the execution of
reconstruction projects.

It should be noted that more than 30 friendly

countries - members and non-members of the Paris
08-3196]
Club alike - have cancelled Iraq debts totalling

$23 billion. We hope that our Arab brothers will take
the initiative to cancel Iraq's debts to them, following
the example set by Iraq's other friends. The Prime
Minister also called upon brotherly Arab countries to
reinstate their diplomatic relations with Iraq, given that
there are more than 45 diplomatic missions, consulates
and international organizations operating in Iraq. The
Prime Minister expressed the readiness of the Iraqi
Government to provide security and protection for all
diplomatic missions and their personnel.

Iraq considers the agreement reached at the
Kuwait meeting to hold the next neighbours' meeting
in Baghdad to be among the positive indications that
the Government of Iraq is capable of hosting such an
important event and of providing all the measures
required.

Iraq welcomes the willingness of the brotherly
State of Kuwait to start bilateral consultations with the
Iraqi Government under the umbrella of the United
Nations Compensation Commission regarding the
amount of $24 billion remaining after finalization of
the payment of environmental compensation. The
Government of Iraq considers this intention to be a step
in the right direction on the part of our brothers in
Kuwait, taking into consideration what is stated in
paragraph 21 of resolution 1483 (2003): that the
Security Council

"[d]ecides further that 5 per cent of the
proceeds referred to in paragraph 20 above shall
be deposited into the Compensation Fund
established in accordance with resolution 687
(1991) and subsequent relevant resolutions and
that, unless an internationally recognized,
representative government of Iraq and the
Governing Council of the United Nations
Compensation Commission, in the exercise of its
authority over methods of ensuring that payments
are made into the Compensation Fund, decide
otherwise, this requirement shall be binding on a
properly constituted, internationally recognized,
representative government of Iraq and any
successor thereto".

Allow me to emphasize that Iraq is positively
looking forward to the International Compact meeting

08-3196]
that will be hosted by Sweden on 29 May 2008 for the
purpose of mobilizing the efforts of the international
community to promote development in Iraq and to
review the attainment of commitments made by Iraq
and the international community.

Furthermore, we would like to stress the vital role
that is being played by the United Nations in Iraq, in
accordance with resolution 1770 (2007), in achieving
the advancement of political dialogue and national
reconciliation in a manner that would contribute to the
fulfilment of the Iraq Compact and assist Iraq in
achieving its national vision.

The Stockholm conference will be an important
forum in which to review economic and political
developments in Iraq and future prospects conducive to
assisting the reconstruction process.

In 2007 and 2008, the Iraqi Government settled
$23 billion of the total external debt burden of
$75 billion. The Government seeks to settle its debt in
accordance with the pledges made at the Sharm
el-Sheikh meeting in May 2007. Iraq's economy grew
by 10.4 per cent during 2007. The International
Monetary Fund estimates that in December 2007
consumer price inflation had stabilized at 20 per cent,
down from 64.8 per cent in December 2006.

Allow me in conclusion to highlight the request
of my Government for the support of the international
community in putting an end to, and preventing,
foreign interference in Iraq's internal affairs, which
destabilizes the country and has a negative impact on
its security. I would like also to express my
appreciation to all countries that continue to support
Iraq, to those that have not closed their missions in Iraq
and to those that have reopened their embassies, such
as the Kingdom of Bahrain, which has announced that
it will send its ambassador to Baghdad in the near
future. I invite all friendly and brotherly countries to
reopen their missions in Iraq and to continue their
relations with the Iraqi people.

