Mr. Sparber (Liechtenstein): I thank you, Madam
President, for this opportunity to address this important
topic in an open debate. We welcome the fact that a
new Security Council resolution (resolution 2462 (2019)) provides an updated basis for the prevention
and countering of the financing of terrorism. At the
same time, we would like to put our view on record
that open debates should inform the drafting process,
and therefore be conducted before the adoption of a
resolution as a way of increasing accountability and
inclusion of the wider membership.

Liechtenstein is steadfast in its commitment to
ensure that its financial centre is not involved in any
form of criminal activity. The prevention and countering
of terrorist financing remains a top priority. Strong
domestic legislation must be promoted. Well-funded
and operationally independent financial intelligence
units are instrumental in the effective implementation
of such legislation.

The Liechtenstein financial intelligence unit has
been the backbone of our domestic efforts to counter
terrorism financing over the past 16 years. As part of its
activities, the Liechtenstein unit, through the Egmont
Group of Financial Intelligence Units, assists other
countries in increasing the capacities of their units,
appreciating that capacity-building is a vital component
in the joint global effort to curb terrorism financing.
Liechtenstein, as a member of the Committee of
Experts on the Evaluation of Anti-Money-Laundering
Measures and the Financing of Terrorism, also
underlines the importance of properly resourced FATF-
style regional bodies.

Liechtenstein is particularly alarmed by the
growing link between terrorism, human trafficking and
modern slavery. Human trafficking and slavery-related
crimes are increasingly employed as a terrorist tactic
and as a fundraising instrument for terrorist groups.
The Security Council has recognized that link by listing
human traffickers under the sanctions regime of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya. Liechtenstein
supports a more consistent practice in that regard and
encourages further discussion, including on a possible
thematic sanctions regime.
In order to tackle modern slavery and human
trafficking, Liechtenstein - together with its partners,
Australia and the United Nations University - has
launched a financial sector commission, also known as
the Liechtenstein initiative. That was partly in response
to the Council's appeal for collaboration between
States and the financial sector in the fight against
these crimes. In the commission, actors from retail
banks, hedge funds, global regulators, institutional
investors and survivors, as well as the United Nations
and the anti-slavery movement, are brought together to
elaborate actionable measures for the global financial
sector. The outcome of the work of the Liechtenstein
initiative will be presented during high-level week
in September.

We are keenly aware that the increased use of new
technologies, in particular blockchain, provides both
risks and opportunities in the fight against terrorism
financing. Liechtenstein is currently introducing a
regulatory framework in this area, including ensuring
that existing and future due diligence standards are
applied to new technologies with a view to avoiding legal
and regulatory gaps. Liechtenstein also continues to
strongly advocate for upholding rule-of-law standards,
human rights law and international humanitarian law
when countering terrorism.

We appreciate the work of the Ombudsperson for
the sanctions regime ofthe Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011)
and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL (Da'esh) Al-Qaida
and associated individuals groups undertakings and
entities. We support the institutional strengthening
and expansion of the office to other sanctions regimes.
The Council also has a responsibility to ensure that its
sanctions do not unduly restrict humanitarian action.
The Council's policy in that regard remains sketchy
and inconsistent. We share the concerns that certain
provisions of Security Council resolutions may lead to
the de facto or dejure obstruction of humanitarian action.

Liechtenstein encourages the Council to issue
consistent guidance to States to avoid unintended
consequences in the implementation of its resolutions
and to adopt a more coherent approach to ensure that
humanitarian actors are given the necessary space
to operate.
