The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a brief statement in my national capacity.

I should like to ask Mr. Mladenov to convey to
the Secretary-General, who had to leave the Chamber
because of other commitments, that he could not have
done more in 10 years. He has tried everything. He
maintained innumerable contacts with the parties and
we share his assessment.

Spain too will be leaving the Security Council in
two weeks. I will therefore provide a brief summary
of our position and what we are currently concerned
about.

We are concerned that the Knesset is considering a
draft law to legalize outposts in East Jerusalem and the
West Bank. We are concerned about the expansion of

settlements and the demolition of Palestinian structures.
We are also concerned about the terrorist violence and
incitement to the use of force. Lastly, our understanding
is that reconciliation at the intra-Palestinian level is
essential if we are to reactivate the peace process.

Our commitment - Spain's commitment i to
peace in Palestine has no expiration date. It began with
the Madrid Conference in 1991, and we have continued
to work since then. The most recent example of this
was the summit of religious leaders of the Middle East,
which was held in Alicante on 15 and 16 November.
I am pleased to say that this was a success and that a
press release was adopted that represented an important
step forward for tolerance and mutual respect. When
we leave the Security Council, we will continue to take
initiatives of this kind.

Over the past two years, at no time have we lost
hope that the peace process could be unblocked, nor did
we resign ourselves to seeing the Security Council fail
to play a role in this process. Peace, as many have said,

can be the only outcome of direct bilateral negotiations
and the support of the international community can be
a key factor. For that reason, we support the various
initiatives currently under way, in particular the French
initiative and the work of the Quartet. We also reiterate
the importance of the Arab Peace Initiative. Any action
in the Security Council must take this context into
account.

Like other representatives, we note that behind
all the Security Council's initiatives there is a will to
preserve the two States and that there is a clear feeling
that the settlements are among the main threats. I
shall therefore conclude by saying that I trust that the
Security Council can give effect to concrete action
before Spain leaves the Council.

I resume my functions as President of the Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers.

The meeting rose at 11.55 am.
