Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): Let me begin by
thanking you, Mr. President, for scheduling this open
meeting on Guinea-Bissau, thereby providing a clear
demonstration of your commitment and that of the
Council to the need to improve the situation in Guinea-
Bissau. I would also like to thank Mr. David Stephen
for his comprehensive briefing on the situation in
Guinea-Bissau. We had an opportunity to benefit from
his experience on the ground last Tuesday during the
meeting of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa, in which the
Economic and Social Council's Ad Hoc Advisory
Group on Guinea-Bissau and the Group of Friends also
participated. All of them have contributed to this
meeting this morning. I commend them for the good
work they are doing for the people of Guinea-Bissau. I
also wish to commend the United Nations Peace-
building Support Office in Guinea-Bissau for its role in
promoting political dialogue in Guinea-Bissau and for
preparing a countrywide programme of activities to
consolidate the process of national reconciliation,
which, in our view, is the key to any progress in the
area of political stability.

I also welcome the opportunity given to us to
address the issue of Guinea-Bissau more frequently.
The current situation in that country requires our
attention. It should continue to receive the international
community's attention. The joint Economic and Social
Council and Security Council mission that will visit
Guinea-Bissau in a few days is a welcome and timely
development.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2003/621)
describes the situation in Guinea-Bissau as critical, and
therefore in need of concrete and urgent steps by the
Government of Guinea-Bissau and the international
community. In that connection, while we look forward
to visiting Guinea-Bissau, the critical message of the
Council should focus not only on the need for
commitment by the Government. In particular, the
Council should ensure that the international community
maintains its interest in helping the people of that
country to address the fragile political situation and the
persistent economic crisis.

With regard to the forthcoming legislative
elections, we fully agree on the role to be played by the
Government. At the same time, we should continue to
call upon the donor community to provide the
necessary financial assistance to enable the
Government of Guinea-Bissau to fulfil its duties. I
would like to thank the Governments that have met
their commitments, thereby keeping hope alive for the
people of Guinea-Bissau.

In order to address the situation in Guinea-Bissau
we should always keep in mind the specificities of a
country facing a complex of not only political, but
primarily social and economic, problems due to various
causes. The issue of the country's specific conditions
has been understood by the Bretton Woods institutions,
which have reclassified Guinea-Bissau as a low-income
country under stress. The World Bank has also
proposed that the authorities of Guinea-Bissau
formulate an alternative staff-monitoring programme to
provide a framework for donors by which to decide
upon the effectiveness and continuation of their
assistance in the current circumstances. Meanwhile,
due to the urgent needs of the country, it is important to
demonstrate flexibility on both sides in order to
facilitate the move from theory to practice, taking into
account the fact that long-lasting economic solutions
are also meaningful for achieving political stability in
Guinea-Bissau.

It is clearly stated in the report of the Secretary-
General that public dissatisfaction and frustration have
resulted in periodic strikes by the public sector. That
situation, and the consequent humanitarian crisis, can
lead to a cycle of violence that will be more costly to
address for the international community. To tackle the
crisis, the work of the specialized agencies of the
United Nations, non-governmental organizations and
other donors will be a determining factor that should
continue to have our political support.

The number of countries emerging from conflict
in Africa is increasing. Guinea-Bissau constitutes a test
for the international community in managing a post-
conflict situation and in cooperation between the
Security Council and the Economic and Social Council.
There is therefore a need to succeed in this case if we
are to extend this experience to other post-conflict
situations. In the search for a long-lasting solution in
Guinea-Bissau, the involvement of regional players is
an important tool in supplementing the work of the
Security Council. We therefore welcome the
involvement of such regional players.

As the report of the Secretary-General states, my
country, in its capacity as the Chairman of the
Organization of Portuguese-speaking African States,
has spared no effort to lend its assistance to finding a
way forward in Guinea-Bissau. I would also like to
commend the Economic Community of West African
States for its efforts to find ways to resolve the crisis in
that country.

The Security Council's forthcoming mission to
Guinea-Bissau is the best opportunity both to deliver
the Security Council's message and to hear from the
people of Guinea-Bissau themselves. Most important
will be the implementation of the recommendations to
be made by the joint mission. It is therefore important
that those recommendations focus on key issues. I look
forward to visiting Guinea-Bissau for these reasons.

