Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): On
12 March, Michael Sharp and Zaida Catalan, two
members of the Group of Experts on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo went missing. Their bodies
were found a few days later. It was clear that they had
been murdered. The Security Council condemned
their deaths in the strongest of terms and called for
an in-depth investigation to find the perpetrators of
the crime and bring them to justice. Today I reiterate
that condemnation in the strongest of terms, as well
as that call. To that end, France also advocates the
establishment ofa special board ofinquiry.

Michael Sharp and Zaida Catalan carried out work
that was extremely important to the Security Council
and were very professional in their duties. The experts
on United Nations sanctions committees are extremely
important to the Council and are the key to the sanctions
regimes. I would like thank them again for their service
to the Security Council. Justice must be served; we owe
it to them and to their families.

They died while conducting an investigation on the
tragic situation in the Kasais. We have received very
worrisome reports on attacks on civilians and on many
gross human rights violations, including the mutilation
and murder of children. In recent months, the Council
has condemned the violence in the region and expressed
its deep concern about such human rights violations.
It has underscored the importance and the urgency of
carrying out diligent and transparent investigations on
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights law so as to ensure that those responsible are
brought to justice. That is required now more than ever.

The tragic events have seriously disrupted the work
of the Group of Experts. That is why France proposed
the adoption of a draft resolution to allow the Group of
Experts to resume their work as soon as possible and in
calmer conditions. It is in essence a technical renewal
but, given the circumstances, France has proposed the
following changes. We hope that all the members of the
Council will agree with this approach.

Through the draft resolution contained in document
S/2017/529, the Council would reiterate its condemnation
of the murders of Michael Sharp and Zaida Catalan and
recall the need for a thorough and swift investigation to
determine those responsible and bring them to justice.
It would call on the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to cooperate with the investigations that might be
conducted by the United Nations, Sweden or the United
States in an effort to shed light on the events.

The draft resolution would also introduce a new
criterion for imposing sanctions, which would target
any individual who attacks a member of the Group of
Experts or who is involved in such an act. The Council
would also reiterate its condemnation of the violence
in Kasais and its call for transparent investigations to
be urgently undertaken to identify the perpetrators of
human rights violations in that region.

Finally, given the constraints faced by the experts,
this draft resolution would provide the Group of Experts
with an additional two months in which to complete its
final report. It also envisages that the Council would
review the sanctions regime and make any necessary
amendments once the report has been completed.

