Mr. Pascoe: This past month has underscored the
gap between the aspirations of the political process and
the grim realities of the situation on the ground in the
Middle East. Continued efforts to progress along the
Annapolis track, with the beginning of negotiations on
core issues and a visit by the President of the United
States of America, George W. Bush, were
overshadowed by an intensification of violence in Gaza
and southern Israel, combined with periods of total
closure of the Gaza Strip and increased humanitarian
suffering and violations of human rights.

Since I last briefed the Council, on 22 January,
there have been significant developments in the crisis
in Gaza.

On 23 January, Palestinian militants destroyed
entire sections of the border fence with Egypt. Since
then, hundreds of thousands of Gazans have crossed
the border, and many who had earlier been stranded in
Egypt have returned to Gaza. Following efforts by
Egyptian security forces to close the border on
25 January, Hamas toppled additional sections of the
border fence. A number of Egyptian security personnel
sustained injuries when fired upon by Palestinian
militants, but they exercised restraint, and the situation
remained, by and large, calm. By 29 January, shops in
the border area had largely run out of goods, and
Egyptian forces took steps to begin sealing the border.

In Egypt, Palestinians purchased food, medicine
and other supplies that are mostly unavailable in Gaza
due to closure. There have also been claims, which we
08-22132
are unable to verify, of weapons and explosives
entering Gaza. We support Egypt's continuing efforts
to find a peaceful and orderly solution along the
border.

From 18 January, when Israel imposed a
comprehensive closure, until yesterday, only 32
truckloads of goods entered Gaza, including 10 from a
Jordanian donation. That compares to a daily average
of 93 trucks during the first two weeks of 2008 and of
250 trucks before June 2007. There is now a backlog of
approximately 224 United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), World Health Organization and World Food
Programme (WFP) trucks, although we understand that
35 trucks of the United Nations and the International
Committee of the Red Cross have been scheduled to go
into Gaza today. WFP distributions in some areas of
Gaza have already run out of sugar and salt, and
UNRWA reported that its stocks of canned meat would
run out within a week. United Nations Palestinian staff
with permits to exit Gaza are not currently allowed to
do so, resulting in the hampering of United Nations
operations.

Fuel imports from Israel resumed on 22 January,
with a total of 1.566 million litres of industrial diesel
going into Gaza from Israel for the week ending
27 January. It is expected that 2.2 million litres of
industrial fuel will be allowed this week; however, just
over 3 million litres are necessary to avoid power cuts,
and reserves of up to 20 million litres are necessary to
ensure normal functioning of the power plant. At the
current level of fuel supply, electricity cuts will
continue, in some areas for as much as eight hours a
day.

Some water wells are functioning again after
being reconnected to electricity and functioning
generators, but UNICEF reports that 40 per cent of
Gazans still have limited access to safe water.

The crisis adds new urgency to the proposal of
the Palestinian Authority to operate the Gaza crossings.
We reiterate the Secretary-General's strong support for
those proposals, and welcome the recent Arab League
and European Council resolutions in that respect. We
also welcome the diplomatic efforts currently under
way on that issue. We call on all parties to work
urgently for the controlled reopening of the crossings
in and out of the Strip for both humanitarian reasons
and commercial flows, in accordance with the
08-22132

provisions of the relevant international agreements
related to access and movement concluded in
November 2005. Such flows should include materials
and equipment to enable United Nations rehousing and
rubble removal projects to resume. The United Nations
stands ready to assist efforts to implement the
Palestinian Authority's proposals in any way it can.

It has been a month of heavy bloodshed; a total of
108 Palestinians have been killed and 229 injured in
conflict with the Israel Defense Forces (IDF). Three
Israelis have been killed and 24 injured by Palestinian
militants. IDF incursions into West Bank cities and
towns continue on a regular basis. During the reporting
period, for example, the entire city of Nablus was
placed under curfew for three days in early January.
There were also a number of incidents of Violence in
the West Bank, including in occupied East Jerusalem,
where Palestinian militants attacked Israeli border
police and religious seminary students.

Today, Israel's Supreme Court declared legal the
reductions to the fuel and electricity supply of Gaza.
The ruling effectively approves the decision adopted
by the Government on 19 September 2007 to impose
sanctions on the Gaza Strip in response to continued
rocket and mortar fire on Israel. I take this opportunity
to remind the Council of the Secretary-General's
statement of 19 September, in which he noted his
concern for the 1.4 million residents of Gaza -
including the old, the young and the sick - who are
already suffering from the impact of prolonged closure,
and said that they should not be punished for the
unacceptable actions of militants and extremists.

We note that levels of Violence have been
significantly reduced in the past week in Gaza and
southern Israel. We remain concerned, however, that 77
rockets and mortars were fired in the past week by
Palestinian militants and that there were also four IDF
incursions and air strikes on Gaza.

In last week's briefing, the United Nations
condemned the firing of rockets against civilians in
southern Israel and called on all parties to abide by
international law and not endanger civilians. The
United Nations has also clearly stated its deep concerns
over Israeli military actions, including targeted killings
and the grave humanitarian consequences of Israel's
closure policy. As such, I will not repeat those
statements of position at this time.
3
On a more positive note, the parties began
negotiations on the core issues during the reporting
period. United States President Bush visited the region
and committed himself to doing all he could to ensure
that a peace agreement is achieved in 2008. He stressed
that the point of departure for permanent status
negotiations was "an end to the occupation that began
in 1967", and made a number of public observations
regarding borders, refugees, Jerusalem and security. He
also issued strong calls for both sides to fulfil their
commitments under the road map, including for
removal of outposts and a settlement freeze, and for
action against violence and terrorism. United States
General William Fraser has been appointed to lead
United States efforts to monitor implementation of
phase I of the road map in accordance with the
Annapolis joint understanding.

The Paris donor conference co-chairs - the
European Commission, Norway, France and Quartet
Representative Tony Blair - met last week to follow
up on commitments made by participants in Paris. The
chairs stressed the importance of tangible and visible
changes on the ground through implementing the
Palestinian Reform and Development Plan (PRDP)
without delay. The total amount of aid pledged has
reached $7.7 billion. A significant number of donors
intend to transfer their aid to the single treasury
account of the Palestinian Authority. Co-chairs have
agreed to meet again in March.

At the request of Prime Minister Fayyad, the
World Bank is putting in place arrangements for a new
multi-donor trust fund to channel donor support to the
Palestinian Authority's recurrent operating budget. The
European Commission has announced that the
Palestinian European aid mechanism, designed in close
consultation with the Palestinian Authority, will be
launched on 1 February as a follow-up to the
Temporary International Mechanism (TIM). That
mechanism will be open to all donors and will combine
investment and recurrent support more
comprehensively than TIM. currently does.

Quartet Representative Blair continues his efforts
to secure implementation of projects to support
Palestinian economic revitalization. The United
Nations country team met earlier this week to
strengthen interagency coordination, particularly in
support of PRDP.

Palestinian reform efforts and the assistance of
donors cannot make a sustained impact without a
significant easing of closure, in accordance with the
Agreement on Movement and Access. The Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs reports that
there are 563 obstacles to Palestinian movement in the
West Bank. It is Vital that those closures be eased in the
context of increased mobility, security and confidence.

In that regard, Palestinian Authority security
forces continue to work to maintain law and order,
including disarming and arresting militants. We
encourage the Palestinian Authority to continue and
deepen its efforts to meet its phase-I road map
obligations on security, and call for improved
cooperation to support those efforts.

The Secretary-General has reaffirmed the United
Nations position on the illegality of settlements. Phase
I of the road map requires the Government of Israel to
freeze all settlement activity, including "natural
growth". We call on Israel to act to meet its obligations
to halt settlement activity, dismantle all outposts
erected since March 2001 and reopen Palestinian
institutions in East Jerusalem. Construction work on
the barrier continues within occupied Palestinian
territory in deviation from the Green Line and contrary
to the advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice.

Turning to Lebanon's political and security
developments continue to be a cause for serious
concern. On the political front, Lebanon's
parliamentary session on the election of a president has
been delayed for the thirteenth time, until 11 February.
Despite the diplomatic efforts led by the League of
Arab States, the parties are no closer to reaching an
agreement. The presidential vacuum has persisted since
24 November and has led to a situation that is
dangerous and ultimately unsustainable. Lebanon's
leaders must act now and find a way to bridge their
positions and return the country to normal political
activity.

Political uncertainty has been exacerbated further
by the increased frequency of grave security incidents.
On 27 January, demonstrations began in a southern
suburb of Beirut, apparently to protest interruptions to
the electricity supply in the area. The unrest led to the
deployment of the Lebanese Armed Forces (LAF) and
security services in the area in an attempt to restore
calm. Demonstrations soon spread to the towns of Tyre
and Khiam in southern Lebanon and to north-eastern
parts of the Bekaa valley. By nightfall, seven people
had been killed and up to 40 wounded. The Lebanese
army has announced that it will investigate the deaths.
On 25 January, Lebanon suffered yet another
targeted assassination when an explosion in Beirut
killed Captain Wissam Bid and Adjutant Osama Mereib
of the Internal Security Forces and four other people
and injured up to twenty others. On 15 January, a car
bomb explosion in an industrial area of Beirut killed
three passers-by and wounded dozens. A diplomatic
vehicle from the United States Embassy in Lebanon
was also impacted in the bombing and both occupants
were wounded.

Aside from attacks on the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), this is the first attack on a
diplomatic target in Beirut since the days of Lebanon's
civil war. In addition, early in the morning of
21 January, a hand grenade was detonated in a
residential area of Beirut. The explosion caused
material damage but no injuries. There have been no
claims of responsibility for these incidents.

The situation in the UNIFIL area of operations
has remained mostly quiet but tense, particularly in the
wake of several incidents that occurred on 7 and
8January, on which the Council has already been
briefed by Under-Secretary-General Guehenno.
UNIFIL and the LAF are continuing their
investigations into the 8 January attack against a
UNIFIL vehicle. Similarly, the investigation into the
8 January rocket firings against the northern Israeli
town of Shelomi is continuing. There have been no
claims of responsibility made. The Secretary-General
issued statements condemning both incidents. On
21 January, the Lebanese Armed Forces fired on two
Israeli aircraft within Lebanese airspace inside
UNIFIL's area of operations.

The Secretary-General has strongly condemned
the grave security incidents during this last month and
has called for the perpetrators to be brought to justice.

In the North, the United Nations system, under
the operational guidance of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, continues to provide humanitarian assistance and
to undertake emergency rehabilitation initiatives in the
Palestinian refugee camp of Nahr el-Bared, where the
Lebanese army confronted the Fatah al-Islam armed
group from May to September 2007.

The Secretary-General fully supports the efforts
of Prime Minister Olmert and President Abbas to reach
a peace agreement in 2008 and encourages them to
make tangible progress on all core issues, including

final status issues. However, it is equally critical that
the situation on the ground should stabilize and
improve, in order to sustain the Annapolis process.

The Secretary-General will continue to work
closely with Quartet partners, regional countries and
this Council towards implementation of the Road Map
and a two-State solution that would result in the
coexistence in peace and security of the State of Israel
and the State of Palestine, in fulfilment of resolutions
242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003)
and the Arab Peace Initiative.

