Mr. Tidjani (Cameroon) (spoke in French): At
the outset, allow me on behalf of the delegation of
Cameroon to congratulate you, Sir, on the occasion of
your country's national holiday. I also wish to thank the
Secretary-General for the statement he made early in
our meeting, which placed our debate in its true
context.

My delegation is grateful to you, Sir, for having
organized a public meeting of the Security Council for
non-member States on an issue of crucial importance
for the codification and gradual development of
international law. Indeed, this morning's debate -
coming shortly before the celebration of the first
anniversary of the entry into force of the Rome Statute
on 1 July 2002 - has allowed the Council to hear
welcome and useful comments from non-members, as
well as their fertile thoughts on peace, international
security and justice.

Because Cameroon is a peace-loving State of law
that fervently supports the creation of human-centred
international law, as well as a fierce partisan in the war
against impunity, we participated wholeheartedly in the
negotiations on and drafting of the Rome Statute.
Moreover, we were among the first 11 countries in the
world that signed the Statute on 6 July 1998. The
process of ratification is now under way in my country.

For Cameroon, the International Criminal Court
will undeniably strengthen the ability of existing
structures in the maintenance of international peace
and security, primarily those of the Security Council.
That is why the relationship between those two bodies
must be considered in the context of cooperation and
complementarity. That is our ongoing conviction.

It will be recalled that last year, when we debated
the renewal of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, the Security Council held lengthy
and arduous discussions. There was a serious danger
that the positive gains of United Nations peacekeeping
operations might be wiped out. The Rome Statute
offers the Security Council three legal options to
overcome the deadlock: article 16; paragraph 2, of
article 98, concerning bilateral agreements; and article
17, on the principle of complementarity. A consensual
agreement with reference to article 16 was reached,
which made it possible to respond to the legitimate
concerns of a State Member of the Organization -
whose important role in peacekeeping operations is
clear - as well as to safeguard the continuation and
effectiveness of its peacekeeping operations. On 12
July 2002, along with the 14 other members of the
Council, Cameroon voted in favour of resolution 1422
(2002).

At a time when the Council is about to take a
decision on renewing that resolution, Cameroon would
like to reaffirm that those who act on behalf of the
Council and who have been entrusted with the task of
re-establishing peace have a crucial duty to humanize
the task of peacekeeping. They must shoulder that
responsibility while respecting both international law
and life. Along with Secretary-General Kofi Annan,
Cameroon also hopes that today's renewal exercise will
not become a routine, given the consequences for
international law and for the credibility of the
International Criminal Court and the Security Council.
We would like to make an urgent appeal for continued
discussion and dialogue among the various parties in
order to arrive at a lasting and pragmatic solution in
accordance with international law.

Today's debate clearly demonstrates that it is not
up to the Security Council to rewrite the Rome Statute.
Wisdom and pragmatism must lead us to consider the
concerns of all, to preserve the spirit and letter of the
Rome Statute and to safeguard peacekeeping
operations. In other words, it is our sacred duty to
reconcile peace and justice.

In the light of the aforementioned, Cameroon has
once again this year decided to vote in favour of the
draft resolution introduced by the United States.

