Mr. Sharma (Nepal): My delegation views with
serious concern the unfolding situation in the Middle
East. Once again, the Middle East has descended into a
cycle of terrible violence between the Palestinians and
Israelis. Innocent civilians are being killed on both
sides, and the Israeli Government has reportedly
decided to remove Mr. Yasser Arafat, an elected leader
of the Palestinian people. Each of these developments
pushes a political solution a little further from our
grasp. The world community and individual countries
have launched a number of initiatives to resolve the
longstanding problem in the Middle East. Among those
initiatives, the Oslo Accords brought some hope -
though it was soon to be dashed in the fire of
retaliatory violence. The road map drawn up by the
Quartet is also facing a very uncertain future.

The international community must continue its
efforts to bring peace and security to the Middle East.
However, first and foremost, the Palestinians and
Israelis themselves will have to bring their political
will to bear to find a durable solution to this tragic
problem. History has put the Palestinians and Israelis
together in a small piece of real estate in the Middle
East which both sides hold holy and dear. No one can
wish the other away. Both peoples will therefore have
to find a way to live side by side.

The road map, despite its many shortcomings, is
the only way forward to help find a political solution to
the Middle East problem. Violence must stop, and
sincere dialogue must begin for both sides to restore
hope in the political process envisaged in the road map.
We must not allow a handful of extremists on either
side to spoil the peace process. All sides must meet
their specific obligations if the process is to move
forward. The Palestinian Authority should do
everything in its power to control the extremist
elements in Palestinian society that are perpetrating
attacks against innocent Israeli civilians. It must
consolidate the security forces and empower the new
Palestinian Prime Minister to engage in serious
negotiations with the Israeli Government.

The Israeli Government, on the other hand, must
stop using excessive force. It must withdraw from the
occupied territories forthwith, cease its extrajudicial
killings of Palestinian leaders and stop demolishing
civilian buildings and infrastructure. Illegal settlements
and walls built in the occupied territories are an
obstacle to peace and must be dismantled.

My delegation denounces the decision of the
Israeli Government to remove Mr. Yasser Arafat, and
urges the Israeli Government to rescind that decision
forthwith. The members of the Quartet and the wider
global community should bring their influence to bear
on both sides so that they exercise the utmost restraint
and desist from taking any drastic steps that would
only worsen the situation and make peace even more
remote. The Security Council should help the Israelis
and Palestinians to build bridges for a shared, peaceful
and secure future through the effective implementation
of the road map.

