Mr. Al-Hassan (Oman) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me first, Sir, to extend to you and to your friendly
country, Colombia, our sincere congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of August. We are confident that your
diplomatic expertise and your knowledge of
international affairs will crown the Council's work with
success and will assist it in attaining the objectives we
all desire, foremost of which is to preserve
international peace and security.

The Sultanate of Oman welcomes the holding of
this emergency meeting of the Council to consider the
latest developments in the occupied Palestinian
territories. We look forward to the time when the
Council will shoulder its responsibilities under the
United Nations Charter through the adoption of
practical measures that would preserve peace, security
and stability everywhere in the world, without
discrimination, selectivity or double standards when
dealing with the various issues brought before it.

After many previous attempts, the time has come
for the Council to respond positively to the just
demands of the Palestinian people by providing the
necessary international protection to that people, which
is a victim of oppression, isolation, repression and
systematic assassination, all perpetrated against the
elderly, women, children and other civilians, and by
protecting it from the destruction of its institutions and
the offices of the Palestinian Authority 4 something
which the Israeli authorities had promised in 1996 that
they would not do. This is not to mention the
occupation of Orient House, which shows Israel's
readiness to exacerbate the situation by increasing
tension and by using its vast military arsenal, as
everyone in the Council and in the entire international
community knows.

That constitutes a flagrant violation of the
provisions of the Fourth Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of
12 August 1949, of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, of international humanitarian law and
of other relevant international instruments. This is all
taking place following vigorous attempts by Israel to
prevent Palestinian civilians from benefiting from these
protections. The Security Council must therefore take
immediate effective measures to provide them with
such protections. Such action by the Council would
surely result in the establishment of a machinery that
would be binding on Israel.

Israel's persistent resort to collective punishment,
blockade and killing should make one thing perfectly
clear to the Council: that Israel does not care about
international criticism and that it ignores all the
agreements it has reached with the Palestinian side over
the past decade. Israel has undermined hopes for peace
in the region; therefore, the Council must no longer
stand idly by as these crimes against humanity are
daily committed in full view. We would ask whether
Israel, as a Member of this Organization, is bound by
international agreements, as other Member States are.
Or is Israel exempt from such international
instruments?

The Sultanate of Oman has been in the forefront
of countries that believe in the peace process and that
view it as a natural, civilized way to settle the Middle
East conflict. We continue to believe that there is a
glimmer of hope that it will be possible to return to the
negotiating table. But that can take place only with
manifest political will.

My Government welcomes the Egyptian-
Jordanian proposal as a serious, promising initiative
that ought to be considered. Along with the
recommendations set out in the Mitchell report calling
for a freeze on illegitimate settlements, that initiative
could create a propitious atmosphere and pave the way
for a return to the negotiating table by the Palestinians
and the Israelis.

Today, the Palestinian people is in greater need of
international protection than ever before, in view of its
daily human suffering as a result of the ongoing Israeli
military escalation. That is a legitimate request in line
with the norms and principles of international
legitimacy, and we make that request of the Security
Council today. To allow these Israeli practices to
continue unabated would cause the Middle East to
descend into a cycle of violence and counter-violence.

