Mr. Kyrle (Austria): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened today's open
debate on drug trafficking as a threat to international
security. Austria attaches great importance to the
ongoing fight against drug trafficking and organized
crime. We highly appreciate the efforts of the
delegation of Burkina Faso and support the presidential
statement to be adopted today. Moreover, Austria
associates itself with the statement to be delivered by
Sweden on behalf of the European Union later in this
meeting. I would like to express my gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his commitment to this important
issue. I would also like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Costa for his valuable input and committed
leadership of the United Nations Office for Drugs and
Crime (UNODC) in Vienna, which plays a central role
in combating illicit drug trafficking around the world.

Many States and their populations are
increasingly ravaged by organized crime, in particular
trafficking in drugs, human beings and arms, and
related illicit activities such as money-laundering.
These scourges destabilize governments, endanger
democracy and respect for human rights, and hamper
the economic and social development of entire regions
in Africa and beyond. Organized crime is prevalent
first and foremost in regions where Government
structures are weak or even lacking, often owing to

armed conflict. Likewise, organized crime - and the
09-63811
revenues derived from illicit activities - fuel and

prolong conflicts, and may contribute to the financing
of terrorism.

Globalized criminal networks engaged in illicit
activities pose threats to internal and external security
alike. Drug trafficking from origin to destination
affects many countries in transit, often across several
continents. No single nation can effectively tackle
these challenges on its own. The presidential statement
(S/PRST/2009/32) before us, therefore, rightly
underlines the need to strengthen transregional and
international cooperation on the basis of a common and
shared responsibility.

A number of States confronted with difficult
security challenges, especially in Africa, lack the
capacity to respond quickly and effectively to them.
We therefore commend the growing efforts to respond
jointly to those challenges in the framework of regional
organizations such as the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) and the African Union.
West Africa faces particular challenges in the fight
against drug trafficking. In recent years, the region has
turned into an important hub for cocaine trafficking
from South America to Europe, and has also become a
centre for the production of narcotic drugs. More
investment needs to be made in developing regional
and domestic capacities to tackle these problems
effectively.

To this end, UNODC, ECOWAS and the
Government of Austria co-hosted a donor round table
in Vienna last week, with a view to increasing support
for the ECOWAS Regional Action Plan on illicit drug
trafficking and organized crime. Austria pledged, inter
alia, substantive contributions to the joint West African
Coastal Initiative earmarked for Sierra Leone, and a
UNODC project in Mali aimed at capacity-building
among national authorities. Austria will continue to
support the zonal offices of ECOWAS, which play an
important role in monitoring member States' respect of
the pertinent ECOWAS legal instruments against drug
trafficking and organized crime.

It is only by acting in concert that the
international community will be able to prevail in the
fight against drug trafficking. We therefore commend
the role of UNODC in assisting the various
stakeholders and coordinating their efforts in the region
and beyond. In order to ensure the continuous delivery
of technical assistance, including advisory and
analytical services, we fully subscribe to the need to
strengthen the capacities of UNODC, as emphasized in
the Presidential Statement.

A recent UNODC report has underlined the
importance of strengthening the rule of law as a most
effective remedy for enhancing countries' immunity to
organized crime. The Council should duly take this into
account when devising sustainable strategies for
conflict areas. Universal adherence to, and accurate
implementation of, pertinent international legal
instruments, such as the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime and the United
Nations drug control Conventions, should be our
common goal.

Our success or failure in tackling the scourge of
drug trafficking will have a direct impact on the well-
being of our citizens. The Council should step up its
deliberations on this important matter, be it in general
terms or with regard to specific regions. Austria would
therefore welcome further debates in this regard.

