The President: As this is the first open meeting
of the Security Council for the month of September, I
should like to take the opportunity to pay tribute, on
behalf of the Council, to His Excellency Sir John
Sawers, Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the
United Nations, for his service as President of the
Security Council for the month of August 2009. I am
sure I speak for all members of the Council in
expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador Sawers
for the great diplomatic skill with which he conducted
the Council's business last month. I should also like to
extend, on behalf of the Council, a warm welcome to
our new colleague Ambassador Ge'rard Araud,
Permanent Representative of France to the United
Nations. We look forward to working closely with him
over the course of the coming months and years.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The question concerning Haiti

Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(S/2009/439)

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Argentina, Brazil, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, Cuba, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Guatemala, Haiti, Jamaica, Norway, Peru, Spain,
Sweden, Uruguay and the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the members of the Council, I wish
to extend a warm welcome to Her Excellency
2
Mrs. Michele Duvivier Pierre-Louis, Prime Minister of
Haiti.
At the invitation of the President, Mrs. Pierre-
Louis (Haiti) took a seat at the Council table; the
representatives of the other aforementioned

countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side ofthe Council Chamber.


The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Mr. William Jefferson Clinton, United Nations Special
Envoy for Haiti.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Clinton to take a seat at the Council
table and thank him very much for his participation.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. He'di Annabi, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Annabi to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2009/439, containing the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by His Excellency Mr. William J. Clinton,
United Nations Special Envoy for Haiti, and Mr. He'di
Annabi, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and head of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti.

I wish to warmly and personally thank President
Clinton for coming to the Council today in his capacity
as United Nations Special Envoy for Haiti. It was my
great honour and privilege to serve him in several
09-50519
capacities in his Administration. He is an American
treasure and a great international public servant, and
we salute him for shouldering this important duty. We
are confident that his efforts and leadership will
produce more sustained international attention and
resources for Haiti, as well as greater creativity and
innovation in our common efforts, deeper engagement
with Haiti's leaders and more stability and prosperity
for its people.

I also wish to take this opportunity to thank
Special Representative Annabi for his dedication to
Haiti and his excellent leadership of MINUSTAH. In
addition, I wish to offer a very warm welcome to Her
Excellency Mrs. Michele Duvivier Pierre-Louis, for
making a special effort to travel to New York on short
notice andjoin us for this important meeting.

It now gives me great pleasure to give the floor to
His Excellency Mr. William Jefferson Clinton.


