Mr. Doutriaux (France) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Mr. Bernard Miyet for his briefing
on Bosnia and Herzegovina. The areas he has covered
are indeed the priority issues that emerged during the
last Peace Implementation Conference, held at Brussels
on 23 and 24 May 2000, namely, speeding up the return
of refugees and displaced persons and strengthening
common institutions. France would like to express it
full support for the work of the United Nations Mission
in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH).

The existence of other regional crises must not
cause us to distance ourselves from the issues
pertaining to Bosnia and Herzegovina. We must remain
very attentive to what is happening there, and we must
ensure that the necessary resources continue to be
devoted to it. In particular, work in the area of police is
essential if we wish - and it is both our wish and that
of the international community - to establish a State
of law in Bosnia and Herzegovina, or even just a State.

We believe that it is important for the local
authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina to be more
responsible, which is something the international
community continues to work towards. Five years after
the signing of the Dayton Agreements, the authorities
in Bosnia and Herzegovina must take charge of the
future of their country. Moreover, the approach taken
by UNMIBH is appropriate: its support is of a
transitional nature and is not meant to continue
indefinitely.

Allow me to recall the contribution of France to
the International Police Task Force in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. With 106 policemen, we are the fourth-
largest contributor. The European Union is overall the
major aid contributor to Bosnia and Herzegovina,
having contributed 2.5 billion euros since 1991. I
would also note that the French Presidency of the
European Union is now making preparations for a
summit to be held next fall among countries of the
European Union and all the countries of the western
Balkans, beginning of course with Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
Mr. Bernard Miyet has already answered most of
the questions I wanted to ask, but I have a few left. My
first question has to do with the assessment of the
judicial system. Mr. Miyet has told us that after the
programme's anticipated end in December 2000, it will
be the responsibility of the High Representative. It is
important that the experience gained by the 18 experts
in the area ofjudicial system assessment not be lost. It
is therefore very important that the programme
continue after December 2000. Ijust have a question as
to how financing will be made available to the
programme after December 2000. I understand that the
High Representative will be responsible for the
programme, but how will its work be carried out? What
activities are envisaged by the United Nations
Development Programme and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe in this area?

My second question relates to refugees and
displaced persons. Mr. Miyet gave us some very
interesting figures on the marked increase in the
number of returns. He also said that the returns are now
taking place even in the most sensitive areas,
particularly in the Republika Srpska. Can he give us a
general breakdown of the returns by entity and by
ethnic origin?
