Mr. Paolillo (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay, which is among the 10 main troop
contributors to United Nations peacekeeping missions,
responded promptly to the appeal for personnel for the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) by dispatching approximately 600
military and police personnel, who were among the
first to be deployed. Uruguay is now the third-largest
troop contributor to the Mission.

Our Government recently decided to increase the
size of its military contingent in Haiti. The
authorization to deploy an additional 200 troops was
given a few days ago by the Uruguayan Parliament,
and the new contingent is expected to arrive in Haiti by
early February.

Uruguay is thus joining in the efforts of the
United Nations in Haiti, not to impose solutions to the
political problems that beset that tormented country,
but, rather, to help its people and their authorities find
their own solutions.

The Transitional Government bears the primary
responsibility for leading the country towards the
establishment and consolidation of a State based on the
rule of law and on the functioning of democratic
institutions. That can be achieved only if such
leadership is exercised in accordance with democratic
principles, ensuring strict respect for human rights. We
would recall here the appeal made by the Security
Council in its resolutions 1542 (2004) and 1576
(2004), particularly as regards the release of
individuals detained for exclusively political reasons
and against whom no charges have been brought, and
the need for all necessary measures to be taken to
prevent impunity for violations of human rights.

The recent agreement signed between the
Stabilization Mission and the Haitian Government for
general elections this year, as well as the pledges made
by Canada, the European Union and the United States
to finance those elections, represent very good news
and are clear evidence that the stabilization process is
under way.

We must also expedite the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process, and,
accordingly, we hope that the Transitional Government
will finalize its elaboration of the legal framework
governing that process. Long-term development
programmes must also be elaborated and implemented.

However, we believe that, given the deplorable
economic and social conditions facing the majority of
the Haitian population, priority must be given to short-
term programmes designed immediately to satisfy the
basic needs of Haitians such as food, housing and
essential services.

At this stage, efforts should focus on alleviating
the extreme poverty that affects the Haitian population.
We must recall that Haiti ranks 153rd in the Human
Development Index. Haiti is a country with a per-
capital gross national product of $415, whose
inhabitants lack the basic resources necessary for
survival with a minimum of dignity. Under such
circumstances, the normalization of the political and
security situation appears to be, if not a mission
impossible, at the very least an extremely difficult
undertaking - unless there is a substantial
improvement in the socio-economic framework within
which the international community is providing
assistance.
If the MINUSTAH presence is accompanied by
material assistance that brings about even a slight
improvement in living conditions, that will increase the
population's confidence in the Mission and its
willingness to cooperate, which will facilitate the
reconciliation, disarmament and demobilization
processes. That is why we consider it very important to
provide MINUSTAH with the capacity it needs to
rapidly implement short-term projects that have an
immediate and tangible impact on the population, as
proposed by the Secretary-General in his most recent
report on the Stabilization Mission.

I wish to express our satisfaction at the decision
of the Economic and Social Council to reactivate its
Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti, and we hope that its
work will help to promote the country's recovery. The
Advisory Group must coordinate its work with the
Core Group established by the Security Council in
paragraph 5 of its resolution 1542 (2004) in order to
avoid any overlap.

The task of restoring order and security in Haiti
and of creating conditions conducive to its
development is of tremendous scope and will require
considerable human and financial resources as well as
perseverance and dedication on the part of all the
individuals and institutions involved in the effort. We
are certain that, led by Mr. Juan Gabriel Valdes -
whom we thank for his report this morning - this
effort will ultimately be successful.

