Mr. Nishimura: I really appreciate the great
interest the Council has shown in what we have been
doing.

There were several questions directed to me. I
will group those questions into three or four broad
categories.

First, Council members have expressed their
doubts or uncertainties as to how we are going to
proceed with the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) programme despite possible
resistance on the part of various regional leaders. They
may have thought that it is going to be a very difficult
process. Indeed, I agree. We all know that we have a
very difficult exercise ahead of us, but there are a
couple of things to which I think I must draw the
Council's attention.

First and foremost, all the decisions which have
been made so far by the Government in Kabul have
been discussed and debated through the National
Defence Council, which comprises all regional political
leaders. Therefore, theoretically speaking, there is a
general consensus amongst all those leaders to go
ahead with the process of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of the soldiers and officers. Our
problem, and the problem of Afghanistan, is to test in
practice that agreement made in principle by all those
political leaders. Therefore, that is the test of DDR
programme as well.

I talked about a pragmatic attitude whereby we
should start our work where it is most likely to
succeed. Indeed, that practicality has something to do
with this process. Our intention - and it is the
intention of all parties concerned, including the
Government of Afghanistan - is to start some kind of
new wind in Afghanistan. There are communities and
provinces which really wish to start those activities in
their territories. Of course, this whole DDR programme
entails economic packages and rewards. Communities
are now seeing that those rewards can come their way.
That is one positive element and we can therefore start
in those areas. They are expressing their wish that this
programme be started in their communities. Other
communities are expressing the desire to see the
programme start, because the soldiers themselves wish
to leave their military formations. That readiness and
disposition has been expressed in other cases. So yes,
there will, of course, be lots of resisters, but there are
provinces, cities and small villages that wish to go
forward. In our view, that might create a new wind - a
new tendency, a new current - which might be
emulated and copied in other areas. That is our
strategy.

The Russian representative asked whether they
may wish to keep their weapons. Of course they may
wish to do so. As a matter of fact, all weapons of all
kinds will not be collected under the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programme.
As far as I understand it, there will be a category of
weapons that must be collected and that there will be
other sorts of weapons - light weapons - that will
not be collected. There should be a clear distinction
between those weapons that are to be collected and
those that are not to be collected. This is, I think, the
practice that has been adopted by other DDR exercises
in other countries. There is nothing wrong with
Afghanistan seeing small weapons remain in the hands
of people. That is a question in its own right. But that
question must be dealt with at a later stage. If you go
there, I think the DDR process itself is going to be a
huge exercise which the present mechanism and
current financial resources cannot cope with.

The financial aspect has been of great interest in
all of today's questions. I also appreciate the interest
expressed and understand the anxieties members may
have had about the financial prospects for the
programme. As a matter of fact, $50 million is the
amount for the kick-off of this programme. That is not
going to be enough for the entire programme, which
may take at least two, three or four years. According to
a United Nations Development Programme estimate,
there will be a total requirement for three or four years
amounting to $130 million to $150 million. So, as I
said in my statement, we have to work together to
ensure that the financial resources can be collected
from the international community to fill those gaps. It
is going to be a difficult task but, nonetheless, I think
we have to proceed with it.

One thing which I think I have to mention in this
respect is the fact that all donor nations can contribute
to the United Nations Development Programme
fund- which has been set up for the purpose of
DDR - not just in financial terms, but by helping to
meet the requirements of ex-combatants who have left
the army and army formations. There are lots of public-
works-type aid projects being offered to Afghanistan
by many donor nations, and that is going to be a great
help in providing job opportunities for those ex-
combatants.

The representative of Cameroon questioned
whether the pledges were additional or were part of
earlier pledges. I really cannot speak on behalf of other
countries, but my impression is that the contributions
offered by donor nations are part of their earlier
pledges, first made at the International Conference for
Afghanistan held in Tokyo one year ago. As a matter of
fact, one year ago the Tokyo Conference amassed $4.5
billion of contribution pledges from the international
community. At the time the Tokyo Conference was
held, no concrete projects were in place. It is therefore
only natural for donor countries to contribute out of
that total pledge amount as concrete programmes are
developed.

As far as Japan is concerned, the $35 million that
we have pledged to the programme is part of $500
million that the Government of Japan pledged for
overall reconstruction activities in Afghanistan.

The representative of Chile asked about other
types of DDR that have been developed in other
countries. I am not very familiar with others exercises
in this area; Mr. Guehenno may be able to draw some
parallels between those past experiences and the
experiences we are having in Afghanistan.

The Syrian representative asked about bridging
the gap between DDR and the development projects. I
am not sure whether I can answer that question
properly. Let me talk about the parallels that I am
drawing all the time. It depends upon whom we talk to,
but as for the number of soldiers to be released from
the army formations, people have been talking about
100,000, 200,000 or 300,000 soldiers being released
eventually under the DDR programme. I should also
mention the 2 million refugees who have returned to
the country since the cessation of conflict.

So, on the one hand, we talk about soldiers to be
released from the army structure, but on the other hand,
we have a huge number of refugees - almost 10 times
as many refugees as soldiers. To attend to refugees and
to internally displaced persons is a serious task in
itself; we must take care of them. But at the same time,
we must take care of soldiers, even though they are
fewer in number, because to induce those soldiers to
reintegrate into civilian life is clearly an important
ingredient for the formation of the new Afghanistan as
a country developing in peace.

Therefore, we must indeed deal with many
aspects of the development process in Afghanistan,
including taking care of refugees, building
infrastructure and rehabilitating schools and hospitals,
among many other things. We are doing - and we
must do - all those things. But, at the same time, we
must take care of all these soldiers and officers,
because their returning to civilian life means that the
country itself will change its basic profile.

