Ms. Adamson (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
28 member States.

The candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania, the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina, as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.

I shall read out a shortened version of my statement;
the full version of the text will be distributed.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive report (S/2017/508). I would also
like to thank Special Representative Yamamoto for
his briefing.

First of all, I would like to express the EU's
most sincere condolences to the Afghan people and
Government for the recent horrific terrorist attacks in
Kabul. At the same time, I would like to confirm the
EU's unwavering engagement to stand by Afghanistan
in the fight against the global threat of terrorism. At the
same time, the EU calls for an in-depth investigation of
these crimes and the identification of the perpetrators,
who should be brought to justice.

As stated on several occasions, the EU strongly
acknowledges the crucial role played by the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
and all the United Nations agencies in supporting the
Afghan people, encouraging peace and reconciliation,
monitoring and promoting human rights, and
coordinating the international community's assistance.

The Brussels Conference on Afghanistan, held
in October last year, demonstrated a very strong
international commitment to Afghanistan. At the
conference, the international community sent a clear
signal in support of peace, security and stability in
Afghanistan. We should continue to build on this
emerging consensus on regional and international
support for the peace and reconciliation process. The
EU stands ready to do its part in this political process.

All international efforts, whether they be
security-related, political, economic, developmental
or regional, should now be aligned to promote such a
political process. Terrorism and violent extremism are
fundamental threats to all State actors, undermining
regional peace and stability.

The European Union remains fully committed to
supporting an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace
process. Such a process must include all Afghan men
and women and their legitimate interests and must
preserve Afghanistan's unity, sovereignty and territorial
integrity as well as the equal rights of all Afghans
under the Constitution of Afghanistan. We welcome
the recently launched new regional peace initiative, the
Kabul process on peace and security cooperation.

We welcome the undeterred willingness of the
Afghan Government to engage in a political process
with the Taliban and other Afghan groups opposing
the Kabul Government to reach a lasting political
settlement. We welcome all initiatives aimed at creating
a conducive environment for such a process and call on
all parties to engage in constructive solutions.

We also welcome the work that has been done by
the Afghan Government to advance the implementation
of its commitments and the progress achieved on
anti-corruption, election preparation, revenue collection
and budget execution. This must now be followed by
further tangible results in the implementation of the
reform agenda. On 18 February, the signature between
the EU and the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan of
their first contractual relationship, the Cooperation
Agreement on Partnership and Development, sent a
strong political signal of the EU's enduring support for
the country. We hope that Afghanistan can ratify the
agreement soon, to start the provisional application and
to set up the institutional structures.

The EU and its member States welcome the
Government's efforts to move ahead with the delayed
parliamentary and district council elections. We
nevertheless note that the key decisions to start fully
the electoral preparations are still pending. We urge the
Government to take the necessary decisions promptly,
and the electoral management bodies to implement
the electoral process in a professional, transparent
and inclusive manner. That will help in rebuilding
public confidence. While technical aspects of elections
play an important role, the political will of Afghan
stakeholders and a strong and cohesive leadership are
necessary to deliver credible elections. The EU supports
the electoral process capacity-building and institutional
strengthening of the electoral management bodies and
UNAMA's coordinating role.

On behalf of the EU and its member States, I would
like to reiterate that joint Statebuilding and development
efforts in Afghanistan need to build on reinforced
regional cooperation. Regional cooperation remains
key to lasting peace and stability in Afghanistan
and the region. The treats of terrorism affecting all
countries of the region can be confronted only with
increased security cooperation. In the same vein, it is
indispensable for sustainable development.

Migration continues to represent a common concern
on which the dialogue between the EU and Afghanistan
proceeds in a meaningful way. In the framework
of the joint way forward, a political engagement to
enhance cooperation on migration and re-admission,
both sides have reaffirmed their commitment to
deepen cooperation on the basis of solidarity and
information-sharing.

At the same time, the EU monitors the Afghan
refugees' regional dimension. We raise this issue
continuously during our political dialogues with
relevant partners. The EU supports a regional approach
in dealing with this issue, and our actions focus on
addressing the root causes of irregular migration and
forced displacement. We also want to focus on the
long-term reintegration of returned migrants. Let me
reassure the Council that the EU will continue its work
and engagement in these areas.
In that context, UNAMA should be encouraged
to uphold its work and the dialogue with the Afghan
Government on the inclusion of internally displaced
persons and returnees. The EU aims to develop a
comprehensive EU response to bridge the humanitarian-
development nexus and promote durable solutions to the
challenges posed by the protracted nature of the crisis.

Although UNAMA's 2017 first quarterly report
on civilian casualties in Afghanistan documents a
4 per cent decrease in the number of civilian casualties
compared to the same period in 2016, we are concerned
by increases in both child and women civilian casualties.
We call on all parties to do their utmost to protect the
civilian population, especially women and children.
We also need to continue to protect the vital role of
humanitarian agencies and respect their impartiality
and humanitarian space in addressing the most urgent
needs of the vulnerable. In view of the threat posed by
the many mines and improvised explosive devices to
the population, the EU also encourages Afghanistan to
maintain the current demining rhythm.

In conclusion, it is important that the international
community remain strongly committed to support
Afghanistan towards long-term stability. The EU
continues to consider UNAMA as a key partner in
achieving lasting peace in Afghanistan. UNAMA has
an invaluable role in ensuring the broadest possible
international support for an Afghan-led and Afghan-
owned process. The EU will continue to support those
efforts with all means at its disposal.

In that regard, I would like to inform colleagues that
the European Union High Representative for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, Ms. Federica Mogherini,
has today announced the appointment of Mr. Roland
Kobia as the Special Envoy of the European Union to
Afghanistan. His main task will be to advance the EU's
contribution to delivering lasting peace and prosperity
in Afghanistan and the region.

