Mrs. Bangura (Sierra Leone): First and
foremost, let me on behalf of the Government and the
people of Sierra Leone join you, Mr. President, and the
Security Council, in extending our heartfelt
condolences to the People's Republic of China and
Myanmar on their loss.

On behalf of President Ernest Bai Koroma and
the people of Sierra Leone, I warmly congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of May and to register
my sincere gratitude to you for having invited me to
participate in this important debate. We assure you and
the other members of the Council of our fullest and
unwavering support.

We deeply appreciate the opportunity to
contribute to the discussion on this vital subject. The
choice and timeliness of the theme is an indication of
the significance that the Government of the United
Kingdom attaches to the search for lasting peace and
stability in post-conflict societies.

We in Sierra Leone are of the view that better
funding and improved integration of international
leadership are crucial components of post-conflict
stabilization and national recovery. In this regard, the
role of the United Nations, in particular the Security
Council, which has primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, cannot
be overemphasized. Nonetheless, practitioners have
raised questions about the tardiness of the involvement
of the critical mass of the international community in
responding to crises or early warning signals in order
to contain a looming, explosive situation in certain
spots. Consequently, observers have tended to interpret
such delays in response as a function of the strategic
significance that those spots represent within the
international community. For instance, notwithstanding
the destruction, carnage and mass displacement of
hapless civilians throughout the Mano River Union
basin, it took the United Nations a long time to endorse
the timely and crucial intervention of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
peacekeeping force in the crisis that engulfed the
neighbouring States of Sierra Leone and Liberia.

In all frankness, the rapidity with which the
international community responded to crises in places
such as Kuwait, Kosovo, Afghanistan and Iraq, as
opposed to many African crises, showed analysts the
need to rethink the international community's approach
to resolving conflicts around the globe. We are hopeful
that the Peacebuilding Commission will not lend itself
to such inadvertence or anomalies in supporting
countries engaged in post-conflict peacebuilding.

Delivering sustainable peace is not only an act of
enlightened self-interest, but also a public good for all
of mankind and humanity. Experience has proven that
conflict and social instability breed poverty, flagrant

violations of human rights and human dignity, socio-
economic disparity and social and political
disintegration. The causes of conflict are much like
their effects: poverty, low economic growth, ethnic and
cultural intolerance, and the mugging of democracy,
social justice and human dignity. Wrestling with this
Vicious cycle of instability and underdevelopment in
our present global reality is, therefore, clearly not an
act of charity.

In Sierra Leone, as in many other places that have
been afflicted with a protracted, violent and
devastating conflict, the road to peace has not been
altogether smooth. But with tolerance, understanding
and the overriding need to reconcile and move forward
for the general good, even the pain, the mud and the
thorns we have travelled through for peace have been
our greatest healers. Today, we can reflect with pride
on the recent presidential and parliamentary elections
that witnessed a seamless transition from the former
ruling party to the opposition. We have made a
significant leap in our peace and democratization
processes and laid a solid foundation for sustainable
peace. The 2007 elections, in particular, speak
eloquently of our political maturity and determination
to achieve lasting stability. For this, we are thankful to
the United Nations and all of our multilateral and
bilateral partners for their support.

Despite the gains in implementing the Lome
Peace Accord and the successful conclusion of the
disarmament, demobilization and re-integration (DDR)
programme, we are still in the process of surmounting
the hurdles inherent in constructing effective and
legitimate governmental institutions to consolidate the
peace and foster human development. Crises, whether
man-made or natural, generally lead to a breakdown of
State institutions. Reforming those institutions is
undoubtedly a complex and demanding task. Our
experience in addressing the practical challenges in
establishing transitional governance structures,
providing security, delivering public services and
addressing questions of transitional justice speaks
eloquently to our ability to overcome those hurdles.

The journey along the thorny path of advancing
national reconciliation and central Government control
over the entire country, including our post-conflict
governance and institutional capacity-building
programmes, would not have been possible without
engagement with our multilateral and bilateral partners
and national and international non-governmental
organizations. The role of partners, such as the United
Nations and its specialized agencies, the African Union
(AU), the European Commission, the Commonwealth,
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and our many bilateral partners - notably
the bold leadership, logistical and financial resources
provided by the United Kingdom, Nigeria and others,
has been crucial in nurturing the condition for lasting
peace and reconciliation in Sierra Leone. Some of the
feasible outcomes that have emerged from those
collaborations included the successful implementation
of programmes such as the DDR, the reform of the
justice and security sectors and the capacity-building
and development of the governance and transitional
justice mechanisms.

The learning curve in Sierra Leone's post-conflict
stabilization has, no doubt, contributed immeasurably
to the knowledge base in United Nations peacekeeping
operations. There is no denying that, without the
requisite levels of funding, leadership and human
capital, post-conflict societies cannot easily escape
from a relapse into renewed violence. In the face of
extensive devastation of infrastructures and the mass
exodus of skilled human resource capacities in disaster
or conflict-prone societies, those countries could only
reverse the trend to pre-crisis levels with coherent,
sustained and coordinated partnerships with the
international community.

In our view, the Government of the United
Kingdom is not advancing an entirely new
phenomenon, but rather giving context to the value that
the now defunct programmes, such as the Volunteer
Service Overseas, Canadian University Students
Overseas and the Peace Corps among others, added to
capacity-building and development in beneficiary host
countries. This, for us, is a wake-up call for the
international community to step up efforts to promote
post-conflict stabilization. We do not always need to
wait for situations to deteriorate before flying tens of
thousands of blue helmets and green berets to
extinguish volcanoes. Investing in peace and stability
makes our work easier and saves lives and billions of
dollars.
The foundation for the enhancement of State
capacities for war-to-peace transitions for development
lies primarily in coherent and sustained partnerships
and cooperation among the various actors in
peacebuilding. The Peacebuilding Commission was
established in tandem with this notion in 2005 in order

to sustain international attention on countries emerging
from conflict and to assist in addressing critical gaps in
their recovery process. Similarly, despite inherent
challenges in funding, regional and subregional
organizations, such as the AU and ECOWAS, have also
established peacebuilding support mechanisms aimed
at complementing external intervention in order to
bring their comparative advantage on knowledge of the
local realities to bear on peacebuilding work. Being a
pioneer on the agenda of the Peacebuilding
Commission, Sierra Leone welcomes the United
Kingdom's recent announcement to set-up a pool of
rapidly deployable and skilled civilian personnel in this
regard.

Underpinning all these initiatives and
engagements is the need for coordination among the
plethora of international actors involved in post-
conflict operations. This brings the centrality of the
leadership role of the United Nations into focus,
particularly at the field level, to effectively manage the
rhythm of war-to-peace transition, in a balanced and
coordinated manner, fully nurturing the capacities of
local actors to take on their responsibilities. In Sierra
Leone, that leadership was found in the United Nations
Integrated Office in Sierra Leone (UNIOSIL) under the
directive of the Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General following the phasing out of the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone. Thus, a robust
and strengthened representation of the Secretary-
General in post-conflict situations is crucial for the
success of their operations and the long-term
stabilization and sustainable development of those
societies.

As a demonstration of our faith in this debate as a
wake-up call for the international community to step
up the efforts that are essential for promoting post-
conflict stabilization, let me make the following
observations for further reflection.

First, as in every partnership and cooperation,
external intervention to promote and strengthen war-to-
peace stabilization processes is not entirely devoid of
tensions and dilemmas. Even with the best of
intentions, international involvement in providing
security, designing transitional governance structures,
economic reforms and the delivery of public services
and identifying local interlocutors, among others, often
comes under the scrutiny of undermining the cardinal
principle of national ownership and long-term
sustainability.
Secondly, another potential area of tensions lies
in the size, scope and assertiveness of external players
in the discharge of their mandate and tasks, especially
where reform measures conflict with traditional norms
and sensitivities in those early stages of conflict
transformation and peacebuilding.

Thirdly, while external engagement of a sustained
and effective kind remains highly desirable, adequate
attention should also be paid to the need for local
actors to be given ample space to determine policy
options and decision-making in the pursuit of their
goals and objectives.

In conclusion, it is our view that in the light of
the capacity gap occasioned by the massive flight of
badly needed skilled human resources in the wake of
crisis situations, the civilian components of
peacekeeping operation personnel are as significantly
essential as their military counterparts. In fact, the
situation becomes even more demanding in the
peacebuilding phase so as to allow societies emerging
from conflict to build and develop the capacities of
their local actors to assume their role in lubricating the
recovery process. It is therefore appropriate to call on
the Peacebuilding Commission and multilateral and
bilateral partners, including regional organizations, to
assist in providing the requisite financial, logistical and
technical support for the creation and empowerment of
such a pool of civilian peace corps at both the
international and the local levels and a base that is
readily deployable as a military component and under
effective leadership and coordination.

