Mr. Chen Xu (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation would like to thank Mr. Carl Bildt for
his briefing. Since assuming his functions as the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Balkans, Mr. Bildt
has done a great deal to promote the peace and stability of
the region. We would like to express our appreciation for
his efforts.

Over the years, the international community, including
the United Nations, has worked hard to resolve the
problems of the Balkans. The United Nations has carried
out several activities in the region, including peacekeeping
operations. Some of those were successful, and some have
not achieved results satisfactory to the international
community. Serious stock-taking of the experiences
acquired and the lessons learned in the Balkans can
therefore provide an important guide for future United
Nations work.

The Chinese delegation believes that the effective
realization of sustained peace and stability in the Balkans
requires strict adherence to the principles and purposes of
the United Nations Charter, in particular to the principles of
the peaceful settlement of disputes, non-interference in
internal affairs and respect for sovereignty and territorial
integrity. We also believe that the rights and interests of
ethnic minorities in the countries concerned should be
protected.

Sustained peace and development in the Balkans
depend on the political will of the countries of the region,
including the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, and the
constructive efforts on the part of the international
community. The two complement each other, and neither is
dispensable. At present, the restoration of a secure
environment, the return of refugees and the economic
rehabilitation of the region are urgent tasks facing the
countries concerned and the international community. They
are also important prerequisites for sustained peace and
stability and common prosperity for all countries and ethnic
communities in the region.

The Balkan countries and the international community
have already made tremendous efforts in those areas, but
the tasks facing us remain formidable. We believe that the
international community should continue its support of the
efforts of the countries of the region to realize stability and
economic rehabilitation. In this regard, high priority should
be given to helping them to realize self-governance and
self-reliance by gradually reducing their dependency on
external assistance, for after all, the comprehensive
resolution of the problems of the Balkans ultimately lies
in the hands of the countries and the peoples of the region
themselves.

The Chinese Government and people have been
watching the situation in the Balkans with concern. We
support the efforts of regional countries and the United
Nations to realize peace and development in the region.
We are deeply concerned about the continuing
deterioration of the situation in Kosovo. We hope that the
international community will take measures to effectively
protect the safety and security of all ethnic communities
in Kosovo and to preserve peace and stability there.

In conclusion, we sincerely hope that the countries
and the peoples of the Balkans will proceed from the
fundamental interests of their respective peoples to deal
with their historical, ethnic, religious and territorial
problems in a common manner and to resolve their
disputes through consultation and negotiation. That is not
only in the fundamental interests of the peoples and
countries of the region, but it is also crucial to the peace
and stability of Europe and the world.

