Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina
Valentin Inzko for his briefing.

China respects the independence, sovereignty,
national unity and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as well as the choice ofthe Bosnian people
in determining their country's future. We support
the efforts of Bosnian people of all ethnicities to live
harmoniously and seek common development. We
welcome the effort of the country to promote national
reconciliation and economic and social development
and strengthen the rule of law. We note that the country
is still faces challenges in its pursuit ofnational stability
and social development. We hope that Bosnian people
of all ethnicities will work actively to consolidate the
political and social progress achieved thus far, engage
in dialogue to settle their differences, comprehensively
implement the Dayton Peace Agreement and continue
to strive for greater progress in all areas so that they
may share in the peace dividend.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is an important country in
the Balkans. Its stability and development, as well as
harmonious coexistence among all ethnic groups, is in
the interests of the international community in general,
and of the States of the region in particular. The
international community should pay attention to the
Views of all the parties concerned and take a balanced
and prudent approach to the country's issues, while
also heeding the concerns of all the parties concerned.

China welcomes the efforts by High Representative
Inzko to promote the political process. We hope that, in
accordance with his mandate, he will continue to play
a constructive role in promoting the implementation
of the Dayton Peace Agreement. We also hope that
the European Union military mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina will continue to work with the relevant
parties to play a positive role in maintaining security
and stability in the country. China is ready to work
with the international community as a whole and will
continue to contribute to the achievement of lasting
peace, stability and development in the country.

