Mr. Kandeel (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Police Commissioners
for their comprehensive briefings. I would also like to
express my full gratitude for their efforts and sacrifice
in peacekeeping operations with a view to maintaining
peace and stability.

Police components play a very central role in
the implementation of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, through the capacity-building of national
institutions, while enabling host countries to exert
security control throughout their territories. The police
component is considered the primary nexus between
the United Nations and civilians, and thereby plays a
very important role in enhancing trust and building the
confidence of communities in United Nations missions,
which would eventually build the capacity to implement
the mandates.

We note the recommendations contained in the
report of the High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations (see S/2015/446), which is in charge of
reviewing police peacekeeping operations. In that
regard, we underscore the importance of addressing
the recommendations of the General Assembly Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, which is
tasked with addressing all peacekeeping-related
policies. I take this opportunity to pose the following
two questions to the police commissioners. My first
question is addressed to the Police Commissioner of
the United Nations Mission in the Republic of South
Sudan. We acknowledge the daunting challenges the
mission faces in discharging its mandate, in particular
with respect to the protection of civilians - as we
witnessed during the Security Council's visit to Juba
in September - and the efforts to overcome such
challenges in an unfriendly environment. We also
witnessed the challenge of securing civilian camps.
The question, therefore, is what is the plan and how
much progress has been achieved thus far with regard
to the development and capacity-building of the police
force in South Sudan?

The second question is addressed to the Police
Commissioner of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali. The All
Sources Information Fusion Unit is considered to
be a pilot model for developing intelligence units in
peacekeeping missions. Notwithstanding the benefits
of such units, there are certain concerns related to
the sovereignty of States regarding the information
obtained by United Nations forces and to what extent
those forces coordinate with host States.

With regard to the vital role played by police forces
in communication with communities, we have two
questions. The first question is, to what extent have
intelligence units provided the police component with
an assessment of the risks to which those forces are
exposed? The second question is, do the Government
and the police forces coordinate efforts? Once again,
I take this opportunity to extend my deep gratitude
and acknowledgement to the police commissioners for
the sacrifices and efforts they are exerting to keep the
peace.

