Mr. Cabactulan (Philippines): I thank the
presidency of Rwanda for convening today's open
debate on the theme "United Nations peacekeeping
operations: the United Nations and regional partnership
and its evolution". It is an issue that is most relevant to
the work of the Organization and the Security Council.

The Philippines aligns itself with the statements
made by the representative of Egypt, on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM), and the representative
of Thailand, on behalf of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN).

The briefings of the Secretary-General, the
Permanent Observer of the African Union (AU)
and the Deputy Secretary General of the European
External Action Service show the value of partnerships
between the United Nations and regional organizations
in peacekeeping operations. While there has been
progress, challenges remain that need to be addressed
to fully harness the partnerships' potentials to keep the
peace throughout the world.

Any debate on peacekeeping operations must be
firmly grounded on the premise that all stakeholders
must exert all efforts to peacefully settle disputes,
acting in accordance with the purposes and principles of
the United Nations. We must do everything that we can
to prevent conflict from arising. That is a paramount
obligation for all States Members of the United Nations
and a principled position that the Philippines will never
tire of articulating.

Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations
comprehensively provides the many ways to reach the
pacific settlement of disputes. While we affirm our
commitment to the peaceful settlement of disputes,
conflicts regrettably continue to arise. Conflicts now
involve not only States but also non-State actors and
result in the more complex and complicated milieux that
United Nations peacekeeping efforts need to address
and operate in. Operational demands and realities
including the finite resources of the United Nations and
the troop- and police-contributing countries require the
maximizing, multiplying and coordinating efforts. In
that regard, the partnership between the United Nations
and regional organizations provides distinct lessons
and practices that we can learn from and build upon.

The Philippines wishes to highlight the following
points and observations. First, the Security Council
bears the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security. Therefore, clear
and achievable mandates emanating from the Security
Council are crucial to their being successfully
implemented.

Secondly, in accordance with Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations and where the mandate
and the capacity of regional arrangements or agencies
allow it, regional arrangements and agencies can and do
provide important contributions to peacekeeping.

Thirdly, the operational partnership between the
United Nations and regional organizations must be
based on comparative advantages, complementarity
and the optimal use of resources and capacities, inter
alia.

Fourthly, there is a need for effective communication
and coordination between the United Nations and
regional organizations and agencies. The strategic
relationship between the Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council is showing
the way towards enhanced interaction and cooperation.
Such a relationship is vital to ensuring rapid and
appropriate responses to emerging situations and to
developing effective strategies for conflict prevention,
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding on the
continent. The establishment of the United Nations
Office to the African Union in Addis Ababa is also a
concrete step in the strengthening of the relationship
between the United Nations Secretariat and the AU
Commission.

Fifthly, there is value in providing capacity-
building support for peacekeeping operations to
regional organizations and their members. In that
regard, cooperation between stakeholders can help
identify ways to further strengthen the capabilities
and comparative advantages of regional organizations
and their members. Avenues to explore such
cooperative opportunities can be greatly enhanced
through agreements, including, for example, the Joint
Declaration on Comprehensive Partnership between
ASEAN and the United Nations.
Sixthly, there are key ongoing peacekeeping
projects and programmes by regional organizations that
deserve support. The potential contribution to peace
and security in Africa by the African Standby Force
is one such endeavour, and support is crucial for AU
efforts to fully operationalize the Force by 2015. On the
other hand, ASEAN has developed a concept paper on
the establishment of the ASEAN Peacekeeping Centres
Network whose implementation is currently under way.

Seventhly, strengthening the safety and security of
peacekeepers should continue to be a priority area of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations. The experience in missions such as the
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force in the
Golan Heights should remind the United Nations and
regional organizations to urge actors and stakeholders
to respect the neutrality and freedom of movement of
peacekeeping missions whose mandates are set forth by
the Security Council. The key in that regard is to ensure
that commands and instructions from the Council reach
the front line commanders of United Nations missions
in countries in conflict.

Finally, the Philippines wishes to underscore
that any discussion on the work of peacekeeping
must involve the participation of key stakeholders.
We reiterate NAM's and ASEAN's position that the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations
is the sole body responsible for policymaking in
peacekeeping. We call the Council's attention to the
report of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations (C-34) on its 2014 substantive session
(A/68/l9), containing recommendations and decisions
on such issues as enhanced safety and security for
peacekeepers, cooperation with regional arrangements,
and enhancement of African peacekeeping capacities.
My delegation joins others in efforts to ensure that the
decisions and recommendations contained in the C-34
report are implemented satisfactorily.

