Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): Let me begin by
expressing Croatia's deepest condolences at the tragic
loss of life in the line of duty in Sierra Leone.

Croatia highly commends the reports of the
President of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and of the Prosecutor
(S/2004/420). The two documents provide a solid, well
researched base for further work towards the successful
implementation of the completion strategy. Their
reports also accurately take note of the major effort
Croatia has made for full and unconstrained
cooperation with the ICTY. I take this opportunity to
thank the ICTY President and the Prosecutor for their
words of praise for Croatia's cooperation with the
Tribunal.

Today, I am happy to state that Croatia has
fulfilled all its obligations to the Tribunal, including its
financial obligations, save one. Regarding the case of
General Ante Gotovina, where the indicted person still
remains at large, the Croatian Government, as stated in
paragraph 42 of the Prosecutor's report, is currently
doing everything it can to locate and arrest him.
Croatia is especially pleased that the Government's
efforts in this particular regard did not go unnoticed by
the Tribunal.

Fulfilling the completion strategy for meeting the
2004, 2008 and 2010 deadlines, as outlined in Security
Council resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004), must
remain the Security Council's priority. Croatia stands
ready to contribute to that goal as much as possible.
The Tribunal's work and its significance for long-
lasting post-conflict stability in South-East Europe
should be judged not only by its judicial work but also
against the background of its timely closure. The past
must not be forgotten, but it should not overshadow the
future. In 2010, when the Tribunal is scheduled to
complete all its work, the issues of European
integration, regional cooperation, economic prosperity
and lucrative investments ought to entirely dominate
headlines throughout the region.

The transferral of cases to competent national
jurisdictions for trial is one of the pillars of the
completion strategy. Croatia is ready to take a number
of cases from the Tribunal and is preparing Croatian
judges and prosecutors for that serious task. I would
like to inform the Council that in May and June of this
year, ICTY representatives, together with Croatian
legal experts, took part in training programmes for the
Croatian judiciary. That important exercise was
organized by the Croatian Ministry of Justice, in
cooperation with the ICTY Registry. Another similar
programme will run until October of this year and will
involve approximately 60 Croatian legal professionals.
Recently, a conference including the ICTY Victims and
Witnesses Section and health and welfare professionals
from Croatia was organized with a View to discussing
the physical, emotional and psychological needs of
witnesses. The purpose of the conference was to
discuss how the establishment of health and welfare
networks throughout Croatia could assist in providing
preparation and follow-up services for witnesses who
testify at the Tribunal. Croatia has also adopted the
Witness Protection Act.

The Croatian Government remains grateful to the
Tribunal and its experts for their valuable assistance,
which will enhance the ability of Croatia's judiciary to
prosecute war-crime cases in a professional and non-
biased manner. Croatia feels prepared to take over part
of the Tribunal's load as soon as this autumn and will
continue its dialogue with the ICTY on this subject and
cooperate in the field of training and technical
assistance. Let me add that Croatia was glad to hear
this morning that the Prosecutor intends to request the
so-called Medak pocket case be transferred to Croatia.
We appreciate that very much.

The Croatian judiciary has independently
initiated a number of proceedings against the
perpetrators of war crimes in Croatia. Those trials were
and are still being closely observed by the ICTY, in
accordance with Croatian legislation, which entitles the
Tribunal's representatives to follow the proceedings
and grants them access to court files. In addition,
evidentiary material obtained by the ICTY can be used
directly in domestic trials. Recent final verdicts in
some of the most serious cases serve as confirmation of
the professional standards achieved by the Croatian
judiciary in this difficult and politically highly
sensitive domain.

I would like to recall Croatia's position -
outlined last October during the Security Council
debate on this item - on two important issues that
appear to have been somehow overlooked:
compensation to those acquitted by the Tribunal and
the enforcement of sentences as close as possible to
prisoners' places of residence. Croatia believes that the
Tribunal's jurisdiction should be amended by
establishing an appropriate procedure that would
enable it to award compensation to wrongly convicted,
prosecuted or detained persons. As for enforcing
sentences, I would like to recall that the basic
international instruments in this area favour the
incarceration of prisoners reasonably near their usual
places of residence. The existing instruction, dating
from 1993, envisages the enforcement of ICTY
sentences outside the territory of the former
Yugoslavia. Nevertheless, we find it important to
reiterate the request that the Secretary-General review
his predecessor's instructions regarding those
arrangements.

With regard to the provisional release of accused
who are awaiting the commencement of their trials,
Croatia advocates the implementation of that measure
whenever feasible. Croatia acknowledges with
appreciation that the Tribunal has already been
forthcoming on this issue in several cases. As affirmed
in General Ademi's case, the Croatian Government will
ensure that other provisionally released citizens of
Croatia will reappear for trial at The Hague and that
they will not pose a threat to victims or witnesses. In
any case, Croatia will meet its obligations in relation to
the provisional release of accused.

The Tribunal cannot fulfil its historical role only
by sentencing those who have been found guilty. For
Croatia, the accurate historical and political record
established through the Tribunal's jurisprudence is no
less important than the legal record or the punishment
of perpetrators. A person's guilt or innocence can be
established only before the Court. Bearing that in
mind, Croatia has transferred to The Hague all indicted
persons within its reach. Those who are guilty must be
punished, regardless of their ethnic background.
Nevertheless, Croatia must question some of the
qualifications in several indictments, which are not
fully in line with the letter of our recent history or
entirely in accordance with the General Assembly
resolution on Croatia's occupied territories.

Justice will be fully served only if those who
have suffered most find comfort and consolation in the
recognition that everything they have experienced has
not been in vain. It has been appropriately stated many
times that the Tribunal performs the role of justice and
of memory. Future generations, as they read the
Tribunal's records on the events that have taken place
on the territory of the Republic of Croatia, must be
able to distinguish clearly between the aggressor and
the victim; they must be able to comprehend what
happened in the critical days of the homeland war,
which remains one of the finest hours in my country's
history.

In conclusion, let me state very clearly that, as a
candidate country for membership in the European
Union, Croatia is fully aware of the importance of
cooperation with the ICTY and will continue to fulfil
all related obligations to the best of its ability.

