Mr. Lamani (Organization on the Islamic Conference) (spoke in Arabic): The Security Council is
meeting once again to consider Israel's serious,
dangerous actions in the occupied Arab territories,
resulting in the killing of innocent children, women
and the elderly. Israel pays lip service to its desire for
peace but pursues activities and practices that run
counter to peace. The peace process, which started at
the Madrid Conference more than nine years ago,
reached an impasse because of those practices and
actions and because of the fluctuating positions
adopted by subsequent Israeli Governments towards
the process and the commitments and conventions
emanating from it. No one can predict the extent of the
dangerous repercussions that will result if Israel goes
back on the peace process, gradually evades its
obligations and disregards conventions.

The Islamic Group has resorted to your Council,
Mr. President, realizing that Al-Quds has a special
status in the United Nations, the General Assembly and
this Council. It also has an internationally irrefutable
position. Previous resolutions adopted by the Council
constitute the sound legal framework for this holy city.
The Palestinian reaction to Israeli provocations and use
of Israel's military machinery is evidence of its belief
in its tireless struggle for self-determination and a
decent life, free and independent in its homeland.

Israel stands once again against the current of
history and the international trend to achieve peace,
upholding its positions and policies on the basis of
continued occupation, illegal terms, settlement
activities, the confiscation of property, house
demolitions, the Judaization and isolation of Al-Quds
Al-Sharif, the perpetration of aggressive acts against
holy Islamic sites, particularly Al-Aqsa Mosque, and
the collective punishment of the Palestinian people. All
this spells out how determined Israel is to undermine
and destroy the peace process and to spread tension and
anarchy throughout the region.

Once again we reaffirm the firm position of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference vis-a-vis the
question of Palestine and Al-Quds Al-Sharif, the crux
of the Middle East conflict. We support the Palestinian
position, which is based on upholding sovereignty over
Al-Quds Al-Sharif, including Al-Haram Al-Sharif, part
and parcel of the Palestinian territories occupied since
June 1967. The Security Council, given its weight in
the international arena, must play a fundamental role in
restoring the peace process to its proper track by
pressuring Israel to implement resolutions based on
international legitimacy and to abide by the agreements
it has signed with the Palestinian leadership. The
Palestinian people are a major partner in the peace
process. Peace cannot be just or lasting in the region if
that people do not regain their full legitimate rights,
like other people of the world, and if Israel does not
withdraw from all the Arab territories occupied since
1967.

