Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): I thank Pakistan for
scheduling this very important open debate on the
situation in the Middle East. Allow me to express our
appreciation to the Foreign Minister of the observer
State of Palestine for his speech this morning. I also
thank Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process Robert Serry for his briefing.

The Bangladesh delegation aligns itself with the
statement made by the representative of Iran on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement. In addition, I wish
briefly to make certain points that Bangladesh believes
to be of importance.

A sustainable resolution ofthe Arab-Israeli conflict,
including the issue of Palestine, must be our collective
strategic objective. All Member States should pledge
complete commitment to this objective and throw their
full moral, diplomatic, political and economic support
behind its early realization.

It is a disgrace that the people of Palestine are being
denied their fundamental rights to self-determination
and to live freely in their own land. Palestinians have
been denied their right to return home and live in dignity
and safety. Achieving a lasting solution in the Middle
East will require Israel's complete and unconditional
withdrawal from the occupied Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem.

We are happy that the General Assembly conferred
on Palestine non-member observer State status in the
United Nations, but we are saddened that, in response,
Israel announced on 30 November that it had accelerated
planning for the construction of more than 3,000 new
housingunits inJerusalem,potentiallybisecting the West
Bank. There is no doubt that these illegal and unilateral
decisions of Israel are counterproductive to achieving a
two-State solution. The announced settlement activity
would be a breach of both the 1949 Geneva Conventions
and the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court. The situation is further aggravated by another
recent retaliatory announcement by Israel that it would
withhold revenue from the Palestinian Authority. We
believe that this unjust decision of the occupying Power
will impair the Palestinian delivery of much-needed
public services.

The situation of thousands of Palestinian
prisoners - including women, elected officials and 300
children - in Israeli detention centres also remains a
cause of worry. Those detained must either be charged
and face trial with judicial guarantees, or be released
without delay. Violations of the human rights of these
detainees should be stopped. We know that justice
delayed is justice denied.

We reaffirm past Security Council decisions that
Israeli settlements in the occupied territory are illegal
and constitute a major obstacle to peace. We believe that
the best guides to achieving a two-State solution are
the relevant General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions - including resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973) and 425 (1978) - the principle ofland for peace,
the Madrid terms of reference, the road map and the
Arab Peace Initiative. We reiterate our full support for
the realization of an independent, sovereign, contiguous
and viable State of Palestine with Al-Quds al-Sharif as
its capital, living side by side with Israel in peace and
dignity.

With regard to the situation in Lebanon and in the
occupied Syrian Golan Heights, my delegation calls for
full respect for resolutions 497 (1981) and 1701 (2006).
We urge the occupying State immediately to halt its
actions to alter the legal, physical and demographic
status of the occupied Syrian Golan Heights in
accordance with the relevant resolutions.

