Mr. Patriota (Brazil): The activities carried out
under the umbrella of the Dayton Agreements in Bosnia
and Herzegovina through the multinational Stabilization
Force (SFOR) and the International Police Task Force
(IPTF) constitute an ambitious mobilization of military
and police support for the stabilization of a member State
which is only slowly recovering from the deep wounds of
the most serious conflict in Europe since the Second
World War.

There have been encouraging signs regarding the
internal evolution in Bosnia, particularly since a new
Republika Srpska leadership has shown a more
cooperative attitude. On the other hand, recent episodes of
violence associated with minority returns are to be
strongly deplored, while local instances of intransigence
in certain cantons and municipalities and obstruction in
the adoption of the common licence plate are simply
inadmissible.

Attentive international vigilance is still required.
While reaffirming our support for United Nations Mission
in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) and IPTF activity
in Bosnia, on the understanding that the situation does not
yet allow for a withdrawal of SFOR or a modification of
its Chapter VII mandate, we continue to believe that a
regular detailed appraisal of the situation on the ground
remains indispensable.

The tri-monthly reports on UNMIBH, which we
expect to continue receiving in the future, as well as the
monthly reports on the multinational Stabilization Force,
should allow us to monitor Bosnia closely, with a View to
evaluating the advances made in the months ahead. It is
essential that the Security Council continue to press for
full compliance by the parties with the Dayton
agreements. Cooperation from countries in the region, in
particular from the Republic of Croatia and the Federal

 

Republic of Yugoslavia, will remain of paramount
importance.
We envisage the renewal of the Security Council's
authorization for the presence of SFOR in Bosnia and the
extension of IPTF's mandate as the expression of a joint
long-term commitment by the international community to
establish an irreversible peace in Bosnia, as called for by
the Secretary-General in his report. It would be
counterproductive and undesirable, however, to interpret
"long-term" as meaning indefinite or open-ended. Let us
hope that in the 12-month period ahead of us Bosnia will
make sufficient progress in overcoming its internal
divisions so as to be able to gradually free itself from an
international armed presence.

Our own historical experience has persuaded us that
tolerance among different ethnic and religious strands is a
stronger and longer-lasting cement for nation-building than
weapons or police activity. As democratic pluralism based
on tolerance takes root in Bosnia and elsewhere in the
Balkans, the emphasis currently placed on military and
public-security issues should progressively shift to
economic and social development, institutional
consolidation and cultural revival. We are convinced that
this is the wish of the majority of Bosnians, young and old,
irrespective of their ethnic or religious backgrounds.

The Secretary-General's recommendation that the
mandate of UNMIBH/IPTF be extended for an additional
one-year period, along with that of SFOR, has been
justified as necessary in the light of the relative fragility of
the complex reconciliation process in Bosnia. Our
understanding is that this recommendation is in line with
the consensus in the Council. We will join in that
consensus.

