President Gasparovic (spoke in Slovak; English text provided by the delegation): I take this opportunity
to welcome the Secretary-General here and to
commend you, Sir, for initiating today's discussion.

The recent history of Africa is replete with
immense human tragedies. Let us recall Rwanda, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Darfur and
northern Uganda, to name but a few. It is our duty to
help African countries to build their own capacities to
protect their populations against genocide, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.

Because of their complexity, African tragedies
must be considered in the context of the interrelated
issues of security, development and human rights, as
stated in the Outcome Document of the 2005 World
Summit. Slovakia therefore follows with concern
economic and political situations in some parts of
Africa that could lead to new conflicts if they should
deteriorate further. In that context, we are very
concerned about the situation in Zimbabwe.

It is difficult to summarize, in the course of a few
minutes, everything that needs to be done to ensure
that Africa joins those regions of the world that are
currently enjoying times of stability and economic
development. Let me point out just a few aspects that
Slovakia considers to be paramount.

First, we need to place maximum emphasis on the
prevention of conflicts. As implied at the Security
Council's open debate in August, it is imperative that a
move from a culture of reaction to a culture of
prevention be made at all levels.

Secondly, equal efforts must be made in order to
address the grievances of the past. Slovakia fully
supports fighting impunity. In that regard, we support

the role of the International Criminal Court in
particular.

Thirdly, it is of key importance that subregional
and regional organizations take a larger share of
responsibility. In that context, it is necessary to
continue to support the development of cooperation
between the United Nations and such organizations.

Fourthly, given the specificities of Africa, it is
necessary to seek innovative approaches. We therefore
welcome and support the deployment of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, as
well as the multidimensional presence of the United
Nations and the European Union in Chad and the
Central African Republic. Despite these positive steps,
the international community should not ease up its
efforts aimed at relieving the suffering of the people of
Darfur, who continue to live in uncertainty and to be
dependant on humanitarian support. We are deeply
concerned at recurrent news reports about aerial
bombardments in Darfur, which pose a threat to the
current fragile peace process. We hope that both the
rebels and the Sudanese Government will cease
hostilities as soon as possible and provide the United
Nations and the African Union with full support in the
process of deploying the Hybrid Operation.

Fifthly, merely reacting to acute humanitarian
crises will not suffice. It is equally important to
systematically address the horizontal problems both in
the medium and long term. In that connection, let me
underline the issue of security sector reform. A non-
functioning security sector is a source of conflict that
also tends to increase the severity and duration of
conflicts. Reform, or the development of a new
security sector, is a precondition for the long-term
stabilization of countries, as well as for the possible
withdrawal of United Nations peacekeeping operations.

In that context, I would like to focus the
Council's attention on a workshop on security sector
reform that we are preparing together with the
Republic of South Africa. The workshop will be held in
Cape Town on 7 and 8 November 2007.

The Slovak Republic wants to contribute
adequately to the efforts of the international
community aimed at ensuring peace and security in
Africa. In the framework of development aid, we
currently have projects in place that are focused on the
development of infrastructure, education, health care
and small- and medium-sized businesses. We are
convinced that economic growth and improved social
conditions are key factors in conflict prevention.

In that connection, I would also like to highlight
the statement made by President Bush in the General
Assembly today (see A/62/PV.4) suggesting buying
crops produced locally in Africa in order to help local
agriculture. It is equally crucial to build democratic
institutions, ensure the rule of law and promote human
rights and good governance. In that regard, it needs to
be noted that no external support can replace the role
and efforts of the countries concerned.

In conclusion, let me once again express my
gratitude to you, Mr. President, for initiating today's
discussion. I believe it will contribute to an even more
active approach to the African continent by the
Security Council.

