Mr. Acharya (Nepal): At the outset, let me
congratulate you, Sir, on Austria's assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month. I
would like to thank you for organizing this briefing and
for the opportunity the Council has given me to speak
on behalf of Nepal. I also thank you for your kind
words to me. I further thank Ms. Karin Landgren,
Representative of the Secretary-General in Nepal, for
her kind words.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive report dated 26 October (S/2009/553)
on United Nations assistance in support of the peace
process in Nepal, at our request. I would also like to
thank Ms. Landgren for her presentation highlighting
the major issues and developments since the Council
extended the mandate of the United Nations Mission in
Nepal (UNMIN) in July.

Nepal's nationally driven peace process is unique
in its characteristics. Since it started in June 2006, the
peace process has made remarkable achievements and
completed several important milestones. The signing of
a Comprehensive Peace Agreement in November 2006,
successful elections to the Constituent Assembly in
April 2008, and the declaration of Nepal as a federal
democratic republic in May that year represent some of
the singular achievements of the peace process.

The Council is aware that Nepal's most inclusive
Constituent Assembly is moving ahead constructively
in the task of writing a new constitution, in accordance
with the aspiration of the people of Nepal. The

 

constituent parties of the present coalition Government
and the political parties outside it have expressed their
sincere desire to conclude the task of promulgating a
new constitution, reflecting the sentiments of people of
all strata of society in Nepal, by May 2010. Various
thematic committees of the Constituent Assembly have
been seriously engaged in this task, in which there is
strong participation and cooperation from all sides.
After the election of the Chairman of the Constitutional
Committee, which is entrusted with producing a new
draft constitution, the task of constitution-making has
gained further momentum.

Similarly, the important business of the
integration and rehabilitation of the armed personnel of
the Unified Communist Party of Nepal-Maoist
(UCPN-M) currently living in the cantonments is being
undertaken by the statutory Special Committee entrusted
with this task. The Committee has been reconstituted,
including the representatives of the UCPN-M, and has
since been meeting to devise practical guidelines, its
programme of work and format of a political
agreement on this subject. We are confident that the
Special Committee and its Technical Committee will
complete the remaining task of reaching an agreement
on all issues related to the future of the cantonments.
Similarly, there has been significant progress regarding
the release of under-age and disqualified armed
personnel in the cantonments, and this process is likely
to conclude soon, as the Representative of the
Secretary-General has just highlighted.

UNMIN has been doing its job in accordance
with the mandate of this Council, including in the
monitoring of arms and armed personnel, as per our
request as stipulated in the peace agreements. It is our
intention to conclude the tasks of UNMIN as soon as
possible within its mandate, which expires on
23 January 2010. To that end, the Government of Nepal
is committed to doing everything in its power, including
by reaching the necessary political agreements required
for the logical conclusion of the peace process.

In that regard, I would like to refer to a meeting
held yesterday, 5 November, among the representatives
of the 22 parties that constitute the coalition in the
present Government. In that meeting, the parties
expressed their commitment to bringing the peace
process to a logical conclusion and bringing about a
new constitution through the elected Constituent
Assembly. They have also asked the UCPN-M. to
withdraw its continued blocking of the legislative

 

session of the Constituent Assembly in order to allow
the budget to be passed, and to withdraw its agitation
programmes, including the blockades of Government
offices in other areas, saying that such programmes are
against the spirit of the peace agreements. They have
also asked the UCPN-M. to be flexible towards
cooperation and consensus on matters related to the
peace process so as to avoid further escalation and
confrontation among the parties to the peace process.

With respect to the assessment contained in the
report of the Secretary-General of the nature of the
Government in Nepal, the constituent parties of the
Government are of the view that it is up to the parties
and the sovereign legislature in Nepal to decide on the
type of Government they desire. They are always open
to including all the parties in the Government and have
specifically asked the UCPN-M. to join the coalition.

The report would have been more balanced if it
had taken into account the sincere efforts made by the
Government of Nepal in addressing key issues of the
peace process and in resolving outstanding issues for
creating conducive environment for making further
progress thereof. Similarly, it is the view of the
Government that the references in the report implying
parity between the regular national army and the
former rebel combatants living in the United Nations-
monitored cantonments, who may have to be either
integrated into the security forces or rehabilitated into
society and their families, are not likely to facilitate a
positive outcome in the ongoing negotiations on the
future of the cantonments.

It is important to note that the senior political
leaders of major political parties are talking to each
other, and it is expected that they will soon reach an
agreement to resolve the current impasse in the
09-59689

 

Legislature-Parliament and to end the street agitation
so that they will be able to move forward in the spirit
of dialogue and consensus stipulated in the peace
agreements.

Despite occasional setbacks, Nepal's peace process
has continued to make significant strides. It may
sometimes seem like it is moving one step backwards,
but it will eventually end up moving two steps forward.
That is how we have been able to come this far. We are
confident that the same spirit will guide our process to
its rational end. In this important process we ask the
Security Council to stay the course to help us achieve
the desired outcome and to assist us in building on the
momentum and progress that we have made so far.

On a personal note, since this will be my last
statement in the Council as I will complete my tour of
duty as Permanent Representative next week, I would
like to thank you personally, Sir, the Austrian
delegation, each of the members and representatives
who have been working with us, and the Security
Council, individually and collectively, for the
constructive cooperation and support provided to the
peace process in Nepal and for the friendship that they
have extended to me personally.

