Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Lacroix,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Sidikou, Permanent Secretary of the Group of
Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), Mr. Buyoya, African
Union High Representative for Mali and the Sahel, and
Mr. Serrano, Deputy Secretary-General for Common
Security and Defence Policy and Crisis Response at the
European External Action Service, for their briefings.

The Security Council meets again to consider the
situation in the Sahel region, which continues to be very

volatile, as shown by the attacks against the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force, the international forces and the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali. That has a profound impact on the
local populations and civilians.

Likewise, challenges in the areas of security,
governance and development have increased. The
complex security environment persists, including
asymmetric threats from armed and terrorist groups,
as well as transnational crime, trafficking in drugs and
arms and human smuggling and trafficking, among
other things. The aforementioned elements not only
jeopardize the stability ofthe countries ofthe region but
also represent a threat to the political peace processes.

All the elements that I have mentioned, added to the
lack of adequate sustainable and predictable funding
for the Joint Force, have delayed its full and effective
operationalization, in addition to it still lacking, among
other things, communications equipment, air assets
and, above all, training for its members.

In that regard, we commend the significant amount
of financial contributions to the Force. However, we
underline the urgent need for the support to continue
materializingthroughtherapidandpromptdisbursement
of all pledges announced by donors that have not yet
been honoured. We emphasize that it is crucial to
accelerate the full and effective operationalization of

the G-5 Sahel Joint Force.

At the same time, Bolivia has repeatedly reiterated
the urgent need to analyse but, above all, identify the
structural causes of conflicts. In the specific case of
the Sahel, such causes have had a profound impact
on the current context of the region. The bloody
consequences of interventionism and regime-change
policies triggered, in the aftermath of the 2011 conflict
in Libya, the collateral destabilization of the Sahel,
bringing chaos with disastrous results that continue
until today.

Regrettably, in addition to the precarious security
situation, the Sahel presents other great challenges. The
threat of a large-scale humanitarian crisis and the risk
of food insecurity affecting nearly 5 million people,
including refugees and displaced persons, not to
mention the adverse effects of climate change, further
exacerbate the crisis in the region.

Despite the bleak outlook in the Sahel, we would
like to emphasize the significant efforts of the regional
and subregional organizations, led by the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union. We welcome
and commend the efforts and the considerable political
will of Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali, Mauritania and the
Niger in terms of cooperation and operationalization

of their forces on the ground. The G-5 Sahel Joint
Force is a great and exemplary demonstration of the
coordinated efforts of the African Union and the United
Nations.

An example of the great work and effort of the

G-5 Sahel is evident in the six joint operations
carried out in the border areas, including through the
increased deployment of troops. We encourage the
States members of the G-5 Sahel to take the necessary
measures to consolidate the new operations through the
prompt adoption of a timeline for operations and the
full deployment of troops.

In addition, we believe the full and complete
implementation of the United Nations integrated
strategy for the Sahel is vital in terms of a comprehensive
framework to strengthen governance, security and
development in the Sahel region. We also welcome
the launch of the United Nations Support Plan for the
Sahel, fine-tuned on the margins of the African Union
summit held in Nouakchott in June of this year.

Last but not least, it should be highlighted that almost
a year after the adoption of resolution 2391 (2017), there
remains much to be done. The refusal of some members
of the Council to define the G-5 Sahel Joint Force
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations
has made its deployment and operationalization even
more difficult. We believe it crucial that the Security
Council take urgent and relevant steps in that regard in
order to protect and safeguard the life and integrity of
millions of people in the Sahel.

