Mr. Normandin (Canada) (spoke in French):
First of all, I would like, Sir, to thank you and the
Mexican delegation for organizing this important
meeting.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2009/ 189) and the Under-Secretary-
General, Mr. Pascoe. The report is a very useful
document to understand mediation as a key instrument
for the maintenance of peace and security. As the
Secretary-General said, very little attention and few
resources are devoted to mediation. That is all the more
surprising, since that approach is very relevant and
promising as well as cost-effective when seeking a
solution to a conflict.
Last January, at the Security Council's open
debate on peacekeeping operations (see S/PV. 6075),
Canada stated that, following the Brahimi report,
special attention should be paid to some existing or
new challenges that the United Nations needed to meet
in the field of peacekeeping. In particular, Canada
underlined the importance of harnessing the preventive
capacity of the United Nations, as prevention remains a
fundamental and joint responsibility of the United
Nations, its senior officers and the Member States. The
unique legitimacy of the United Nations in the field of
mediation and conflict resolution is widely
acknowledged. However, beyond the Secretariat's good
offices, it is important to recall that Chapter VI of the
United Nations Charter also bestows on this Council
the general responsibility to engage in prevention
activities.

Canada also stressed the importance of the
political dimensions of peace operations. Increasingly,
conflicts are not fully resolved when a peace operation
is deployed, and the regional dimensions or the partial
respect for peace agreements complicate a large
number of operations. In such cases, the political
dimensions of peace operations become vital.

Yet, it must be acknowledged that those political
dimensions are not well integrated within peacekeeping
structures. Continued mediation efforts before, during
and after the deployment of a peacekeeping mission,
whether or not there is a comprehensive peace
agreement, are paramount to the success of United
Nations efforts to re-establish peace and security.

The Secretary-General's report makes excellent
recommendations. I should like to speak in particular
about four of these.

First, Canada unreservedly supports the need to
build on the progress of the Mediation Support Unit
(MSU) within the Department of Political Affairs.
Canada has provided funding to the MSU to develop its
roster of external experts for rapid deployment.
Canada's contribution to that project will be
supplemented by a list of Canadian mediation experts.
Secondly, the imbalance between the number of
men and women in senior mediation posts should be
corrected. To date, there have been no women among
chief mediators, and very few in formal mediation
roles of any kind. Canada applauds the Secretary-
General's expressed intentions in that regard and
requests that concerted efforts be made across the
United Nations system to turn that commitment into
results.

Thirdly, mediation efforts require dedicated
expertise to ensure that appropriate and inclusive
approaches are applied to all sectors. The nature of
conflict is changing, and our response must adapt
accordingly. Increasingly, sexual violence is used as a
tactic of warfare; ceasefire and other mediated
agreements must acknowledge and address that issue.
Resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008) provide
essential guidance on these matters for mediators.

Fourthly, the Secretary-General mentions the
importance of strengthening regional mediation
capacities. Canada fully supports the recommendation
to ensure closer partnerships with regional and
subregional organizations. Let me also add to the list
the important contribution made by the International
Organization of la Francophonie, inter alia, in Chad
and the Central African Republic.

(spoke in English)

With respect to the Americas, Canada is
developing a partnership with the Organization of
American States (OAS) to deploy Canadian mediation
support expertise within the OAS Department of
Democratic Sustainability and Special Missions. Let
me also note that Canada continues to assist in the
effective implementation of the Kenya National
Dialogue and Reconciliation agreements to encourage
the ongoing political dialogue between the coalition
partners through the mediation assistance of the Panel
of Eminent African Personalities.

Successful mediation efforts demand synergies
among the various departments, funds, programmes
and agencies of the United Nations. As different
aspects of peace agreements are addressed, the work of
mediation experts and various United Nations
representatives from other fields can be mutually
reinforcing.

Let me note that Canada is currently undergoing
an internal policy exercise to consider past engagement
in mediation processes and to examine options for
enhancing Canada's contribution to the prevention and
resolution of conflicts through mediation in the future.
As we begin to see the appearance of new trends in
mediation - including the next generation of
mediators, such as non-governmental organizations -
the Security Council's work on the maintenance of
peace and security is going to be affected and it must be
agile and responsive to these changing circumstances.

In conclusion, let me say that Canada looks
forward to engaging with the United Nations in this
area and to supporting the work of the Security Council
in particular.

