We thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his briefing today. Peacekeeping operations are a vital and indispensable tool for the maintenance of international peace and security. We would like to express our support for, and commitment to, the Action for Peacekeeping (A4P) initiative and the Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations, and we encourage Members that have not yet endorsed them to do so. Likewise, the Dominican Republic reaffirms its commitment to the implementation of resolution 2378 (2017). That is why we value the quarterly performance consultations held by the Department of Peace Operations, enabling us to make better-informed decisions that are even more relevant to the current context and address urgent needs. We believe that the availability and timely deployment of properly trained and equipped personnel are among the elements that lead to better performance. Collective action is vital to support missions, particularly as they face major challenges amid a pandemic in addition to the extremely demanding context in which they operate. Those challenges are exacerbated if the mandates are not matched with the proper funding for their implementation. As the Secretary-General said, we need a budget that accommodates the mandates, not mandates that accommodate the budget. The importance of strengthening cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations to underpin the work of peacekeeping operations at the strategic and operational levels is evident, contributing to the efforts of Member States, both the host country and the troop-contributor countries. We therefore appreciate the number of tools and systems that have been introduced in peace missions for performance evaluation, while we believe that it is essential to share intelligence and to reduce the gaps in essential equipment, which will translate into greater security and staff performance. There is an undeniable link among capacity-building, security and the protection of peacekeepers given that they are deployed in complex and challenging political and security environments, facing asymmetric threats. In addition, such personnel are consistently threatened by deliberate attacks against them. It is therefore imperative to ensure their safety and protection. In that regard, we extend our condolences to the families of the peacekeepers who have lost their lives due to the coronavirus disease pandemic. That sad reality highlights the importance of closely monitoring and evaluating the impact of the pandemic on peacekeeping operations, particularly with regard to the protection of civilians, which, we believe, requires prioritizing, readjusting and the resources allocated to them probably increased. The development, planning, implementation and review of peacekeeping operations must have a gender perspective. We trust that resolution 2538 (2020), an initiative of Indonesia, will reinforce that perspective and hence the full, equal and meaningful participation of women at all levels and positions in peacekeeping operations. Likewise, it is necessary to strengthen the zero-tolerance policies for acts of sexual and gender-based violence committed by peacekeepers and ensure the deployment of gender and women's protection advisers, as well as child protection advisers, and that they are fully funded and have the appropriate level of seniority. Last Wednesday, the Security Council held an Arria Formula meeting on the implementation of the resolutions on youth, peace and security by United Nations peace missions. Under-Secretary-General Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and the other briefers were emphatic about the need to comply with such resolutions. We hope that the missions develop and implement youth, peace and security strategies tailored to each context and designate youth, peace and security focal points, in line with resolution 2535 (2020). In conclusion, the Dominican Republic reiterates the fundamental role played by peacekeeping missions. Such missions are the best example of multilateralism and cooperation. Only through joint will and efforts will we one day successfully achieve lasting and sustainable peace.
