Mr. Kubis: When I was last here three months
ago in September (see S/PV.7035), I highlighted the
positive trajectory as Afghanistan undergoes ambitious
security, political and economic transitions. Today I
can reiterate that progress continues and efforts are by
and large on track, although not without challenges and
temporary setbacks and at a heavy cost in life and limb
to Afghan and international soldiers. I would like to
express my condolences over the deaths of six NATO
soldiers who were killed today in a plane crash in
southern Afghanistan.

Yes, there is volatility. There is uncertainty.
However, the fundamental elements required to
enhance stability in Afghanistan and the wider region
are being consolidated as the drawdown of international
forces continues. The consultative loya jirga's recent
endorsement of the bilateral security agreement
between Afghanistan and the United States reinforced
the widespread expectations for the finalization of
that important framework for ongoing partnership
and, by extension, continuity in broader international
engagement.

Predictability is critical to building confidence
in the future. We must resolutely continue working
together to ensure a sovereign and sustainable State
that will never again become a haven for international
terrorism and organized crime, including, notably,
narco-business. This is in everyone's interest.

The critical importance of holding credible polls
on time and in full accordance with the Constitution
is widely appreciated. Technical preparations and
political momentum for the agreed election day of
5 April remain on track and are further advanced than
previous polls. The security challenges are real and
should be proactively and realistically addressed in
order to promote maximum inclusion and avoid any
pretext for disenfranchisement or delay. This includes
transparency on the location and status of polling
centres, with important decisions to be made in the
coming period.

The polls and the surrounding political environment
should also contribute to national unity and not enflame
or exacerbate tensions, including ethnic or sectarian
divisions. Observation efforts - not just on election
day but of the environment leading up to polling and
the compilation of results - can strengthen confidence.
I urge Member States, together with regional and
multilateral organizations, to contribute to efforts in
this regard.

Afghanistan's regional relationships and establishing
its rightful place in a cooperative neighbourhood will be
the best guarantors of future stability and sustainability
both for Afghanistan and its for neighbours. Iparticularly
welcome the positive momentum in relations between
Afghanistan and Pakistan. The recent high-level visits
are an important demonstration of mutual willingness
to build trust and cooperation in all spheres of mutual
interest. I was encouraged by the recent reception of
Afghanistan's High Peace Council at the highest levels
in Islamabad. There is now broad recognition across the
region that political solutions will be key to sustainable
peace, security and prosperity.

The Istanbul Heart of Asia process continues
to demonstrate potential in enhancing multilateral
relationships and regional approaches on Afghanistan.
Recent progress in talks on the Iranian nuclear
programme in Geneva is being closely followed in
Kabul as potentially contributing to an environment
more conducive to peace and stability in Afghanistan
and the region, as well.

In my meetings with the leaderships of
Afghanistan's neighbours and regional partners, I heard
concerns centred around current uncertainties. This
included the potential for volatility post-2014 if there is
a vacuum that could encourage the spread of Al-Qaeda-
linked international terrorism and criminality, with
implications across the region. Most immediately,
another record-setting year of poppy cultivation and
production in Afghanistan - resulting in some 5,500
tons of opium - is of grave concern. This menace
threatens the health, security and economic well-being
not just of Afghanistan but also of the region and the
wider international community.

It is civilians who continue to bear the brunt of
the conflict. By the end of November, the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
had recorded 2,730 deaths and 5,169 injuries - a
10 per cent increase over the same period in 2012. The
Mission's data continues to show that armed opposition
groups are responsible for the vast majority of such
casualties. As Afghan forces assume the security
lead, this brings with it increased responsibilities for
ensuring the protection of civilians. Working to build
understanding of human rights obligations, together
with promoting the transparency and accountability of
Afghan security institutions, should be an important
element of international training and assistance going
forward.

Humanitarian needs will likely increase.
Afghanistan remains a country of chronic poverty,
which exacerbates vulnerability to natural disasters and
conflict. Winter is an additional stress. Even as such
needs increase, so do the dangers to those seeking to
assist. So far in 2013, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs has recorded 237 incidents against
humanitarian personnel, facilities and assets, including
36 deaths, 24 detentions, 46 injuries and 72 abductions.
The Security Council has already expressed its strong
condemnation of two particularly tragic incidents in
this period. On behalf of the humanitarian community
in Afghanistan, I express my deep gratitude for that.

Continued momentum in the development
agenda is required to ensure continuity and progress
throughout the upcoming political transition. In taking
stock of progress on the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework and in building a forward-looking agenda,
arrangements are currently being finalized for a special
Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board meeting on
29 January 2014.

Some areas, such as elections, have seen
encouraging results, but greater efforts are needed in
others, such as the implementation of the law on the
elimination of violence against women. UNAMA's
latest reporting has found that Afghan authorities
registered more reports of violence against women
under the law over the past year, but that prosecutions
and convictions remained low. Increased levels of
reporting are a positive development, but must be met
by real will to enforce legal prohibitions on harmful
practices against women, including the prosecution of
perpetrators.

The role of UNAMA, and more broadly of the
United Nations in Afghanistan, appears to be widely
appreciated. A need for greater internal United Nations
coherence and efficiencies is recognized. Assistance
must be delivered in ways that reinforce and strengthen
the capacity of Afghan institutions to deliver services
to their people, in line with agreed national priorities.
This includes increasingly integrated efforts across the
United Nations family in support of comprehensive
approaches to tackling the illicit economy and improved
coherence in the delivery of justice and enhancing the
rule of law.

While not seeking in any way to pre-empt Council
discussions on a future mandate, at this juncture I
foresee the continued need for an integrated mission
streamlined around core areas, namely, good offices in
support of Afghan-led processes, leading development
coherence among international stakeholders, and
human rights monitoring and advocacy, including a
particular focus on the rights of women and children,
as well as humanitarian assistance.

I thank Council members for their clear statements
in previous debates supporting stability in UNAMA's
resourcing in the coming biennium. The budget must
necessarily be informed by the mandate, which remains
extensive and complex. In particular, I would like to
highlight the value of the Mission's national footprint,
which is a unique network. Our field offices are
essential to mandated elections work and human rights
monitoring in particular. Reductions in funding would
most likely, and most unfortunately, require additional
closures.

Essential elements of Afghanistan's transition are
coalescing and efforts remain generally on track. The
key at this delicate time is enhancing predictability. We
must remain patient and not waver in our determination,
ensuring that mutual efforts remain firmly focused on
strategic interests and ultimate goals shared by both
Afghans and the international community.

