Mr. Adam (Belgium) (spoke in French): I wish first
to congratulate the delegation of the Netherlands on the
excellent manner in which it has been carrying out the
duties of the presidency this month, particularly through the
endeavours of the Prime Minister of the Netherlands,
Mr. Kok.

I associate myself with the statement made by the
delegation of Finland as President of the European Union,
especially with respect to the progress report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of the
recommendations contained in the report on the causes of
conflict and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa. Moreover, I fully subscribe to the
views expressed by Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim, Secretary-
General of the Organization of African Unity (OAU), and
by the representative of Algeria, on behalf of the current
Chairman of the OAU.

Let me take this opportunity to explain my country's
approach and aims with regard to Africa, and more
specifically with regard to Central Africa and the Great
Lakes region. The Vice-Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Belgium, Mr. Louis Michel spoke in
the General Assembly last week of the need for a more
active and more generous policy towards the African
continent, which has suffered so greatly; he even
proposed that the fifty-fourth session of the Assembly
should be held under the banner of Africa.

The Security Council too must demonstrate Vision
and shoulder its responsibility to restore peace in a
continent which today has by far the world's largest
number of victims of conflict - dead, wounded, missing,
refugees, displaced persons and the victims of anti-
personnel landmine - not to mention endemic diseases
such as AIDS, malaria and sleeping sickness, which are
an unprecedented scourge of the continent and which it is
even more difficult to combat when the countries they
affect are involved in war.

The Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement has aroused great
hope. Now it must be implemented, and we would be
very concerned by any delay or prevarication. This means
that the parties concerned should demonstrate the political
will to solve the root problems of the present conflict, and
should seek lasting solutions throughout the region. To
encourage and support them, the international community
must make a considerable effort; here the Security
Council must be a driving force.

The point is not to find ad hoc solutions to
individual problems. In some regions of Africa, despair is
so great that many see no prospects for improving their
lot other than through armed struggle. We must change
that way of thinking by showing that only peace can
bring happiness and prosperity: peace, and certainly not
military victories that bring illusory gains at the cost of
untold suffering.

We therefore believe that peace should be
complemented by a partnership pact setting out specific
commitments in the economic, financial and social areas.
Such a pact would mobilize donor countries and
international financial institutions and their resources as
well as recipient countries. Belgium will make its
contribution and will step up its direct contacts, its
cooperation and its financial support.
History has forged special links between my country
and that region, along with responsibilities which my

 

country intends to shoulder in a responsible and consistent
manner, as Mr. Michel said last week. Belgium has the
capacity to do this. My country has a reserve of men and
women with experience of Central Africa, its customs, its
languages and its economy. Our institutes of agronomy
have acquired great expertise in tropical agriculture and
animal husbandry, and the Antwerp Institute of Tropical
Medicine has a well-deserved reputation worldwide. Those
are only some examples of the kind of potential that
Belgium can place at the service of Africa.

Africa must help us help Africa, for if the world's
good intentions are to be effective in benefitting that
continent, African leaders too must work to create a context
for the peace and good governance that are necessary for
development. Financial and technical cooperation can exist
only in a climate that ensures its effectiveness. Cooperation
cannot be based on giving partners the benefit of the doubt:
it develops and flourishes in a climate of predictability and
stability.

