Mr. Le Drian (France) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I should like to thank you, Mr. Prime
Minister, for having convened this debate on an issue
that you know to be so important to my country. The
issue of peacekeeping reform comes in response to
two requirements that are more important than ever
before: on the one hand, the need for results, so as to
respond to the growing complexity of crises and the
expectations of peoples, and, on the other, the need
for resources in a world in which they are limited and
in which effectiveness is no longer just an option but
an imperative.

This twofold requirement can be seen in all
areas of public action, but the Charter of the United
Nations conferred upon us a unique responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
This responsibility creates immense expectations and
requires that we commit to ceaselessly analysing our
actions; our capacity to address crises; our successes,
because they do exist; and our limitations.

Here I will not resort to facile criticisms of
peacekeeping to the effect that it is useless, ineffective
and too costly, for we must not overlook the considerable
progress that has been made in recent years or the reality
that United Nations peacekeeping operations often are

the sole guarantors of a minimum level of security and
a minimum level of civilian protection.

Here I wish to pay tribute to the 120,000 military,
police and civilians who are deployed throughout the
world in difficult theatres of operations and who daily
serve on our behalf as messengers and actors for peace.

However, we must also pay attention to criticism.
We must not underestimate it; it must be our compass for
tirelessly seeking better responses. It is this constructive
criticism exercise that must enable us to move towards
more effective and efficient peacekeeping, strengthen
what we can do better, change what we can do differently
and stop what we do not know how to do.

It can be difficult, in certain theatres, to see an
end to peacekeeping operations. The United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has been deployed in that
country for 18 years, and prospects for withdrawal
remain remote. In South Sudan, the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan, which was created to support
the emergence of the youngest State in the world, now
faces a civil war and a humanitarian crisis that it is
having great difficulting addressing. In Mali, the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali, which was deployed to stabilize a
country facing terrorist threats, has the sad record of
being the deadliest United Nations operation.

This simple list shows the limits that we have
reached. The United Nations has become the answer to
all ills, and it is expected to deal with, at the lowest
cost possible, the full spectrum of crises and ensure the
protection of civilians, stabilization, security, justice,
reintegration, human rights, humanitarian assistance
and support for the political process. This is no
longer tenable.

The other obstacle is the temptation to substitute,
in cases where peacekeeping has been established by
importing solutions from outside. We thought that by
deploying 10,000 or so soldiers in support of a peace
agreement we could settle conflicts for good. We have
now seen the limitations of that approach in South
Sudan and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. A
massive peacekeeper presence no longer guarantees
that we will be able to have a decisive influence on
the choices of the stakeholders involved in a crisis or
conflict. With that in mind, I believe that it is time to
update our way of thinking and consider two avenues.

First, we must strengthen States' capacities, also
known as reforming the security sector. The fact that it is
so often discussed without actually being accomplished
has made the term something of a bogeyman. However,
if supported by a credible political process, it is key to
achieving sustainable security. We must acknowledge
that we have not succeeded in that area. We must
continue to reflect on it and come up with new responses
so as to better engage and involve host countries and
those that are the most affected in taking charge of
their own security. That was what we were hoping for
in supporting the initiative of the Group of Five for the
Sahel (G-5 Sahel), five States that are dealing with the
threat of terrorism and every kind of trafficking and
that have decided to overcome their differences, pool
their limited resources, coordinate their efforts and
take joint action. They are also some of the poorest
countries in the world, facing a threat that concerns
us all. We therefore have a collective responsibility to
support them. That is the first avenue - strengthening
State capacities.

The second concerns more generally the importance
of finding the tools best adapted to evolving threats
and complex crises, such as President Macky Sall
referred to earlier. Today in Mali we are dealing with a
paradox. On the one hand, we have the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA), established under Chapter VII,
which has considerable resources but no mandate
to combat terrorism, for reasons with which we are
familiar. On the other hand, there is the Force conjointe
du G5 Sahel, which has a mandate to counter terrorism
but few if any resources, and must plead for support
from its partners without any guarantees or visibility.
That is not good enough, and if granting MINUSMA a
counter-terrorism mandate is not the solution, we must
come up with something else.

Of course, as has been pointed out several times,
the United Nations does not have a monopoly on
crisis management. The European Union and the
African Union and its subregional organizations have
become key players in settling crises. We must make
better use of the added value of all of them to ensure
a coordinated, committed response. We must reinvent
the linkages among those tools. In that regard, I can
only echo the Secretary-General's analysis and the
paths that he highlighted in his opening address to the
General Assembly (see A/72/PV.3). We must all focus
on our core tasks and, to that end, we must find ways to
help our regional partners become more effective.

In the past 12 months the United Nations and the
African Union have worked hard to come up with
meaningful options for an African response to the
security challenges facing the continent. Some issues,
including the critical one of financing, are still pending
and must be refined. I can hear the reluctance and even
hostility to this on the part of some, but I firmly believe
that that is where the future lies. I am aware of the
major efforts that the African Union has undertaken,
and France stands ready to work together with our
African partners to fulfil the commitments made in the
Security Council, when the time comes.

I would like to assure the Council of France's
support for its efforts regarding the topic that brings
us together today. France will remain committed to
working for more effective peacekeeping for the benefit
of the world's most vulnerable peoples.

