We wish to congratulate Estonia on its assumption of the presidency and wish your delegation, Mr. President, the best of luck in fulfilling its duties. We pay tribute to the Dominican Republic for its leadership in its first-ever virtual presidency of the Council in the month of April. The current and prolonged circumstances give this debate on working methods a higher significance. Lebanon thanks the briefers for their insights. Let us express our support to Ambassador Inga Rhonda King, Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, in her capacity as the new Chair of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and other Procedural Questions. The informal retreat on the working methods of the Security Council, organized by Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and the State of Kuwait in January of this year, was a much welcome initiative. It offered interesting ideas and food for thought in helping to improve the working methods of the Security Council. We also commend both countries for providing a summary of the discussions held at this retreat, which ultimately enables the wider membership and other stakeholders to reflect on the discussions. As rightly highlighted in the concept note (S/2020/374, annex), transparency and efficiency should go hand in hand, a fortiori under these extraordinary circumstances. It is important to acknowledge the important work done by the Security Council members and the Secretariat to rapidly adapt the work of the Council to this unforeseen situation, while trying to uphold some of the key principles steering their activities. The Council has been able to adapt its work essentially through improved technology platforms, namely, video-teleconference, which offers the opportunity to widen the net of people who are invited from outside to brief the Council. Online meetings have made it possible to continue the functioning of the Council and the Organization. The Council could consider developing specific working methods for the virtual work of the Security Council on the basis of the three letters contained in documents S/2020/372 of 7 May 2020, S/2020/253 of 27 March 2020 and S/2020/273 of 2 April 2020. Still, it must be understood that it cannot permanently replace in-person meetings, and these should apply only during extraordinary and unprecedented circumstances. One of the concerns we express is that multilingualism - a cornerstone of the work of our Organization - has not been fully guaranteed, through interpretation, for instance, or the timely translation of documents. The Council can improve the efficiency of its work by enhancing meaningful communication and the involvement of concerned countries in the decision-making process. This type of involvement is conducive to better and fairer implementation of Security Council resolutions, thereby improving the efficiency of the Council. We continue to call for a more analytical content of the Security Council report to the General Assembly, and to improve its timeliness. On the prevention front, we believe that more visiting missions of the Council could take place, with the possibility of having a particular outcome. In this transitional period, improved and continued communication between the Security Council and the wider membership remains necessary to keep us from creating a virtual wall.
