Mr. Klein (United States of America): I thank you,
Sir, for this initiative on security and water, which is a
good follow-up after the meeting held last November
(see S/PV.7818) under Senegal's presidency.

I too would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his insightful briefing.

As we have heard today, growing demand, rampant
pollution and changing water conditions contribute to
water insecurity in many regions of the world. Water
is becoming an increasing factor in migration, civil
unrest and State failure. Transboundary water problems
are particularly challenging but there are successful
models for dealing with them throughout the world.
One such example is the growing cooperation among
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia, Croatia and Slovenia
on the Sava River.

Soon after the stability pact for South-Eastern
Europe was signed in 1999, those countries began
to work together to improve the joint management
of the Sava River. With backing from their political
leadership and a broad base of support from external
partners, cooperation began in 2001 and culminated in
the establishment of the International Sava River Basin
Commission in 2005. It is one of the first regional
agreements put into place after the wars in the Balkans
ended. It demonstrated the genuine potential of water
to strengthen regional ties. It was a common project on
navigation use and conservation that improved people's
lives and promoted peace and security.

The United States brings a similar viewpoint to
water issues in our own neighbourhood. As we said
during the open debate on water, peace and security
in November 2016 (see S/PV.7818), for more than 100
years the United States has had close relationships
with both our neighbours on water management. The
United States, Canada and Mexico have benefited. My
country has a long history of supporting cooperation
on shared waters. We are a contributor to the Shared
Water Partnership, multi-donor group managed by
the Stockholm International Water Institute, which
Minister Lovin mentioned. The Partnership aims to
build political will for cooperation on water worldwide
and to support Government-led efforts to solve difficult
transboundary water challenges. We strongly encourage
other donor countries to support the Shared Waters
Partnership, and for countries in need to make use of
the Partnership so that it might support their efforts to
cooperate on water.

While there is no standard approach to solving
disputes related to water, our experience points to four
key ingredients for preventive diplomacy to address
transboundary water issues. The first ingredient
involves increasing the capacity of Member States
and stakeholders to better understand and engage on
transboundary water challenges. Countries require the
ability to negotiate, resolve disputes and implement
agreements relating to their water resources. Secondly,
there must be sound data to establish a common
understanding of the available water resources and
the potential benefits and costs of development. All
parties in a potential dispute should have the same
understanding ofwhat is at stake. Thirdly, it is important
to incentivize cooperation through investments in
joint projects that demonstrate the benefits of working
together. The final and most important ingredient, in
our view, is political will. Political leaders should make
cooperation a priority, set clear goals and empower
technical experts, which is in line with what the
Secretary-General outlined in his statement today.

Making progress on how we address transboundary
water issues should not be episodic. We need to build on
our successes so that countries and their people realize
that, whether it is across sectors or across borders,
cooperation on water opens up new opportunities for

growth and reduces risks for all of us. I would like to
thank you again, Mr. President, for organizing this
important debate.

