Mr. Wang Xuexian (China) (interpretation from Chinese): The Chinese delegation sincerely welcomes His
Excellency the Foreign Minister of Botswana to the
United Nations to preside personally over this meeting
and congratulates him on his country's assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
February. We wish you, Sir, complete success in carrying
out your noble duties.

I should also like to thank Ambassador Emilio
Cardenas of Argentina for the remarkable manner in
which he directed, with his trademark efficiency and
promptness, the work of the Council last month.

I also wish warmly to welcome to today's Council
meeting the Foreign Minister of Angola and the other
Foreign Ministers from the delegation of the Organization
of African Unity (OAU), and thank them for their
important statements.

The Angolan peace process is at a critical juncture.
The Lusaka Protocol, which was finally signed by the
Angolan Government and UNITA at the end of 1994 after
long and hard negotiations, and the entry into force of the
cease-fire agreement thereafter, have laid a favourable
foundation for that peace to which the Angolan people so
ardently aspire. The determination of the two Angolan
parties to engage in national reconciliation and end their
conflict by peaceful means has set an example for the
settlement of other conflicts and disputes in Africa. It is
our ardent hope that both Angolan parties will maintain
the cease-fire and unswervingly bring to fruition the grand
cause of national reconciliation in accordance with the
timetable set forth in the Lusaka Protocol, thus making
their contributions to peace and stability in Angola.

 

The establishment of the third United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III) is not only strongly
desired by the two parties and by the people of Angola, but
is also a concrete expression of the actions of the
international community to support and consolidate the
Angolan peace process. OAU's sending such a large, high-
level delegation to New York to participate in the
consideration of the Angolan question in the Security
Council has demonstrated the readiness of African countries
and OAU to contribute at least their share to the settlement
of conflicts in Africa. This is highly commendable. The
United Nations and the Security Council should attach great
importance to resolving African problems and to
strengthening cooperation with OAU so as to help Angola
set out along the road towards rebuilding peace at an early
date.

The post-cold-war world is far from tranquil. We
urgently need a peaceful and stable environment in order to
promote our common development and improve people's
standards of living. That need is all the more pressing and
actual in today's Africa, for without peace and stability in
Africa, world peace and stability will remain elusive.

Africa needs no external interference, but it does need
assistance and cooperation. The Chinese Government and
people have always set great store on strengthening
cooperation with the African countries. We have been
following closely, and supporting, the efforts of the
Angolan people towards an early end to the war and for a
lasting peace. We also sincerely support OAU in its efforts
to safeguard political stability in Africa and actively
participate in international affairs, particularly the political
settlement of African conflicts.

The Angolan people, which is now in the throes of a
critical transition, need continued strong support from the
international community. The draft resolution before us
reflects the objective situation and Angola's need. The
Chinese delegation will therefore vote in favour.

