Mr. Adorn (Cote d'lvoire) (spoke in French): First of
all, my delegation would like to congratulate China on
its assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of November and assure it of our full
support in carrying out its duties. We also congratulate
Bolivia on the high quality of its presidency last month.

MycountrythankstheProsecutoroftheInternational
Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her
very informative briefing on the Court's work on cases
related to the situation in Libya. As a State party to the
Rome Statute, Cote d'Ivoire reaffirms its full support
for the efforts of the International Criminal Court to
promote international justice and combat impunity in
Libya, as well as around the world.

My delegation is concerned about the deteriorating
security situation in Libya, after more than seven years
of crisis. Since 26 August, those living in Tripoli have
been the innocent victims of fighting that has resumed
between militias and armed groups. The ceasefire
reached on 4 September is a glimmer of hope that
must be preserved. To that end, Cote d'Ivoire urges
the international community to work to consolidate
the current truce and create the conditions to avoid a
resumption of clashes among armed factions.

Despite an unstable security situation, Cote d'Ivoire
welcomes the actions of the Libyan Government of
National Accord, which is resolute in its commitment
to the process leading to the organization of free,
transparent and credible elections. Those elections
will undoubtedly be an important step in building
the rule of law, as well as restoring peace and lasting
stability in Libya. I would like to commend the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Libya,
Mr. Ghassan Salame, for his efforts and reassure him
of our full support.

Cote d'Ivoire remains firmly committed to respect
for human rights and the principle of accountability. We
firmly believes that the fight against impunity is a basic
requirement of the national reconciliation process. In
that regard, my delegation reiterates its appreciation
for the efforts of the Office of the Prosecutor to
meet the demand for justice, without which there can
be no lasting peace and stability in Libya. We also
strongly encourage the Prosecutor and her Office and
commend the high-quality work of the International
Criminal Court over the past 20 years in the area of
combating impunity.

My country also welcomes the Prosecutor's decision
to consider the possibility of extending the ICC's
jurisdiction to crimes committed against migrants.
That decision is justified in the light of known cases of
torture, rape and the sale of migrants, which challenge
our collective conscience. To that end, Cote d'Ivoire
urges the Libyan authorities to engage in constructive
cooperation with the Office of the Prosecutor in order
to shed light on allegations of serious human rights
violations in Libya. We urge them to allow those
accused of serious crimes to be tried by the ICC.

Notwithstanding the efforts of the Government
of National Accord to restore its authority throughout
Libya, its unstable security situation and weak
institutional capacity have a negative impact on the
establishment of institutions that guarantee the rule of
law and compliance with obligations under the Rome
Statute. The difficulties encountered by the Prosecutor
in executing various arrest warrants are symptomatic of
the complexity of the political and security environment
in Libya.

My country therefore calls on the international
community to continue its multifaceted support
for the Government of Libya to enable it to fulfil its
commitments to promote and protect human rights
and establish accountability mechanisms against
individuals or armed groups convicted of serious
human rights violations.

In conclusion, my country reiterates its support for
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court and
calls on the international community to support the
efforts of the Government of National Accord to restore
peace and stability in Libya.

