Mr. Gallegos Chiriboga (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I should like at the outset to ask you, Sir, to
convey to the Minister my country's gratitude for her
presence in this Chamber, which is clear evidence of
the high priority she attaches to this issue, which is of
such importance to all of us.

Let me express my country's gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his clear and detailed report on
children and armed conflict contained in document
S/2003/1053, in which he gives us an update of the
work done and achievements registered in this area.
These achievements are very significant, and have, as
the Secretary-General states in his report, been
particularly notable since 1998 when the item on
children and armed conflict was officially incorporated
in the Council's agenda.

As the report notes, without doubt, a broad and
solid framework enabling the international community
to continue working to protect children affected by
armed conflict is provided by the machinery relative to
this question in the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict, the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court,
International Labour Organization Convention No. 182,
the African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the
Child, the relevant provisions of the 1949 Geneva
Conventions and of the Convention of the Rights of the
Child and relevant Security Council resolutions.

In order to ensure the necessary protection of
children, especially given the persistence of conflicts
of all types in various regions of the world,
international instruments must be strengthened, their
scope must be extended and they must be effectively
implemented and complied with.

The right machinery must be established to
ensure that those legal instruments are binding not only
for Member States of the international community but
also for the irregular groups that exploit children by
involving them in armed conflicts. The international
community must condemn parties to conflicts that
violate the legal and moral norms relative to this issue.
Ecuador believes that the international community
must work with those demonstrating their
determination not to involve children and must act
against those who defy that resolve of the majority.

We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Mr. Olara Otunnu, for his worthy initiatives, for the
commitments achieved in various countries to ensure
the welfare and protection of children in conflict and
for greatly raising awareness among authorities and the
public about the situation of children affected by armed
conflict. We also welcome Ms. Carol Bellamy,
Executive Director of UNICEF, who requested that this
issue be included in all resolutions of the Security
Council.

One of the saddest and most tragic realities that
we have noted in various regions of the world is the
profound suffering to which children are exposed as a
result of armed conflicts. The report of the Secretary-
General takes note of this intolerable reality, including
the risks that children face: killings, orphanhood,
mutilation, abductions, the denial of education, the lack
of health care and grave psychological disorders and
trauma. The report also notes the grave situation faced
by child refugees and internally displaced children,
who are vulnerable to violence, recruitment, sexual
exploitation, disease, malnutrition and death.

The report of the Secretary-General underlines
the effects on children of the illicit trade in small arms,
landmines, munitions and unexploded ordnance and the
problems caused by the recruitment and use of children
in armed conflicts. We believe that allowing children to
bear arms and participate in violence, conflict and
destruction is inhuman and contrary to the highest
values of all societies.

Considerable progress has been achieved in
ending the recruitment of child soldiers, as noted in the
report. However, much remains to be done, many
challenges remain ahead. In these circumstances, the
international community must give priority attention to
this situation by taking more concrete measures to
ensure the most basic rights of children and to mitigate
and prevent the grave effects of armed conflicts on
children. Ecuador supports the proposal the President
made this morning on the specific measures that should
be adopted.

The results achieved in protecting the rights of
children in armed conflicts are praiseworthy.
Nevertheless, we hope that all the necessary efforts and
actions will be redoubled to alleviate the consequences
of armed conflicts on children the world over.

