Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Hedi Annabi for his briefing. I must congratulate
Mr. Soren Jessen-Petersen on his appointment as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), and I should like to
assure him once again of France's full support.

I associate myself with the statement to be made
by the representative of the Netherlands on behalf of
the European Union. Therefore, I wish to confine
myself to a few observations.

We set a strategy for Kosovo last fall - a
strategy clearly expressed by the presidential statement
of 12 December 2003 (S/PRST/2003/23). The very
regrettable events of 17 to 19 March 2004 were a
particularly negative development. We strongly
condemned them, and we reacted energetically. The
fact remains that our strategy has not changed; we
simply know now that the situation is extremely fragile
and that we have little time in which to act, particularly
in the light of the date of mid-2005. We are totally
convinced that unwillingness to act would be the worst
possible attitude. Ambassador Eide has sent a report to
the Secretary-General in which he puts forth ideas on
that subject. Like others, we would very much like to
read it so that we can take that contribution into
account in our consideration of the matter.

On 14 July, the political leaders of Kosovo's
various communities adopted a joint declaration that is
a step in the right direction towards getting the political
process back on track after the March violence.
However, that declaration will have value only if it is
translated into concrete action and progress in
implementing the standards, particularly with regard to
security and the rights of minorities. We welcome the
very positive results of the joint UNMIK-Provisional
Institutions working group on decentralization. The
framework document that came out of its work is a
good basis upon which to move in the direction
indicated by the Security Council in its presidential
statement of 30 April 2004 (S/PRST/2004/l3). We
hope that the Kosovo Serbs and all other parties
concerned with this issue will take an active part in
finalizing the decentralization plan, particularly with
regard to pilot projects and the mapping of districts at
whose level decentralization will take place.

More generally, France wishes once again to
strongly encourage the Kosovo Serbs to participate
fully in the institutions that the international
community has created in Kosovo - and first of all in
the elections. My country is convinced that it is in the
greater and long-term interest of the Kosovo Serbs to
participate in the forthcoming general elections of
23 October 2004. We encourage them to register
immediately on the electoral rolls, which will be
irrevocably closed on 12 August: in exactly one week.
It is important that others also encourage them to do
that and, in any case, that Kosovo Serbs not be
dissuaded from doing so.

