Ms. Loj (Denmark): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The Central and
Eastern European countries associated with the
European Union - Bulgaria, the Czech Republic,
Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania,
Slovakia and Slovenia - and the associated countries
Cyprus, Malta and Turkey, as well as the European
Free Trade Association country of the European
Economic Area, Iceland, align themselves with this
statement.

At the outset, I would like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Guehenno for his comprehensive
briefing. That briefing, together with the Secretary-
General's report, gives a broad overview of the recent
developments in Kosovo.

On 26 October, municipal elections took place in
Kosovo. It was the first election in which all Municipal
Assemblies were elected for a four-year term. The
European Union commends the professional manner in
which it was held. We consider the election as both free
and fair. We, therefore, join the Council of Europe in
describing it as a significant step in the process of
creating a democratic society in Kosovo. One incident,
however, did cast a shadow over the otherwise peaceful
elections. That was the killing of the President of the
Municipal Assembly and two other persons in
Suhareke/Suva Reka. The European Union strongly
condemns those killings. As they represent an attack on
democracy in Kosovo, the perpetrators must be brought
to justice.

The municipal elections were characterized by
great variations in voter participation from district to
district. The European Union regrets the low
participation among the Serb minority in certain areas.
We share the view of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Steiner, that the Serb minority,
by staying away from the ballot, missed an opportunity
to contribute to shaping its communities.

Laying the foundation for economic progress is
key to putting Kosovo on the path to a better future.
We agree with the Secretary-General that the main
challenges are creating jobs, ensuring that the basis for
a market economy takes firm root and increasing the
capacity of the Kosovo workforce through education
and training. The Provisional Institutions must assume
primary responsibility for the economic and social
progress of all of Kosovo's inhabitants. In that regard,
the European Union supports the work of the Kosovo
Trust Agency in establishing clear property ownership,
facilitating and protecting new investments, and
putting idle assets into productive use. We expect to
see full support from all parties to meet the difficult
challenges ahead.

Continued efforts to combat organized crime and
corruption will also be essential for creating a
sustainable basis for economic development in Kosovo.
The European Union welcomes the work done by the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and the Kosovo Police Service in
that regard.

United Nations authority throughout Kosovo is
unconditional. There can be no partition, no mono-
ethnicity and no parallel structures. Progress in
Mitrovica depends on replacing parallel structures with
legitimate institutions. It also depends on the full
cooperation of local actors such as UNMIK and the
Kosovo Force (KFOR) in the implementation of
resolution 1244 (1999). In that connection, we stress
the importance of continuing the process towards
further decentralization. We reiterate our call on
Belgrade to discontinue its financial and political
support of the parallel structures, including the bridge
watchers. Kosovo Serb judges and prosecutors must
work within legitimate legal structures and thereby
contribute to upholding the rule of law in Kosovo. To
achieve that, we must replace fear with trust and build
confidence through the concrete measures proposed by
the Special Representative. That will open the way to
ending confrontation between those on opposite sides
of the Ibar. There is nothing to loose by cooperation for
the people in the northern part of Mitrovica. They only
stand to gain.

The issue of returns remains the test of Kosovo's
progress towards a multi-ethnic society. The European
Union remains supportive of UNMIK efforts to
increase the pace of returns. In that regard, we
welcome the information in the Secretary-General's
report that the previous trend of net outflow of
minorities has stopped. The European Union
furthermore welcomes the cooperation between
UNMIK and Belgrade in ensuring that returns are
sustainable. However, much more could be done. We
regret the reports of local obstruction of returns and
urge all authorities to work with UNMIK and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees to improve the conditions for returns.

The fate of missing persons also remains a
serious strain on all communities in Kosovo. Resolving
that remains a crucial obstacle to reconciliation, and
should therefore receive the necessary attention by the
authorities. To that end, the European Union welcomes
the work of the newly established Office on Missing
Persons and Forensics.

In conclusion, I would like to stress that the
European Union remains supportive of the Special
Representative's policy of "Standards before Status".
The focus of the Kosovo politicians must be on
achieving a culture based on the rule of law, tackling
crime and violence, and ensuring economic progress
before considering the future status of Kosovo. The
final status of Kosovo will need to be addressed in due
course in line with resolution 1244 (1999). The
solution must secure a society that is both multi-ethnic
and democratic and that contributes to stability in the
wider region.

