Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Thank you, Mr. President,
for Germany's continuing leadership on Afghanistan
here in New York. Allow me to especially welcome the
important presence of His Excellency Foreign Minister
Rassoul and Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Kubis.

2012 will be remembered as the year when
the common goal we have of a secure and stable
Afghanistan, with strong prospects for long-term
economic and social development, was underwritten
by unprecedented support from the international
community. The commitments pledged at the Chicago
summit, and most recently at the Tokyo Conference,
give us the best chance at reaching that goal. Such
support, which, as we know, included pledges for the
Afghan National Security Forces and $16 billion over
four years, underlines the importance of Afghanistan's
stability, not just for itself, but for regional and global
security. The outcomes of those key meetings send an
undiluted message both to the people of Afghanistan
and to the insurgency: Afghanistan will not again be
abandoned.

My own country has underpinned our bilateral
relationship through a comprehensive long-term
partnership, increasing our development assistance
from $165 million this year to $250 million by 2015, and
providing $100 million a year to the Afghan National
Security Forces' sustainment. Since the Council last
met, we have signed a memorandum of understanding on
development cooperation, which provides a long-term
framework to ensure the effective implementation of
Australia's development partnership with Afghanistan.

We welcome the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework and Afghanistan's vision of self-reliance. It
is now up to us and the Afghan Government to implement
the Framework. Through the Framework, Afghanistan
itself now has the tools it needs to make progress
on peace and security, to improve governance and
economic development, to tackle corruption and protect
human rights, and to develop regional cooperation and
private-sector and civil society engagement.

We know that the role of the United Nations will
become increasingly important as the international
military presence is reduced. The presence ofthe United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
sends a reassuring signal of the collective resolve to
protect the progress that is being made. We welcome
the Secretary-General's assurances in his most recent
report (S/2012/703) that despite a substantial decrease in
resources to UNAMA, the United Nations commitment
for Afghanistan is undiminished, and we ourselves
remain a strong supporter of the UNAMA mandate.

The successful conduct of the political transition
in 2014, accepted by the Afghan people, is critical
to Afghanistan's future stability, and, to this end,
credible presidential and parliamentary elections are
vital. We welcome the commitment Afghanistan has
made to announce its election timetable, consistent
with its Constitution and domestic laws, by early 2013.
Clearly, however, there is still a lot of work to be done
to ensure the elections' success. We support the work
of the United Nations on elections, and, through our
development partnership, Australia is working to
promote participation in public debate and Government
decision-making, particularly by Afghan women.

The importance of an Afghan-led peace process,
the work of the High Peace Council, and the Afghan
Peace and Reintegration Programme were all reinforced
at Tokyo. However, the fact is that there has been,
unfortunately, little progress in peace talks. Those have
effectively stalled.

Despite the challenges, political dialogue will be
key to securing Afghanistan's future, and peace cannot
be made at the expense of the gains of the past decade,
particularly in human rights, democracy or the rights of
women and children.

Regional cooperation is also important for security,
a peace process and economic development. Australia
will continue supporting the "Heart of Asia" process,
and we look forward to the next round of meetings here
in New York next week.

The process of transferring security responsibility
to the Afghan National Security Forces is proceeding
well. While the transition process will inevitably
experience challenges, it remains on track, and that
must be recognized. The Security Forces' security
leadership, as we know, covers 75 per cent of the
population. By the middle of next year, the Security
Forces will lead the delivery of security across their
nation.

Australia welcomes efforts by the Afghan
Government and coalition forces to mitigate the threat
from insider attacks, which, as we know only too well,
have claimed many lives recently, including those of
Australian personnel. As tragic as such incidents
are, we must not let them dent our resolve to see our
mission through, so Afghanistan does not again provide
sanctuary for international terrorism.

To conclude, my Government remains committed
to working with the Afghan Government, the Afghan
people and our international partners to ensure that,
after far too long, the people of Afghanistan can once
again enjoy peace and stability. Of course, we all know
that this will come only with resolve, strong mutual
commitment, relentless hard work and long-term strong
commitment. My own country will remain committed
to that.

