Mr. Laram (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I
congratulate you, Madam President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month and on your successful leadership,
especially with respect to the progress achieved on the
situation in Syria.

I also thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, for his briefing this
morning.

I offer my deep condolences to the Government
and people of Pakistan on last week's air disaster.

No matter what happens in the Middle East, the
question of Palestine remains the central issue affecting
peace and security in the region. The final months of
last year saw new momentum emerge towards an
agreement between the Israeli and Palestinian parties in
the wake of the statement issued in September 2011 by
the Quartet, in which it proposed a time line for
re-activating negotiations between the two sides to
reach an agreement by late 2012 that would address the
salient issues. This led to a return to negotiations after
a long pause as exploratory talks began under the
commendable auspices of Jordan.

The Palestinian side has shown the desire to
engage in direct, serious and productive negotiations.
In response to a Quartet request, Palestinians
demonstrated vision, in all negotiating rounds, to
resolve the two most prominent issues, namely, borders
and security. The Palestinian position was made clear
at the highest level in a letter sent last week by
President Mahmoud Abbas to his Israel counterpart.
That letter reaffirmed the principles of the peace
process, which are known and acknowledged by
everyone, and stressed the commitment of the
Palestinians both to those principles and to national
unity, so as to ensure respect for agreements signed by
Israel. The letter also explained how Israeli practices
aimed at stripping the Palestinian Authority of its
powers. On the other hand, the Israeli side did not
provide anything in writing, merely declaring its
determination to retain control of the Jordan Valley and
the eastern border.

On the ground, the Israeli Government has
continued to expand settlements at a significant pace,
even after the meetings at Amman began. The
international community has spoken with one voice
about the seriousness of the continuation of settlements
on the peace process, as it undermines the two-State
solution by imposing a fait accompli that makes it
impossible to build a viable Palestinian State in the
territory occupied by Israel in 1967, including East
Jerusalem. That renders negotiations meaningless and
pointless and serves to emphasize the absence of
sincere intentions on the part of the Government of
Israel, the occupying Power, to achieve peace. One is
inevitably led to the entirely objective conclusion that
the Israeli side bears full responsibility for the failure
of the talks and the freezing of negotiations, and
therefore for the standstill in the peace process.

Against that backdrop, we reiterate our demand
for the countries sponsoring the proposed Quartet
solution that believe in such a negotiated solution to
bring to bear the political pressure necessary to ensure
the success of that endeavour. We also call for support
for the latest resolution of the Human Rights Council,
which called for the deployment of an independent
international fact-finding mission to investigate the
repercussions of Israeli settlements on Palestinian
rights.

While the international community remains
unanimous about the basic aspects of an ultimate
solution - a two-State solution - insisting that the
Palestinian request that it be recognized as an
independent State be rejected does a disservice to such
a solution. We should like to take this opportunity to
renew our call on States that have not yet recognized
Palestine to do so. We also call on the Security Council
not to obstruct the Palestinian demand for full
membership of the United Nations, given that such
recognition could contribute to the achievement of a
peaceful, comprehensive, just and sustainable
resolution of the issue.

We would like to reiterate that a solution to the
crisis in the Middle East is contingent upon Israel's
withdrawal from occupied Palestinian territories, the
occupied Syrian Golan and the remaining Lebanese
territory occupied by Israel. A solution also depends
upon Israel's cessation of violations of Lebanese
sovereignty, including all ongoing violations of
international law and international legitimacy, as set
out in the relevant resolutions of the United Nations,
especially resolution 1701 (2006). Nevertheless, Israel
has not stopped violating that resolution - by
violating Lebanese sovereignty in various ways, most
recently by building a road in the occupied Lebanese
Shaba'a farmlands.

The question of Jerusalem continues to be a
primary concern of the peoples of the Arab and Islamic
world, who are worried about the Israeli authorities'
escalation of illegal measures aimed at the Judaization
of occupied Jerusalem. The International Conference
on Jerusalem was held last February in Doha on the
initiative of His Highness Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa
Al-Thani, Emir of the State of Qatar, who emphasized
that Jerusalem, with its mosques and churches, will
remain an Islamic and Christian Arab city. He also
stressed that Israelis do not realize that there is no
Palestinian State without Jerusalem, and no Jerusalem
without the Al-Aqsa Mosque. He also urged the
international community to express its rejection of
attempts by the Israeli Government to desecrate the
sanctity of Islamic and Christian Holy Sites, to
demolish homes in the city and expel its Arab
population, and to withdraw the identity documents of
its inhabitants so as to Judaize Jerusalem. Such
attempts are in violation of the obligations of Israel,
the occupying Power, under international law. They
also run counter to the relevant United Nations
resolutions, in addition to undermining the prospects
for a peaceful resolution of the Palestinian question
and the Arab-Israeli conflict.

Since the outbreak of the peaceful uprising of the
brotherly Syrian people, in March 2011, the State of
Qatar has expressed its deep concern about what is
happening in a dear brotherly Arab country, and
demanded that the bloodshed among the Syrian people
and violations of fundamental freedoms and human
rights stop. The State of Qatar has strived to play a
positive role to resolve the crisis in a way that spares
the country future disasters. However, the Syrian
authorities unfortunately decided from day one to
resort to a repressive solution entailing killing,
detention and torture, in the hope of extinguishing
demonstrations. They also described unarmed
demonstrators as armed and terrorist groups. As a
result, some in Syria have had to resort to self-defence,

l2-30747
which is a legitimate right, especially given that it was
in reaction to the negative acts of the Syrian authorities.

The State of Qatar has repeatedly emphasized the
cohesion and unity of the Syrian people and the
sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity of sisterly
Syria and the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. As we have supported the efforts of the Arab
League to resolve the crisis, we continue today to
support the efforts exerted by the international
community, led by the efforts of Mr. Kofi Annan, Joint
Special Envoy of the United Nations and the Arab
League. Those efforts are based primarily on the Arab
plan of action adopted by the Arab League on
22 January.

We also support the implementation of
resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012), on the
deployment of an observer mission to Syria. In that
regard, we sincerely hope that the mission will succeed
in its tasks. However, past experience has taught us
that granting the Syrian authorities one opportunity
after another only results in the Government reneging
on its promises and continuing to savagely crack down
on its people. Since the deadline to stop the violence
on 10 April, the Government has continued to violate
its obligations to maintaining military forces in
population centres and by bombing cities with heavy
weapons and even by helicopter.

The Syrian Government has also continued to
arrest and torture people and to commit other abuses,
confirming its non-compliance with any of the elements
of the six-point plan of the Joint Special Envoy, as
indicated in the letter that the Secretary-General
addressed to the Council on 19 April (S/2012/238).
None of that bodes well for the success of the Mission,
and requires that the international community,
including the Security Council, take firm action to
protect the Syrian people in the event of
non-compliance by the Syrian authorities with the
provisions of resolution 2043 (2012), as well as all the
provisions of the Annan plan as an integral unit, within
a specific time frame.

In spite of all of that, we are consistent in calling
for a peaceful solution that meets the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian people and holds accountable
all those involved in the killings and the violations of
their rights, freedoms and dignity. To reach such a
solution, the Syrian Government must commit to the
immediate cessation of all acts of violence and killing,
the protection of Syrian civilians, the withdrawal of
military forces and the demilitarization of cities and
villages, as well as to ensuring the freedom of peaceful
demonstration and the immediate release of all those
detained in such events and allowing the free entry and
movement of the media, including the immediate
admission of humanitarian assistance provided by Arab
and international relief organizations.

The representatives of the Syrian authorities have
directed several false accusations against my country,
aimed at distorting the facts on the ground, in a
desperate attempt to divert the attention of the
international community from the terrible massacres
being committed by those authorities against the
brotherly Syrian people. We stood with Syria before
the current crisis. Only an ungrateful party would deny
that fact. Here we ask, is there any worse terrorism in
the world than bombing homes, mosques and churches
with tanks, mortars, artillery and airplanes?

