Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank Mr. Jan Eliasson, Ms. Caroline
Anstey, Ms. Rebeca Grynspan and Mr. Kofi Annan for
their statements.

Like other colleagues, we condemn the attack
on the United Nations Office in Mogadishu, and we
would like to express our solidarity with the people and
Government of Somalia.

As was correctly pointed out by former Secretary-
General Kofi Annan in his briefing, conflicts that are
directly or indirectly linked to natural resources are not
limited only to the African continent. In that regard,
the President of my country said recently that the major
battles of the twenty-first century would be fought over
our people's natural resources. South America is one of
the planet's richest regions, not only in terms of human
resources but also in natural resources - water - as
well as all the various other potential resources being
discovered on a daily basis. Conserving our natural
resources therefore also means safeguarding a region
in which peace prevails.

There is no doubt that the exploitation of natural
resources can be a source of conflict in many countries
owing to the irresponsible conduct of transnational
corporations, shadowy contracts, and the vulnerability
of State sovereignty in managing natural resources.
But that can also be due to the existence of weak States
and already deeply unequal societies where poverty is
rife and there are domestic problems having to do to
with rivalries and tensions caused by ethnic or religious
differences or all-out power struggles. Nevertheless,
despite the fact that the illegal or illegitimate exploitation
of natural resources can unleash, exacerbate or provoke
armed conflicts on many occasions, we should avoid
establishing a causal link between armed conflicts and
the exploitation and management of natural resources.

What is unquestionable is the link that exists
between the structural causes of poverty and inequality
in some countries and regions and the irresponsible,
illegal and corrupt exploitation of renewable and
non-renewable natural resources. Argentina believes
that the international community should focus its
efforts on addressing this issue by establishing a more
fair and balanced world order. It should put an end to
the illegitimacy of an unregulated financial system and
a world market in which everything has a value except
respect for human rights. We emphasize that we should
concentrate our efforts on ensuring sustainable human
development based on the principle of shared but
different responsibilities, with a focus on human rights
and on economic, social and environmental aspects.

We believe that the mandate to deal sustainably with
the exploitation and management of natural resources
lies clearly with the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council, the funds and programmes, the
regional economic commissions and the various
specialized agencies. As we are seeing, organizations
such as the World Bank and regional development banks
also have an important role in line with the priorities
that have been established by the Governments and the
peoples of the various countries concerned. Security
Council intervention should occur only in conflict or
post-conflict situations that are on its agenda and that
represent a threat to international peace and security.

With regard to conflict prevention, the Security
Council should refrain from intervening in a situation
in which it believes that there is a potential risk that the
exploitation of one country's natural resources could
fuel a conflict that could pose a threat to international
peace and security. In that way, it would avoid any
intervention in the internal affairs of a given country.
Preventive diplomacy should play a leading role in
such situations by dealing with problems that affect
the stability of a particular region or subregion when
it comes to the exploitation and management of natural
resources. The United Nations must focus its efforts in
a coordinated way and in cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations.
With regard to conflict and post-conflict situations
in which the Security Council intervenes, the work
of the United Nations should be aimed at supporting
those measures that tend to break the link between
the predatory exploitation and corrupt management
of natural resources and the emergence of conflicts,
while transforming natural resources into a key to
development, promoting economic diversity and
strengthening democratic, legitimate and transparent
State institutions.

Bolstering the rule of law in the framework of
peacebuilding strategies requires the strengthening
of the debate and the collective work under way
among the General Assembly, the Security Council
and the Economic and Social Council, including
through the Peacebuilding Commission. Similarly, the
implementation of sanctions regimes by the Security
Council are on some occasions effective in combating
the effects that the illegal trade in natural resources
can have in a given situation. However, the success of
such measures can be ensured only if both States and
companies in the private and public sector alike fully
meet their obligations imposed by the Security Council.

In conclusion, we believe that the international
community should assume its responsibility not just
with regard to efforts to support peacebuilding and
sustainable human development, but also with regard
to the struggle to combat practices that facilitate the
unregulated greed of the financial system, tax havens
and evasion, and corruption. The management and
the legal, legitimate, fair, responsible and transparent
exploitation of natural resources requires not only a
commitment by the Governments of those countries
where such activities take place, but also a commitment
by the Governments of those countries where the
headquarters of multinational companies involved in
such exploitation are located.

We must recognize the responsibility of destination
and transit countries to prevent any activity related to
the exploitation and management of natural resources
that can lead to or perpetuate a conflict, as well as its
financing. An active civil society is undoubtedly needed
to take clear measures with regard to regulating trade
practices and promoting corporate social responsibility.

Argentina emphasizes the importance of avoiding
the securitization of the development agenda and
making the exploitation and management of natural
resources into the cause of conflicts, leaving aside the
complex interrelationships among its genuine deep-
seated causes. The real way to prevent conflicts at both
the intranational and international level and to maintain
peace and security is through the establishment of
a more just world order that shows more respect for
human rights.

