Mr. Lambertini (Italy): At the outset, I should
like to thank the Secretary-General for his clear and
exhaustive report (S/2017/467) and Under-Secretary-
General Jeffrey Feltman for his comprehensive
briefing. Some issues are worth highlighting for
today's discussion.

Daily brutal violent acts affecting civilians
continue to occur. In that regard, we strongly condemn
the most recent terrorist attacks in Afghanistan, in
London and Manchester of the United Kingdom, in the
Islamic Republic of Iran, in the Philippines, Iraq, Egypt
and France. It is a long list of attacks that ocurred in a
relatively short period of time and, while we want to
express our deepest condolences to the families of the
victims and our solidarity to the affected Governments,
we also want to highlight that this is the most evident
proof of the level of threat that we face.

We are also aware that the threat is increasing
via hate propaganda. Security Council resolution
2354 (2017) raised awareness within the international
community that strictly military counter-terrorism
operations or attempts to block terrorist revenue sources
are not enough. It is crucial that the credibility of their
distorted interpretation of religion be undermined by
effective and widely shared information and education
through solid and durable cooperation with the
private sector, internet service providers and social
media platforms.

We also recognize the importance of the private
sectors in fighting financial flows to the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). We therefore welcome
the report's emphasis on ongoing efforts aimed at
strengthening multilateral frameworks to combat
the financing of terrorism in national legislation and
acknowledging the importance of providing the most
explosive countries with technical assistance and
training programmes.

We share the concern highlighted in the Secretary-
General's report over trafficking in human beings
and cultural property as a means of funding terrorist
activities. Resolution 2347 (2017) on the illicit trade and
trafficking of cultural property, as well as resolution
2331 (2016), which condemns all forms of human
trafficking undertaken by Da'esh and other criminal
groups, are milestones of paramount importance in that
challenge. In that regard, I want to reiterate our strong
condemnation of the smuggling of migrants and human
trafficking that continues to endanger the lives of
thousands of people along the journey through Africa
and the Mediterranean Sea - made more appealing by
its possible contribution to the financing of terrorism. I
want to reiterate that in its ongoing efforts to combine
security and solidarity, my country remains committed
to rescuing and assisting the thousands of migrants who
reach our shore.

We acknowledge that Da'esh will long remain the
most serious threat to the security of our country. While
its military defeat in Iraq and Syria is only a matter
of time, the international community must remain
vigilant by helping to stabilize liberated areas and by
countering and preventing the lingering global threats.
The stabilization ofliberated areas in Iraq, together with
reforms and reconciliation are the strongest antidotes to
the resurgence of a terrorist threat.

As for Syria, only a genuine political transition can
bring about the conditions for completely uprooting
ISIL and other extremist and terrorist actors from
the country. In Libya, outstanding results have been
achieved in he fight against Da'esh. Nevertheless,
counter terrorism must remain a strategic priority.
In order to make it more effective, we continue to
support a solution based on a unified security force
under the control of the Presidency Council. That
will strengthen the legitimate institutional framework
underpinned by the Libyan Political Agreement and the
Security Council.

In time, Da'esh may turn into a more traditional
terrorist and criminal organization with unique appeal
and capabilities. The more the would-be caliphate
disappears from the map, the more it might try to raise
the profile through additional terrorist attacks in our
homeland. In that regard, we welcome the report's
emphasis on returning and relocating foreign terrorist
fighters. Indeed, regardless ofthe size offlows, we share
the concern over the risk of foreign terrorist fighters
returning to their countries of origin or relocating to a
third country.

Still, with respect to returnees, we appreciate
the report's focus on legal aspects - stressing the
centrality of the judicial response to terrorist criminal
activity and the respect for the rule of law. We therefore
believe that the most effective countries should receive
technical and legal assistance in a timely and effective
manner. Moreover, the experience gained in the Lake
Chad basin highlighted in resolution 2341 (2017)
should be considered a model for the larger-scale
development of a strategy for the return, rehabilitation
and reintegration of foreign terrorist fighters.

We welcome the report's reference to a human
rights-compliant approach in countering Da'esh, which
must remain central to the international community's
counter-terrorism strategy. We cannot expect to build
an effective and credible counter narrative without a
crystal-clear record of upholding human rights and
promoting fundamental freedoms, including when
it comes to monitoring terrorists' exploitation of
information and communications technology.

Finally, international cooperation is crucial to
countering terrorism. The United Nations must continue
to play a leading role in fostering law enforcement and
judicial cooperation, including through its agencies
and offices, to strengthen responses to ISIL at the
regional and global levels. We therefore fully support
the proposal to establish a new counter terrorism
office in order to increase the effectiveness of United
Nations assistance to Member States through enhanced
coordination and streamlining. Likewise, Italy is
closely following the implementation of resolution
2322 (2016) adopted on 12 December. The 8 May Arria
Formula meeting, dedicated to the role of national
central authorities, represents one of Italy's specific
contributions in that regard.

