Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I
would like to associate myself with the remarks soon to
be made by the Permanent Representative of
Luxembourg on behalf of the European Union. I would
also like to join other colleagues in thanking Lord
Ashdown for his report and the welcome account of the
progress being made in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as
well as for the drive and determination he has shown in
his role as the High Representative.

If the Council will forgive me, I would like to
express a lateral thought that owes little to Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We have before us, following the
recommendation made by the Secretary-General on
Monday, a proposal for a peacebuilding commission.
Part of the debate on that commission involves the
question of whether it is going to be an advisory body
or a decision-making body. If it is to be the former,
how would one actually get out of it a coherent
indication of policy and the implementation of policy?

I would like to suggest that we have a model
before us this morning, and that is what the High
Representative has done in Bosnia, because what he
has succeeded in doing is to weld together various
international organizations. He has produced a
coherent implementation of policy - even though that
policy is being carried out by different actors - and
involved a very large number of Governments in
cooperation. I think that, as an exemplar for us, it is a
very good one.

The European Union and NATO have been a
motor for peaceful economic and democratic
development across the European continent. I agree
very much with Lord Ashdown that, actually, they will
be the real drivers for change, for progress in Bosnia
and Herzegovina - so that, as soon as we can, we are
able to move into a stability and association process
with the European Union and a partnership for peace
with NATO. That will be the watershed, and that, I
think, will lead to an acceleration of the progress we
are now seeing. Those two organizations, in the
manner they have carried out the transition from the
Stabilization Force (SFOR) to the European Force
(EUFOR), are actually demonstrating how they are
working together for the benefit of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. That progress is very welcome.

I was glad to hear the largely positive briefing by
Minister Colak. However, I must say that his comments
on the role of the judiciary struck me as being a little
bit surprising, especially those pertaining to the role of
international judges, who I had thought were present in
Bosnia and Herzegovina in their existing roles at the
request of the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

But I would strongly agree with two statements
made by the Minister in relation to the judiciary. He
said something that I very much endorse, taking those
statements directly from his comments: "The most
important pillar of every democracy is an independent
judiciary". I agree with that totally, so I take his
remarks as indicating full support for their
independence. Secondly, the Minister stated that all
provisions of the European Charter on Human Rights
should apply. I very much agree with that too. I think
both of those statements are a better basis for moving
forward than reliance, in the Minister's words once
again, on "the usual practices" of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, because "usual practices" in the Balkans
carries with it a connotation that I, frankly, would
rather not indulge in.

There is, however, an impediment to progress:
full cooperation with the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) is still not
in place. We have heard encouraging accounts of recent
transfers - and, indeed, of decisions taken in
Republika Srpska for the first time. Those are very,
very welcome. They reflect the pressure of the
international community, as well as the self-interest of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and its neighbours, to actually
see progress. The Security Council has, on a number of
occasions, made quite clear the obligation incumbent
upon all Member States to do everything they can to
bring fugitive indictees to trial in The Hague. That
remains our position, and it must do. But a blot - a
stain on all our consciences - is the continued
freedom of Karadzic, Mladic and Gotovina. Bringing
those indictees to face the Tribunal now is an essential
element of justice and reconciliation within Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and it is a precondition for Euro-Atlantic
integration.

Can I put it bluntly, Mr. President? Those who
offer support, those who finance and shelter Mladic
and Karadzic, be they criminals, be they agents of
governments or any other institutions in the region,
they are not patriots. They are a reminder of everything
that has disfigured the region in the last 15 years. They
represent nationalist hatred and criminal networks.
They are the biggest obstacle to the success of those
countries. They are, in my view, criminals by
association, at least. They reject the principle of
international justice, and thus they deny on a daily
basis their compatriots the prospect of international
progress. That is what is happening as a result of all
this shelter. That is why the apprehension of those
indictees in particular is vital if Bosnia and
Herzegovina is to take its rightful place in the
international community, which is what we all very
much wish.

