Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to start by thanking
Deputy Secretary-General Mr. Jan Eliasson for his
forceful remarks. I am also grateful for the clear and
thorough briefing by Mr. Andrew Gilmour, Assistant
Secretary-General for Human Rights and Head of the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights.

The report of the commission of inquiry on human
rights in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea of
February 2014 (A/HRC/25/63) sheds light on the critical
human rights situation on the ground. Regrettably, there
has been no sign that the situation has improved since
the report was released. Under such circumstances,
today, the Security Council has rightly decided to
have a briefing under the agenda "The situation in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea" for the third
consecutive year.

The Democratic People's Republic of Korea
conducted two nuclear tests and launched more than
20 ballistic missiles this year, despite the fact that
three-quarters of its population are in need of some
form of humanitarian assistance and that the total
humanitarian funding requirement of the United
Nations and other non-governmental organizations
reaches $145 million. Even as the people in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea suffer from
great unmet needs, the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea authorities pursue nuclear weapons and ballistic
missiles at the sacrifice of the fundamental human
rights and welfare of their own people.

Japan, along with every other Security Council
member, condemns the current state of affairs. The
authorities of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea should respect and ensure the welfare and
inherent dignity of their citizens. That message was
conveyed in resolution 2321 (2016), which the Council
adopted unanimously on 30 November. The same
concern was also expressed in the Third Committee's
draft resolution on the situation of human rights in the
Democratic People's Republic ofKorea (A/C.3/7l/L.23),
which was adopted by consensus in October. As the
High Commissioner for Human Rights pointed out in
his briefing last year, and as has been confirmed by the
briefers today, there is a clear linkage between human
rights violations in the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea and the instability of the region. Addressing
the root causes of the threat to international peace and
security falls undoubtedly within the mandate of the
Security Council.

The abduction of foreign nationals by the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea is a case where
human rights violations and threats to international
peace and security clearly overlap. As the report of
the commission of inquiry on human rights in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea states:

"Since 1950, the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea has engaged in the systematic abduction,
denial of repatriation and subsequent enforced
disappearance of persons from other countries
on a large scale and as a matter of State policy."
(A/HRC/25/63, para. 64)

Hundreds of nationals from the Republic of Korea,
Japan and other countries have been abducted and
disappeared. Abduction committed by the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea undermines the sovereignty
of the countries concerned and casts fear over the
lives and safety of their citizens. At the same time, the
issue is a grave human rights violation as abductees'
invaluable futures have been stolen and their bonds with
their families have been severed. Even now in the harsh
situation of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea,
many abductees are being deprived of freedom and are
awaiting rescue. As abductees and their families grow
older, the issue can avoid no further delay.

Regrettably, there is no indication that the
authorities of the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea have moved to improve the human rights
situation on the ground. Therefore, the efforts of the
international community to ensure accountability are
needed. In March 2017, the Human Rights Council will
receive a report from the Group of Independent Experts
on Accountability for Human Rights Violations in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, as set out by
the Human Rights Council in resolution A/HRC/3l/l8.
I would also like to recall that General Assembly
resolution 70/172 encourages the Security Council to
take appropriate action to ensure accountability.

With that said, I would like to stress that such
efforts do not aim to isolate the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea from the international community. I
trust that the United Nations human rights mechanisms
always have their doors open to the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea for dialogue. We sincerely hope that
at the end of the day, the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea alters its course towards the improvement of
human rights and invests its limited resources in the
improvement of the welfare and fundamental rights
of its citizens instead of in the development of nuclear
weapons and ballistic missiles. We also hope that the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea comes back
to the table of credible dialogue with the international
community in order to resolve our various concerns.
We believe that such a shift will lead to greater stability
in the region.

