Mr. Zainal Abidin (Malaysia): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting and for your
concept paper (S/2010/l65). My delegation aligns
itself with the statement made by the representative of
Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

The concept paper that we have before us all too
quickly assumes that the aim of prompt and effective
action is inherently incompatible with that of gaining
the support of the wider United Nations membership.
By contrast, Malaysia firmly believes that in many
situations, effective action requires the support of the
entire international community. By the same token,
Malaysia firmly believes that the principles of
transparency, interaction and dialogue with
non-members, as well as efficiency, must be applied to
the entire spectrum of the Council's work, including in
the implementation of its resolutions.

Malaysia notes that some measures contained in
document S/2006/507 to enhance the efficiency and
transparency of the Council's work have been
implemented. However, as this exercise has yet to be
completed, regular interactions such as today's meeting
will provide the necessary impetus for their
implementation.

Some of the measures contained in document
S/2006/507 - such as referring to all speakers at
political and ambassadorial level by name and title and
ensuring that draft documents be made available to
non-Council members when these documents are
introduced within informal consultations - lend
themselves to quick implementation; others less so.
Those include such measures as having subsidiary
bodies of the Council seek the views of Member States
and having sanctions committees seek the views of
those States affected by sanctions, which have either
not been put in place or have been done sporadically
and sparingly. This statement is focused on those
measures.
In cases where sanctions committees meet to
discuss the requests of States to de-list entities or
individuals from consolidated lists, that particular State
should have the opportunity to either listen in on the
proceedings of the Committee or be officially informed
of the proceedings in which their requests were
considered. This would enable the State concerned to
better understand why certain de-listings took place,
while others did not.

Further, we believe that the briefings given by the
special representatives or heads of United Nations
missions or by the Secretariat to the Council are
inherently useful because they provide an account of
what is actually happening on the ground.

We advocate, therefore, greater transparency in
the briefings made to the Security Council and for
non-Council members to be allowed to hold watching
briefs without the right to interject or interact. This
would not only generate greater interest in these issues
among the entire membership, but would also afford
non-members of the Council the chance to understand
subjects and viewpoints of the Council.

Finally, we would like to touch on the thematic
debates that now form the norm in the Council's
monthly programme of work. Malaysia appreciates the
fact that regional and subregional organizations are
also invited to speak and participate in open thematic
debates, particularly when such debates are relevant to
a given organization. Further, we hope that the new
trend of increased interaction with troop-contributing
countries will be further expanded, given the
indispensable role that those countries play in the
maintenance of peace and security worldwide.

