Mr. Al-Maawda (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): It is
a pleasure for me to congratulate you, Mr. President,
and your friendly country on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
November. We also thank you for providing us this
opportunity to discuss an extremely important topic for
the international community.

The challenges facing the world have served to
underscore the singular importance of the role played
by multilateral diplomacy in meeting those challenges
and strengthening international relations, while
also supporting the efforts of the United Nations to
ensure the aspirations of the international community.
Multilateral diplomacy therefore plays a critical and
Vital role in upholding international law and advancing
international cooperation. The United Nations has
thereby become the conscience of humankind and
the compass marking the trends of the international
community. For more than seven decades it has served as
a unifying platform aimed at maintaining international
peace and security, mitigating and preventing conflicts,
achieving development and preserving human dignity.

The current international order is experiencing
a critical stage of crises and conflicts, as well as
various challenges that go beyond the imagination of
the founding fathers of the United Nations. Based on
that reality and in order to achieve the goals of the
United Nations as a multilateral system representing
the entire international community, our commitments
as Member States compel us to use our capacities to
promote security and the role of the United Nations so
as to address international challenges and enable the
Organization.

The United Nations has played a vital and significant
role in confronting challenges, conflicts and crises
created by irresponsible policies. The resolutions and
procedures ofthe United Nations, as well as international
legal instruments, have been a safety valve to maintain
international peace and security and respect for the rule
oflaw. They also have been a deterrent against all those
who seek to undermine international security. That is
why cooperation between Member States to achieve the
United Nations goals is a non-negotiable commitment.
No State can work in isolation from other States - a
notion that reflects the concept of collective security in
the international system as stipulated in the Charter of
the United Nations.

Amid the intertwining interests of States and
societies, the commitments dictated by the multilateral
international system call on us to continue working
together and not lose the achievements and gains
attained by the United Nations in different fields,
while upholding the mechanisms identified by the
Charter and the relevant international legal systems.
Those are binding rules to tackle joint challenges and
threats, ensure respect for international law and deter
its violators, ensure respect for the sovereignty and
security of States, prohibit the use or threat of use of
force in international relations, respect the rights of
people to self-determination and prevent conflicts and
crises while resolving existing ones by peaceful means.

Multilateral diplomacy and support for the United
Nations represent an essential pillar of the State of
Qatar's policy. We are keen to continue promoting
the capacity of this international Organization to
achieve its goals. We have continued to strengthen our
international partnerships to achieve the purposes and
principles of the Charter. We are closely working with
effective stakeholders at the international level and
with United Nations bodies to support all initiatives
that help the United Nations to resolve regional and
international crises.

The State of Qatar believes in the principle of
international cooperation and shared responsibility.
We have continued our voluntary contributions to
many activities and programmes carried out by the
Organization at all levels. We have also strengthened
our partnership with numerous United Nations entities
in order to enable them to effectively carry out their
mandates, particularly with regard to international
peace and security, combating terrorism and extremism
and promoting human rights and development. In that
context, we are continuing our efforts to open United
Nations House, which would host representative offices
from many United Nations bodies. That would facilitate
and support their work in the region.

In order to support United Nations efforts to resolve
and prevent conflicts in our region, the mediation
undertaken by the State of Qatar with relevant parties
as part of multilateral diplomatic means has been
appreciated and welcomed by the United Nations. The
aim is to peacefully defuse and settle many ofthe crises
in the region, in line with the purposes and principles
of the United Nations. Last January, the State of Qatar
hosted regional consultations on sustainable peace
in the Middle East and beyond, which is consistent
with our policy to support United Nations efforts and
objectives in the area of peace. The goal was also to
support preventive diplomacy, which is one of the
Secretary-General's priorities. Those consultations
were part of the preparations for the high-level meeting
of the General Assembly that was held in April.

In conclusion, the State of Qatar reiterates its
commitment to the multilateral work at the international
level and to supporting the role played by the United
Nations. We continue our cooperation and partnership
with the Organization in order to achieve the goals for
which the United Nations was founded, which we all
seek to achieve.

