Mr. Razali (Malaysia): Mr. President, you and your
colleagues have begun the year on a promising note by
initiating steps towards greater transparency in the work
of the Council. The Malaysian delegation would like to
commend you for these initiatives, which we hope will be
institutionalized as part of the efforts to make the Council
truly representative as well as being well placed to
address the needs of the Member States.

I would also like to record my deep appreciation to
your predecessor, the Permanent Representative of
Rwanda, for having steered the Council last month.

We recall that the precursor to this report - namely,
the Agenda for Peace - was in itself prepared in
response to a request by the Council. The debate on the
issues raised within the Agenda for Peace evoked, and in
fact continues to evoke, mixed reactions within and
outside the United Nations, developing into a continuing
debate as the issues raised deal with questions of
international peace and security, with substantial focus on
the United Nations peacekeeping activities.

In the General Assembly itself the debate culminated
in resolutions 47/120 A and B, entitled "An Agenda for
Peace." Yet reading the current report as contained in
document A/50/60, entitled "Supplement to an Agenda for
Peace", we are not sure that it is meant for the
consideration of the General Assembly, particularly when
it is noted that this report makes no specific reference to
the General Assembly resolutions 47/ 120 A and B.

We hope, too, that the introduction of this report at
this point, during the work of the United Nations will not
deflect attention from the urgent need to adopt an Agenda
for Development. Indeed, resolution 47/ 120 A, among

 

others, recognized - in its seventh preambular
paragraph - that "An Agenda for Peace" would need to be
complemented with "An Agenda for Development",

"to strengthen the socio-economic development of
Member States as one of the means of enhancing
international peace and security."

As we are all aware, the progress on an Agenda for
Development has been limited and slow.

This morning and for part of this afternoon we non-
Council members, belonging to the general membership,
have had the benefit of listening to the positions of Council
members. Some of the statements made, I regret to say,
reflect entrenched national positions, surely not fully taking
into account the positive and negative experiences at the
United Nations on issues dealing with peace and security
and the mechanism of peace-keeping and peace-making. I
also regret to say that from their entrenched positions the
few will try to continue to dictate the discourse on, and
examination in the Council of, this multifaceted issue. My
delegation believes that the Agenda for Peace and all
attendant issues are better served by discussion in the
General Assembly.

I would like to make a few comments on the
Secretary-General's paper: First, the members of the United
Nations will no doubt be relieved that, unlike the first
report, the current report underlines the importance of the
principle of consent, a principle strongly advocated by
developing countries. Secondly, the current report also
addresses in a forthright manner the issue of sanctions. The
call to take appropriate measures to address the impact of
sanctions on third parties enjoys widespread support within
the membership of the United Nations. While the sanctions
regime has often been vigorously enforced in the context of
specific instances and some countries, the need to address
on an urgent and priority basis the needs of those adversely
affected by sanctions has not been resolved. Similarly,
sanctions serving the specific political agenda of a few
Council members should not be condoned. Sanctions of the
United Nations cannot be seen as a political vendetta in
promotion of special interests. If the Council's action is to
represent a genuine process of collective opprobrium, its
implications, proportionality and reasons for continued
enforcement must bear the result of a continuing collective
examination. In this regard, the recommendation contained
in paragraph 75 of the report of the Secretary-General
deserves the full support of all Member States.

The report of the Secretary-General is excessively
centred on the Security Council and has limited comments
involving the important role of the General Assembly, a
point highlighted in resolution 47/120 B. Taking into
account the fact that all these conflicts continue to take
place in areas of the developing world, the role of the
General Assembly should not be marginalized. After all,
the first United Nations peace-keeping operation was set
up by the General Assembly, which has the power to
establish peace-keeping operations as well. Accordingly,
the report should spell out specific measures in which the
General Assembly could be involved, not only in peace-
keeping but also in the larger question of international
peace and security.

On the observation by the Secretary-General,
contained in paragraph 39, that the Security Council
increasingly tends to micro-manage peace-keeping
operations, Malaysia holds the view that this is a
reflection of the dysfunctional relationship between the
Council and the Secretariat. This situation has arisen
primarily as a result of the preponderant influence of
some powerful members of the Council as well as the
excessive reliance on the financial contributions of some
of these members. Lessons should be learned from this
situation. As for the Secretariat itself, we have high
regard for the competence and professionalism of the
senior officials dealing with peace-keeping. At the same
time, with an annual budget of more than $3 billion the
Secretary-General must put his house in order, just as the
Council must discharge its responsibilities consistently
without resort to double standards and selectivity. At the
end of the day, it is important that leadership be provided
in partnership from the General Assembly, the Security
Council and the Secretariat.

On the issue of consultations between troop-
contributing countries and the Council, the report should
spell out further means to enhance the consultations as
well as to implement Article 44 of the Charter. This is an
issue on which advance work has been done and we hope
that the process of consultations between the troop-
contributing countries and the Council will be
institutionalized.

On disarmament, the Secretary-General admits that
he has chosen to "concentrate on what might be called
'micro-disarmament'" (S/1995/J, para 60). Although he
has endeavoured to elaborate on "micro-disarmament",
generally a euphemism for light weapons, he has not
highlighted the important role of the key producers and
exporters of these so-called light weapons. The Permanent

 

Five, which enjoy special powers in this very Council on
issues of international peace and security, are also the
world's leading arms traders. They have it within their
power to promote genuine and complete disarmament -
nuclear and weapons of mass destruction. A recent issue of
the Harvard International Review has catalogued the various
issues relating to the arms bazaar, which constitutes a major
threat to international peace and security. It has also further
catalogued the role of the major Powers in this context.
Overall, the impression is created that the Secretary-General
has, on this issue, shied away from his own stated desire
for hard decisions.

On the issue of a rapid reaction force, referred to in
paragraph 44, we would like to seek clarification,
considering that a number of countries have agreed to have
stand-by arrangements for peace-keeping. In fact, I wish to
take this opportunity to announce the decision of the
Malaysian Government to participate in the stand-by
arrangements.

Finally, the request, as reflected in paragraph 32, for
a certain amount of discretion in the use of a proposed
contingency provision of $25 million per biennium would
seem to indicate a desire to act independently. This
proposal has come at a time when audit reports have
revealed instances of serious financial mismanagement in
the various United Nations peace-keeping operations.
Hence, Member States may find it difficult to allow for this
discretionary flexibility, given the poor management record.

These observations are not exhaustive. My delegation
would be ready to examine further, in the Council or
General Assembly, the issues raised in this report, in an
effort to bring about collective responsibility on this
important issue.

