Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Equatorial Guinea for taking the initiative of organizing
this meeting on transnational organized crime at sea,
and I welcome the presence of the country's Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation. I also thank
Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), and
Mrs. Florentina Adenike Ukonga, Executive Secretary
of the Gulf of Guinea Commission, for their especially
informative briefings. I wish to make three points.

First, maritime insecurity caused by transnational
crime at sea represents an even greater security threat
given the significance ofthe related economic and social
challenges. The following statistics suffice to illustrate
the risks posed by maritime insecurity: 90 per cent of
world trade is maritime. As previously mentioned, the
Gulf of Guinea is one of the largest offshore oil fields in
the world, with estimated reserves of 24 billion barrels,
or 5 per cent of the world's total reserves, while almost
40 per cent of world's maritime traffic passes through
the Strait of Bab Al-Mandab. Transnational organized
crime therefore has found a natural if not ideal milieu
at sea, while the threats posed to maritime security are
anything but theoretical. Maritime piracy in the Gulf of
Aden and acts ofrobbery in the Gulf of Guinea perfectly
illustrate the threat that transnational organized crime
at sea poses to individuals, States and businesses.
Moreover, some criminal groups know how to take
advantage of maritime insecurity in order to engage
in other forms of trafficking, including trafficking in
migrants, as we have seen in the Mediterranean Sea.
Drug trafficking on the high seas, whether of heroin
from Afghanistan or cocaine produced in South
America, fuels terrorist groups and destabilizes entire
economies by fostering corruption. The plundering
of fisheries resources is another harsh reality that
destabilizes coastal regions and inflicts harmful
environmental and socioeconomic consequences.
Secondly, the alarming observation I just made
makes it all the more necessary to act robustly at the
international and regional levels to contain the threats
identified. France is fully committed to combating
maritime insecurity in many regions, in particular
in the Gulf of Guinea, the Mediterranean and the
Caribbean. In our national capacity, to give just one
example, we have maintained a presence in the Gulf
of Guinea for 25 years through Mission Corymbe and
related cooperation activities in the areas of security
and defence. We rely on a permanent network of
partners to help partner countries strengthen their
coastal surveillance and response capacities and, since
2015, we have been training experts at the Interregional
Institute for Maritime Security in Abidjan. We are also
participating in European Union activities in the Gulf
of Aden under Operation Atalanta, which has played
a key role in reducing the number of acts of piracy
in the region and is currently conducting numerous
programmes to strengthen the capacity of States.
Operation Atalanta therefore represents a true success
story that has made a significant contribution on the
ground, for which the European Union and the States
concerned should be commended.

In the Gulf of Guinea, the States of the Economic
Community of West African States, the Economic
Community of Central African States and the Gulf of
Guinea Commission have been particularly active since
2013. Through the Group of Seven Group of Friends
of the Gulf of Guinea, France has robustly supported
the establishment of an interregional maritime security
architecture as part of the Yaounde process. The
establishment of the Interregional Coordination Centre
for Maritime Safety and Security in the Gulf of Guinea,
which is a unique mechanism for the implementation and
monitoring of the regional strategy to combat maritime
insecurity, represents a major step in that direction.

Thirdly, and in conclusion, I would like to make
three priority recommendations to strengthen our
commitment to combating maritime insecurity. The
first recommendation is to strengthen the capacities
of vulnerable States, which is crucial for preventing
and combating the full spectrum of maritime
crime - piracy, trafficking in drugs, oil and human
beings and the smuggling of migrants. In that regard, it
is necessary to focus on the development of a judicial
and prison system that is capable of addressing those
phenomena within the framework of the rule of law;
UNODC clearly has a central role to play in that area.
The second recommendation is to promote better
cooperation among all State actors and regional and
international organizations, in particular to step up
information-sharing. Close cooperation with economic
and non-governmental actors, beginning with the
maritime industry, is obviously necessary in that regard.
The third recommendation, as a broader priority, is
to ensure that coastal populations are provided with
alternatives by pursuing ambitious development
policies. The combination of those three lines of action
will make it possible to effectively combat transnational
crime at sea.

Rest assured of France's commitment to continue
to spare no effort in that regard.

