The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Senegal.

At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Ladsous
and the other briefers this morning for having accepted
our invitation and, above all, for having illustrated the
difficult conditions of our operations, under which our
tasks are accomplished for the good of humankind. At
this late hour, I hardly need to underscore the growing
importance of police in peacekeeping operations - the
briefers have more than adequately done that. I will
simply note why my delegation took the initiative of
convening this debate.

Senegal is the largest contributor of police units
to United Nations peacekeeping operations. Given
the growing role of the police in those missions, my
delegation considered it useful to take this opportunity,
as we preside over the Council this month, but also
during United Nations police week, to ask Council
members to participate in this interactive dialogue. With
nine formed police units in six police stations, for a total
of 1,250 personnel throughout our theatre of operations
of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID), the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), the United Nations
Mission in the Republic of South Sudan, the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic, the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau, not to mention individual police
officers, Senegal has much to gain from this debate,
by sharing its contribution and experience but, above
all, by listening to others and asking for their input in
order to improve its training and deployment policies
for formed police units in peacekeeping operations.

The 65 recommendations issuing from the
assessments - organized by Mr. Ladsous - on police
units, including documents on strategic guidance, seem
to be on the right path. Shortcomings, weaknesses and
areas of improvement were identified - I will mention
but a few, specifically: the often late deployment of
police to missions, resulting in development aspects
not being included in initial action plans; unqualified
personnel, often due to poor training, which hampers
their operational capabilities; the difficulty ofthe Police
Division in filling vacancies within mission forces;
mandates too rigid for specific and asymmetrical
developments on the ground; the lack of a reliable
and effective information- and intelligence-gathering
system that would enable us to be proactive; but also the
difficulty of missions in preventing the misconduct of

their personnel, which tarnishes the image of the United
Nations. And we have all emphasized the lack of women
personnel, who in many cases are more appropriate for
local policing efforts. The figure cited was 17 per cent,
not 7 per cent, but in UNAMID, with a female Head of
Mission, it is 19 per cent, still a significant degree of
improvement.

I would now like to ask our briefers a few questions,
the first of which - on the issue of the language that the
missions are operating in in the various theatres 4 was
raised by the French delegation. The second has to do
with the fact that peacekeeping missions are increasingly
deployed in hostile environments where functioning
equipment and well-trained personnel are needed
in order to carry out complex tasks effectively.
Mr. Ladsous's Department has frequently deplored
the lack of available equipment. On the other hand,
some missions have problems with a lack of qualified
managerial personnel. What are the implications of
those factors for the execution of mandates? That
question is for all four briefers and Mr. Ladsous.

With regard to MINUSTAH, Hurricane Matthew
recently did enormous material damage to the country
and significantly worsened the humanitarian situation
there. MINUSTAH had to throw itself into assisting
the population, which was very badly affected at a
moment when the security situation was deteriorating,
so the police component was forced to add aiding
the population to its traditional tasks. How, in the
Commissioner's opinion, was it able to combine the two
missions? And what were the constraints in terms of
personnel and equipment?

Regarding UNAMID, where the protection
of civilians is concerned, what steps can be taken
to ensure better physical protection for women in
Darfur - Ms. Makotose is a woman and Force
Commander - who are often at risk of being raped by
armed groups?

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to Mr. Ladsous.

