Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): At the outset, may I
extend to you, Sir, my delegation's warm congratulations
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
the month. Your experience and diplomatic skill will no
doubt guarantee the success of the Council's work under
your wise leadership. We also extend our sincere

 

congratulations to your predecessor, Ambassador
Wisnumurti of Indonesia, for the remarkable and admirable
way in which he guided the affairs of the Council for the
month of November.

Allow me also to express our gratitude to the
Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, for the
comprehensive report before us today and for his efforts to
further the cause of peace and reconciliation in Angola. The
same sentiments are extended to his Special Representative,
Mr. Alioune Blondin Beye, and to the entire personnel of
the United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM. III). They are carrying out their mandate with
determination under difficult conditions.

We note with satisfaction the initiatives and the
intensive efforts of the Secretary-General's Special
Representative, in collaboration with the troika - Portugal,
the Russian Federation and the United States of America -
in the search for peace in Angola, which have resulted in
positive developments, as stated in the Secretary-General's
report. We are encouraged that substantial progress has
been made thus far. In this connection, we need to
encourage the Government and UNITA to make additional
efforts and to speed up the pace of implementation of the
Lusaka Protocol.

We warmly welcome the announcement by the
Government of Angola regarding the incorporation of
UNITA generals into the national Army. We are also
pleased to note that UNITA has just made a declaration
regarding the assembling of its troops and the handing over
of its weapons.

Namibia is fully committed to ensuring that lasting
peace and stability are restored in Angola. In his statement
before the fifty-first session of the General Assembly on 30
September 1996, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Namibia said the following:

"Namibia is bound by blood and common destiny to
stand with Angola. That is why our military
contingent attached to UNAVEM. III will remain in
Angola until the Mission is satisfactorily concluded."
(Ofi'icial Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-first Session, Plenary Meetings, 14th meeting, p. 8)

Of grave concern to my Government is the desertion
of UNITA troops from the quartering areas and the delay
in settling the outstanding political issues, namely, the
return to Luanda of UNITA deputies to the National
Assembly, the agreement on the status of the leader of
UNITA and the establishment of the Government of
National Unity and Reconciliation. Those issues, among
others, are of paramount importance to the whole peace
process. We trust, therefore, that the parties will continue
to negotiate seriously and reach an agreement. In this
connection, we agree with the recommendation of the
Secretary-General to extend the present mandate of
UNAVEM. III to 28 February 1997.

Although we recognize that it is the Angolan people
who bear the ultimate responsibility for their own destiny,
it is imperative for the international community, and the
Security Council in particular, to demonstrate greater
commitment and determination to help the people of
Angola to resolve the outstanding political issues. The
Council must send a clear message to the parties and to
UNITA in particular, bringing to its attention the
consequences of obstructing the peace process in the
country. The time has now come for the UNITA
leadership to know that the people of Angola, especially
the children, need peace, and the country needs
development.

The Secretary-General's report also states that
Angola continues to be confronted with severe economic
conditions and a serious budget deficit. To address such
economic challenges the country requires the efforts of all
its people, the parties concerned and their leadership.
However, this is not an easy task. Therefore, we call upon
the international community to mobilize all the necessary
resources for the rehabilitation of the economy and the
reintegration of ex-combatants into civilian life. That is
why, despite the severe drought situation confronting
Namibia, we contributed in August of this year $5,000 to
the United Nations consolidated inter-agency appeal for
Angola. We will continue to make our humble
contribution to that fund. In this connection, we join the
Secretary-General at this critical stage to urge the donor
community to fulfil the pledges undertaken at the 1995
Brussels Round Table Conference on Angola.

We warmly welcome the unanimous adoption of
resolution 1087 (1996).

