Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We thank Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, for his briefing to the Council.

Undoubtedly, we all agree that the situation in
South Sudan continues to be of serious concern.
Whatever Under-Secretary-General Lacroix has said in
this regard is valid. The conflict continues unabated.
The economic and financial problems the country is
facing are indescribably huge. It is not clear how they
can be managed without the support of the international
community. This needs to be looked at very seriously.
It is not unrelated to the effort being made to achieve
peace in the country.

The humanitarian situation continues to worsen,
and its severity is incalculable. That is what makes the
cessation of all hostilities and violence in the country,
as well as ensuring safe and unhindered access for
humanitarian actors, absolutely critical and urgent. The
lack of meaningful progress in the implementation of
the 2015 Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudan is further exacerbating
the already dire situation. The peace Agreement is the
only viable way forward to bring an end to the conflict
and restore peace and stability in South Sudan.

The success of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) high-level revitalization forum is
becoming all the more crucial. The high-level forum
is key to restoring the permanent ceasefire and the
full implementation of the peace agreement. Indeed,
we are moderately pleased to see that substantive
progress has been made towards the convening of the
high-level forum. The IGAD Council of Ministers
undertook successful consultations with the parties to
the peace agreement and estranged groups as part of
the pre-forum consultations in preparation for the high-
level revitalization forum.

One measure of the success of these visits by
the IGAD Council of Ministers is that all the parties
consulted have expressed their support for the
revitalization forum and the cessation of hostilities. It
must be underlined that when we say that all parties
were consulted, we mean literally all parties without
exception, including the former First Vice-President.
IGAD will be holding a summit in the near future - we
hope in December - to take stock of the outcome of
the series of consultations and to provide directions on
the launch of the actual high-level revitalization forum.

One thing that should be stressed in that regard is
that the high-level revitalization forum should in no
way be understood as a new negotiating platform. It
should rather be seen as an initiative that provides an
opportunity for the parties to the peace agreement and
estranged groups to expedite, in a realistic and genuine
manner, the implementation of the peace agreement
to restore a permanent ceasefire and to develop a
revised and realistic timeline and implementation
schedule towards a democratic election at the end of the
transition period.

Now, IGAD does not have a magic wand to create
miracles in South Sudan. Like all complex peace
processes, this one also exhibits all the complexities
that are rooted in a lack of trust, not only among parties,
but also between parties on the one hand and mediators
on the other. Memories of disappointments and
betrayals in the past aggravate the absence of mutual
trust. The absence of inclusivity, as Under-Secretary-
General Lacroix mentioned, is the other element. Under
these circumstances, even the smallest progress in the
process of this meeting need not be belittled.

It is in part for that reason that the efforts of IGAD
to revitalize the peace agreement, which has gained
encouraging momentum, needs to be sustained. The
support of the international community, in particular
that of the Security Council, is absolutely critical for
ensuring the effectiveness of the revitalization agenda.
Indeed, we cannot overemphasize the importance of the
full support of the Council for the success of the regional
efforts being exerted to ensure the full implementation
of the peace agreement. At the end of the day, it is
only through a carefully worked out political strategy
that the multifaceted problems of South Sudan can be
addressed. Only then can sustainable peace be achieved.
Frankly, at present, the high-level revitalization forum
is the only show in town, and the IGAD countries are
all united behind that agenda.
All talk about the destructive impact of parallel
initiatives should be thrown out the window. The
consultations with the parties that were mentioned
earlier were conducted in the presence of all the
Ministers or their representatives. The Council has no
reason to not fully support that effort, without caveats.
We believe that the United Nations, the African Union
(AU) and IGAD should be commended for maintaining
the unity of purpose among the three organizations
in the search for lasting peace, security and stability
in South Sudan. The high-level revitalization forum
would not have progressed in the way it has without
those three organizations working in close consultation
and coordination. We encourage the United Nations,
the AU and IGAD to redouble their efforts and further
strengthen that positive trend.

We are encouraged to learn that all the parties
have expressed their commitment to the high-level
revitalization forum and the cessation of hostilities.
That is particularly important because no matter
what we - both in the region and in the rest of the
international community - can do, the success of
the revitalization process, as well as addressing the
enormous challenges that South Sudan is facing, will
depend greatly upon the willingness of all the parties,
as the representative of Uruguay said. We still remain
hopeful that all the parties will seize the opportunity
provided and work towards achieving the purposes of
the revitalization agenda.

Finally, we recognize that the deployment of
vanguard units of the Regional Protection Force (RPF)
continues according to the revised timelines. In that
regard, we endorse what Under-Secretary-General
Lacroix said on the matter. Alhough serious problems
linger and need to be addressed, we are particularly
encouraged to see improved cooperation from the
Government with regard to the deployment of the RPF.
The troop-contributing countries to the RPF, including
Ethiopia, remain committed to its deployment, as well
as to its rationale of the Force itself.

