Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Ms. DiCarlo, the Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, for her briefing.

Since the beginning of the year, thanks to the joint
efforts of the various parties concerned, the situation on
the Korean peninsula has undergone positive changes.
The issue of the peninsula has returned to the correct
track of settlement through dialogue and consultation.
The leaders of the United States and the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea have met, marking a crucial
step towards a political settlement of the peninsula's
nuclear issue. China supports the United States and the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea in resolving
the nuclear issue on the peninsula through dialogue
and consultations, and wishes to see both countries
duly implement the outcome of their summit meeting
in a continuous push for a political solution of the
peninsula's issue.

China supports the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea and the Republic of Korea in maintaining
dialogue and engagement and in pressing ahead with
reconciliation and cooperation in a sustained manner. It
is our wish that the summit in Pyongyang between the
leaders of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
and of the Republic of Korea will run smoothly and
yield positive results. China commends the important
efforts of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
to achieve the denuclearization of the peninsula and to
maintain peace there. We hope that all parties concerned
will work in synergy to consolidate the momentum
of dialogue and rapprochement on the peninsula and
jointly move the peace process on the peninsula forward
for lasting peace and stability in the region.

Looking back on the evolution of events from several
rounds of escalation of tensions on the peninsula since
2016 to a series of positive changes in the peninsula's
situation this year, we draw three important lessons
from that experience to inform and guide us.

First, we must uphold the goal of denuclearization.
Making the peninsula nuclear-free is the essential
requirement for lasting peace on and stability of the
peninsula and an imperative for safeguarding the
international nuclear non-proliferation system. The
measures taken on the part of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, such as the cessation of nuclear- and
ballistic-missile tests and the dismantling of nuclear-
test sites, have demonstrated its good will to push for
the denuclearization of the peninsula and build mutual
trust with the relevant parties. That is helpful to the
political settlement of the issue on the peninsula. We
hope that all parties concerned will show political
wisdom and work together in a tangible manner for a
nuclear-free Korean peninsula.

Secondly, we must persevere in maintaining
peace and stability on the peninsula. Central to the
peninsula's issue is the question of security. It is
imperative to address the legitimate security concerns
of the parties concerned in a proper and balanced
manner in order to safeguard peace and stability on the
peninsula in earnest. There is no military solution to
the peninsula's issue, and confrontation is a dead end.
Resorting to force will bring nothing but disastrous
consequences to the peninsula. The suspension of the
joint military exercises conducted by the United States
and the Republic of Korea will help ease the situation
on the peninsula. It is up to the parties concerned to
continue to make the sensible choice.

Thirdly, we must strive to resolve issues through
dialogue and consultation. History shows that dialogue
and negotiation are essential means for promoting
the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula and for
maintaining regional peace and stability. The positive
progress in the dialogue and exchange between the
North and the South on the peninsula and the summit
between the United States and the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea clearly bear witness to the necessity
and the effectiveness of dialogue and consultation.

China has always been committed to the
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula, to the
maintenance of peace and stability on the peninsula
and to the resolution of issues through dialogue and
consultation. That position has always remained
steadfast and will continue to do so in the future. As a
close neighbour of the peninsula, China has maintained
close engagement and coordination with the parties
concerned in a responsible way, while promoting peace
talks and working tirelessly to resolve the nuclear
issue on the peninsula through negotiation. Our role in
that regard has been constructive. In the light of the
developing situation on the peninsula, China proposed a
dual-track approach and the suspension-for-suspension
initiative. The former refers to the denuclearization
of the Korean peninsula in parallel to establishing a
peace mechanism on the peninsula. Suspension for
suspension envisions the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea suspending nuclear and ballistic missile
activities and the United States and the Republic of
Korea suspending large-scale military exercises. China
and Russia have also developed a road map for resolving
the peninsula issue.

With regard to implementing the Security Council
resolutions on the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea, China has consistently and fully fulfilled its
international obligations. Whenever the Security
Council adopted a resolution on the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, the Chinese authorities
concerned issued a timely notice for the implementation
of the relevant measures on the ground. In accordance
with the provisions of the resolution, China submitted
an implementation report in a timely manner and
regularly reported the crude oil supplied and the
refined petroleum products exported to the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea.

It should be recalled that China has actively
participated in the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006). China will never
allow Chinese citizens or enterprises to engage in any
activity that contravenes Security Council resolutions.
China will address any act found to have violated such
resolutions and Chinese laws and regulations in line
with the relevant laws and regulations. China's serious
attitude towards implementing Security Council
resolutions on the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea and the significant cost to our country are clear
to all. The reality has shown that China's proposed
approach and initiative represent the right direction.
The results are significant and are in the common
interests of all the parties concerned. China has always
constructively striven to promote the denuclearization
of the Korean peninsula. China will work with all the
relevant parties to establish a nuclear-free, stable and
prosperous Korean peninsula.

The current situation on the Korean peninsula is
two-fold: there is a rare historic opportunity but also
challenges. The parties concerned should make efforts
in the following areas.

First, they should strive for progress in terms of
dialogue and negotiation. In accordance with the phased
and synchronized approach and as a package resolution,
the denuclearization process of the Korean peninsula
should be coherently linked to and coordinated with the

process of establishing a peace mechanism in order to
achieve early results as soon as possible.

Secondly, the overarching direction towards a
political resolution should be maintained. We hope that
the United States and the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea will continue to maintain the momentum
for dialogue and that they will properly resolve their
differences on the basis of the existing consensus,
meet each other halfway, take each other's concerns
into account, continue to strengthen mutual trust and
persevere in the negotiation process until it yields
results and establishes peace.

Thirdly, in order to fully and comprehensively
implement Security Council resolutions in the correct
way, we must not only step up non-proliferation
measures to promote the denuclearization of the
peninsula but also actively strengthen the political
and diplomatic approach in order to resolve the issue
peacefully, while avoiding an adverse impact on the
humanitarian and civilian needs of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea. China is ready to continue
to provide the necessary support and assistance to
humanitarian activities in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea. The Security Council resolutions
clearly stipulate that, in the light of the progress on the
denuclearization of the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea, the reversible provision should be considered
and the corresponding actions taken at the appropriate
time. That complies with the spirit of the resolutions
and facilitates the denuclearization process.

In the current context, the Security Council should
remain united, meet its historic responsibilities and
strive for the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula
and lasting peace and stability in North-East Asia.
China stands ready to work with the various relevant
parties within the international community and to
continue to play a positive and constructive role for a
nuclear-free Korean peninsula in the interests of peace
and stability on the peninsula.

Last but not least, in her briefing Under-Secretary-
General Rosemary DiCarlo referred to what is known
as the United Nations Command. I would like to affirm
China's position in that regard. China is ofthe view that
the so-called United Nations Command is a product of
the Cold War era. Its name does not reflect the reality.
It is not legitimate and brings to mind overtones of
military confrontation. The so-called United Nations
Command has long been anachronistic. It should not

become an obstacle to reconciliation and cooperation
between the South and the North of the peninsula.

