Mr. Li Kexin (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation thanks you, Mr. President, for
having convened this public debate. Our thanks go also
to Mr. Lynn Pascoe for his briefing.

Although the situation in the Middle East remains
fragile and volatile, there has been significant progress
since March, when the Council held its previous open
debate on the subject (see S/PV.5 859). We welcome the
ceasefire in the Gaza Strip and we are pleased to
see that leaders on both sides - in Palestine and in
Israel 4 are determined to move the negotiating
process forward. We welcome the active diplomatic
efforts of Arab countries to promote the internal unity
of Palestine. We are greatly encouraged by
developments such as the proximity talks between
Syria and Israel, the agreement on an exchange of
prisoners between Lebanon and Israel, and the
commitment made by Lebanon and Syria to strengthen
their relations. Recently, a Government of national
unity was formed in Lebanon, and we congratulate the
Lebanese people on that achievement.

The current positive progress and momentum are
hard-won results achieved jointly by the parties
concerned with the support of the international
community. Those results are to be doubly prized in the
light of the difficult situation over the past two years,
and in particular over the past several months. The
parties concerned should continue to show their
political will and tackle the difficulties and challenges
head-on. They should redouble their efforts to attain a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle
East. Here, I wish to make three points.

First, it is important to provide further assistance
to the Palestinian people. There has been no discernable
improvement in the humanitarian situation in the Gaza
Strip, and the situation in the West Bank is also a
matter of concern. The Palestinian people both in Gaza
and in the West Bank are a single whole, and the
international community should accord them equal
importance. It is important both to provide them with
assistance and to help the Palestinian Authority with the
building of institutions and capacity. To maintain the
internal unity of the various Palestinian factions is the
ardent hope of the vast majority of the Palestinian
people. The international community should intensify
its efforts to promote Palestinian internal unity. Here,
we express our support for the efforts being undertaken
by Egypt and other Arab countries.

Secondly, it is important to create conditions
conducive to political negotiations between Israel and
Palestine. We are now at the midpoint of the Annapolis
process timetable, and the parties have high
expectations of the negotiations. We hope that the
parties concerned will take concrete action to
accelerate the negotiating process and do everything
possible to avoid any action that could harm the
negotiating climate. Israel's continued establishment of
settlements while negotiations are under way is clearly
not conducive to those negotiations. Countries with
substantial leverage on the negotiating parties should
exert a positive influence by urging them to make
strategic choices.

Thirdly, it is important to promote a
comprehensive peace in the Middle East. The Lebanon-
Israel track and the Syria-Israel track are both
important parts of the overall Middle East issue and are
closely linked to the Palestine-Israel track. At present
there are important opportunities to improve relations
between Lebanon and Israel and between Syria and
Israel; that would have a positive impact on the
negotiations between Israel and Palestine. The
international community should provide further
assistance in that regard.

The support of the international community is
indispensable for the achievement of peace in the
Middle East. We are confident that the Security
Council, as an organ of great importance for the
maintenance of international peace and security, has an
important role to play and that it can play it.

