Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): As hurried as we are, let
me welcome you, Sir, to the position you occupy today. I
cannot resist also bursting with pride at seeing some of my
dear friends who have joined this Council. It is a
wonderful, wonderful day today.

It is important for me to say that HIV/AIDS is a
global problem. There is no country that has been spared
this epidemic. It is said that, at the end of 1999, there
were more people living with HIV/AIDS in the
developing world than in the developed world. The
majority of people living with HIV/AIDS are indeed in
the developing countries, yet the human beings affected
are the same. The disease is the same.

The reason for the disparity is not hard to find. The
core difference between the developed and developing
world is the level of development itself. The answer,
therefore, lies in the difference in the standard of living
of the people infected. In other words, until there is a
cure for HIV/AIDS, the level of development in each
country will influence how much such a disease spreads.

Poverty and underdevelopment destroy families and
health systems. While we must continue striving to find
ways of halting the spread of and curing HIV/AIDS, the
only way to immediately address the spread of this
disease is through raising the standard of living in
developing countries. Addressing issues of poverty is
central to this approach.

If you have an educated populace, it is easy to
communicate AIDS-prevention programmes in a manner
which does change behavioural patterns. We have found
instances in our own country where communities know
that there is a disease called HIV/AIDS, but do not
appreciate the connection between that disease and their
sexual behaviour. This connectedness is understood better
within literate communities in our own country. More
spending on health care results in HIV/AIDS preventative
tools, such as condoms, being more accessible to
communities.

The better levels of nutrition in high- and middle-
income societies ensure stronger resistance to disease. The
positive impact of good nutrition on opportunistic
infections is well known to all of us. The accessibility and
affordability of ordinary drugs are also central to this
issue. A body weakened by ordinary diseases is more
susceptible to AIDS. We use these few examples to
illustrate the relationship between HIV/AIDS and poverty.

At the Third African Population Conference held in
Durban, South Africa, in December 1999, it was noted
that

 

"AIDS is 100 per cent preventable through openness
and proper education".

However, a look at the countries with the largest number of
people who live with HIV/AIDS shows that there has been
a decline in social spending. There is less money for
alleviating poverty and for improving the nutrition of the
people as a defence against nutritional diseases such as
tuberculosis and pneumonia, which make it easier for
HIV/AIDS to fester. Many developing countries are
overburdened with paying off international debt, which
leaves them with little money for development.

The decline in social spending happened over many
years, mainly as a result of policies of multilateral
institutions. We are encouraged by efforts now being made
by such institutions to evaluate some of these policies and
to focus on their core mandate, which is development.

The Charter of the United Nations, in Article 24,
paragraph 1, bestows upon the Security Council the
"primary responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security". In the age of globalization, it has
become important to define security in broader terms. In
other words, the definition of security has to include
economic security, food security and health security. The
Security Council, whose job is to guarantee security around
the world, must use its peacekeeping operations to create a
space and climate for other institutions and regional and
subregional organizations - such as the World Health
Organization (WHO), the Joint United Nations Programme
on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), the Organization of African
Unity (OAU) and the Southern African Development
Community (SADC), which are best suited to address other
aspects of security - so that they can do their work.

Already, the Security Council has set a wonderful
precedent in Sierra Leone, where the Council's Chapter VII
mandate allows peacekeeping troops to be accompanied by
expert United Nations personnel dealing with social issues
that result from conflict. They include experts sent to assist
women and children caught in conflict, including many
people who had their limbs cut off by ruthless guerrillas.

The Security Council must be applauded for having
adopted this innovative decision. We hope that the same
creativity will prevail soon when the Security Council
decides on a mandate for a peacekeeping force for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Perhaps it is time that all 188 Members of the United
Nations participated in a General Assembly debate on the
challenge posed by the spread of HIV/AIDS throughout
the world and developed a comprehensive plan to address
this disease that knows no boundaries.

Furthermore, the donor countries must ease
restrictions on the money they earmark for the treatment
of HIV/AIDS in Africa so that recipient countries can use
it to alleviate poverty, help improve the living standards
of their citizens and fund education programmes on this
disease. Otherwise, the money given for the treatment of
HIV/AIDS may not produce the results that are needed in
fighting off this epidemic.

Let me conclude by saying that there is no cure for
AIDS at this point. As we await a possible cure, we have
the ability to halt its spread. Let us not shy away from
this.

