Mr. Gambari: When I last briefed the Council on
this item on behalf of the Secretariat on
30 November (see S/PV.53l2), I spoke of the
opportunities for, and challenges to, progress towards
peace in the Middle East.

This month has seen some positive developments,
notably steps toward the implementation of the Access
and Movement Agreement between Israel and the
Palestinian Authority. But violence has continued in
the occupied Palestinian territory, in Israel and in
Lebanon. This violence undoubtedly raises tension in
the region at a time when the political situation is
evolving very rapidly. In the coming weeks, the parties
must strive for a return to calm. An atmosphere of
stability and restraint will help to ensure that voices of
peace and moderation are heard and heeded during the
crucial electoral period.

I would like first to touch upon the economic,
fiscal and the humanitarian situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory. Let me begin with the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee meeting held in London on 14
December, where donors, the Palestinian Authority and
the Government of Israel met to discuss the economic,
fiscal and humanitarian situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory and to assess progress in
Palestinian reform.
The Palestinian Authority presented an update on
its precarious financial situation and shared with
donors the main elements of its medium-term
development plan for the next three years. The meeting
adopted a revised donor structure that strengthens the
role of the Palestinian Authority. This enhanced role in
aid management constitutes an important step towards
the assumption of some recipient-State functions by the
Palestinian Authority, in accordance with the
Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development (OECD) Paris principles.

The need for the Palestinian Authority to adhere
to the reform agenda and to re-establish fiscal
discipline was a central theme of the meeting. The
International Monetary Fund (IMF) reported on the
fiscal crisis thus: the Palestinian Authority's deficit
rose from 14 per cent to 17 per cent of gross domestic
product (GDP) in the past year, and may well reach 19
per cent of GDP in 2006. Donors agreed on the need
for the Palestinian Authority to implement, as a matter
of priority, a medium-term fiscal stabilization plan and
stressed that reform must continue in the coming
months, even though the election period may make this
more difficult. The Palestinian Authority's fiscal
situation is so acute that there is real concern that, this
month, December salaries may not be paid.

The United Nations reported three significant
socio-economic trends that emerged in 2005. First,
poverty rates increased despite overall growth in the
economy and in employment rates. Secondly - and
related to that - the gap between rich and poor
widened. And, thirdly, geographic disparities became
more pronounced, with humanitarian needs highest in
the Gaza Strip and in the northern and southern areas
of the West Bank.

The Ad Hoc Liaison Committee discussed
convening a pledging conference to mobilize the target
sum of $3 billion, as agreed in principle at the Group
of Eight (G-S) Summit in October. A specific date has
not yet been identified, but the conference is expected
to take place in the first half of 2006.

I should now like to move on to the status of the
implementation of the Agreement on Movement and
Access. In its presentation to the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee, the World Bank reiterated that movement
restrictions imposed on goods and people continued to
be the major obstacle to Palestinian economic growth.
That underscores the importance of the Agreement on
Movement and Access, which was signed last month.
Implementation is proceeding on some parts of the
Agreement. For example, the Rafah crossing, between
Gaza and Egypt, has been open for five hours each day
since 26 November. The Karni crossing, through which
produce enters Israel from Gaza, has also remained
open since 15 November, allowing the first post-
disengagement Palestinian harvest to reach Israeli
markets. Both parties must continue to make efforts to
ensure that agricultural exports remain a top priority.

The Agreement includes an Israeli commitment
to allow the passage of convoys to facilitate the
movement of goods and persons between Gaza and the
West Bank, specifying that bus convoys would start by
15 December. Despite the concerted efforts of the
United States and Mr. James Wolfensohn, the Quartet's
Special Envoy, to resolve outstanding differences and
to ensure that Israel's security concerns are met, the
commencement of the convoys remains suspended. We
hope that discussions aimed at breaking the impasse
will continue on this very important issue.

As for movement in the West Bank, the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs has reported a slight increase: there are now
just over 400 roadblocks and checkpoints. Discussions
are ongoing between the Government of Israel and the
United States, with United Nations participation, to
develop a plan to reduce obstacles to movement in the
West Bank.

Let me now turn to the security situation. On
5 December, a suicide bombing in Netanya killed five
Israeli civilians and wounded dozens more.
Representatives of Palestinian Islamic Jihad claimed
responsibility for that attack. The Palestinian
Authority, which condemned the act, arrested some 60
suspects following the bombing. The Quartet
condemned that terrorist attack in the strongest terms
and demanded that the Syrian Government take
immediate action to close the offices of Palestinian
Islamic Jihad and to prevent the use of its territory by
armed groups engaged in terrorist acts. The Quartet
also encouraged and supported the Palestinian
Authority's efforts to prevent armed groups from
acting against law and order and against the policy of
the Authority itself, and urged all parties to exercise
restraint, avoid an escalation of violence and keep the
channels of communication open.

There have been a number of other worrying
security developments since my last briefing to the
Council. Over 20 Qassam rockets were fired at Israel
since the beginning of December. The outskirts of
Ashkelon were hit by rockets for the first time in two
and a half years.
The Government of Israel responded to the
Netanya terror attack and to the firing of Qassam
rockets by tightening the closure regime and by
implementing a previously announced resumption
of targeted killings. Israeli air force strikes on
6 December and 8 December killed four suspected
militants in Gaza. On 14 December, a helicopter strike
by Israel Defense Forces (IDF) killed four men east of
Gaza city, reportedly all members of the military wing
of the Popular Resistance Committees. A failed
targeted killing took place on the same day.

While acknowledging the right of Israel to defend
itself against terrorist attacks in conformity with
international law, it must be noted that extrajudicial
killings amount to executions without trial and that
innocent bystanders are often killed or injured in those
operations. In the targeted killings I have just
mentioned alone, 11 other Palestinians, including four
children, were reported wounded.

Meanwhile, the Palestinian internal security
situation has worsened, with attacks on electoral
offices, armed clashes between Fatah factions at the
party headquarters and between the Palestinian security
forces and armed elements. Clashes with the IDF also
led to the death of a Palestinian in Nablus. An Israeli
soldier was stabbed to death at the Qalandia
checkpoint, and militants killed an Israeli settler near
Hebron.

It is clear that the Palestinian Authority must
pursue security-sector reform with single-minded
determination. The Palestinian Authority's inter-
ministerial working group, supported by the team of
the United States Security Coordinator, has now
produced a first draft of a security reform white paper.
Security-sector reform is expected to feature in the
Palestinian Authority's medium-term development
plan.

Let me now say a word about settlement activity.
During the reporting period, settlement activity and
barrier construction continued. A recent study by the
Israeli non-governmental organization Peace Now
refers to a list published by the Israeli Ministry of
Housing and Construction, reporting that 3,696
housing units are currently being built in West Bank
settlements, and another 1,654 in East Jerusalem. We
are concerned by unconfirmed reports that the Israeli
Defence Minister recently approved plans to construct
further housing units in Maale Adumim and other
settlements near Jerusalem. According to the road map,
Israel is obliged to freeze its settlement activities and
to dismantle outposts in the West Bank constructed
since March 2001.

With regard to elections, preparations are
continuing for the Palestinian Legislative Council
elections scheduled for 25 January 2006. Those
preparations were marred by violent incidents, many of
them arising from internal disagreements within the
Fatah party concerning the composition of the party's
lists. The Central Election Commission decided to
close down all district offices on 13 December, but it
reopened them the following day when police
protection was provided, thereby allowing candidates
to be registered by the deadline of 14 December. The
candidate lists include two Fatah lists, one headed by
Prime Minister Ahmed Qurei and another under the
name Al-Mustaqbal - which is Arabic for "the
future" - headed by the imprisoned Fatah leader
Marwan Barghouti. Hamas has also formally registered
for its first parliamentary elections.

On 15 December, the fourth round of municipal
elections took place in the West Bank, including in
larger municipalities such as Nablus, Jenin and Al-
Bireh, where Hamas won an overwhelming majority of
seats, and Ramallah, where Fatah won. The fifth, and
final, round, which will include major constituencies in
Gaza, will be organized in early 2006 after the
legislative elections themselves.

I now turn to the situation in Lebanon, a country
that has had to endure yet another attempt to
undermine its stability and independence through the
brutal killing of Gebrane Tueni and three others on
12 December. Mr. Tueni was a champion of a
democratic, sovereign Lebanon and of a free press. The
Security Council and the Secretary-General expressed
their condemnation of that act of terrorism, as well as
their support for the Government of Lebanon's
determination to bring the perpetrators of that and
other such attacks to justice.

We note the decision of the Security Council in
resolution 1644 (2005) to establish a tribunal of an
international character to try those found responsible
for the assassination of Rafik Hariri, to extend the
United Nations International Independent Investigation
Commission's technical assistance to the Lebanese
authorities and to expand the scope of the
Commission's investigations. The Secretariat is
working actively to implement the operative
paragraphs of resolution 1644 (2005).

Promoting the stability of Lebanon is a vital part
of efforts to achieve comprehensive peace in the
Middle East. The Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process, Mr. Alvaro de Soto, visited
Lebanon in early December. In his meetings with the
Government of Lebanon, he discussed, among other
matters, the need to improve the situation along the
Blue Line. That is a matter on which Mr. De Soto has
also had discussions with Israel.

The situation along the Blue Line was tense but
stable during the reporting period. Hezbollah started to
reconstruct its position near Ghajar village, which had
been destroyed during the 21 November exchange of
fire, on which the Council received a separate briefing.
I would like to stress the importance of the
Government of Lebanon's extending control over all of
its territory, especially in the South.

Since the last briefing of the Council on
30 November, there have been 19 Israeli air violations,
including on the day of Gebran Tueni's funeral. On
15 December, the Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General for Lebanon, Mr. Geir Pedersen, yet
again expressed his deep concern about those
violations and noted that overflights are a serious
breach of Lebanese sovereignty. Israel cites the
continued presence and activities of Hezbollah as the
reason for the violations. We would like to remind both
parties, however, that one violation does not justify
another. We call again on the Israeli authorities to halt
those overflights and on all parties to respect the Blue
Line in its entirety.

The road map's target date for a final and
comprehensive settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict is now 10 days away. It is obvious therefore
that, while we have made very important progress, we
will certainly not reach our destination on time. Let me
be clear: that does not in any way detract from the
centrality of the road map, which remains the agreed
framework for achieving a just and lasting peace in the
Middle East.

This is surely an occasion for all parties to reflect
on what more they can do to ensure that road map
obligations are met so that we can make genuine
progress towards the goal of two States, Israel and an
independent, viable and democratic Palestine, living
side by side in peace and security, within secure and
recognized borders.

More immediately, however, during this delicate
pre-electoral period in both countries, there is a need to
respond to the forces of violence and despair with
concrete political, economic, security and social
action - action that provides a framework in which
the agenda of peace is made stronger than the agenda
of conflict, violence and terror.

The Palestinian Authority's inability to exercise
control over its territory remains a source of great
concern. The Quartet encourages and supports the
Palestinian Authority's efforts to take immediate steps
to prevent armed groups from acting against law and
order and against the policies of the Authority itself.

Israel's continued policy of settlement expansion
and barrier construction undermines not only
Palestinian leaders who are seeking election on a
platform of peaceful negotiation with Israel, but also
efforts to achieve a viable two-State solution, with a
contiguous West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and
meaningful linkages between the West Bank and the
Gaza Strip.

I note, in closing, the comments of the Quartet
Special Envoy, James Wolfensohn, at the recent donor
meeting in London. Mr. Wolfensohn, whose efforts
have been so crucial to achieving the progress recorded
in 2005, reminded participants that the immediate
aftermath of both Palestinian and Israeli elections will
be a very critical period of opportunity that neither the
parties nor the international community can afford to
miss.

