Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Rwanda for having organized this moment of gathering
and commemoration in honour of the victims of
genocide. The briefings oer. Eliasson and Mr. Keating
will enabled us to draw a lesson from the past in order
to improve our actions in the future.

On this day of mourning, France pays tribute to
all the victims of the genocide. More than a million
innocent people were massacred because they were
Tutsi or because they were opposed to the murderous
folly ofa political ideology and system. Mass atrocities
were carried out by militias, armed forces and civilians
in violation of the very principle of humanity. The
violence was planned; radios disseminated hate speech
that will forever echo in our consciences.

I also pay homage to the 15 Blue Helmets of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Rwanda
(UNAMIR) who were killed in the line of duty. The
international community was not able to prevent or stop
the genocide. The Council acted too late and did not do
enough. And yet, the earliest warning signs had already
been given, the first of which in a communique from
General Dallaire of 11 January 1994.

Fourteen years ago, we met in the Security Council
to draw lessons from our collective failure. At that
time, we asked the Secretary-General to draft an action
plan to prevent genocide. Since then, our preventive
mechanisms have been strengthened. Like my
Argentine colleague, I shall return to this topic, which
she addressed with deep emotion and thoughtfulness.

To prevent is first and foremost to warn.
One early aspect of progress to that end was the
establishment of the Office of the Special Adviser of
the Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide,
led by Mr. Adama Dieng. Mandated by resolution 1366
(2001), his Office is acting as an early rapid-warning
mechanism for the Secretary-General and the Security
Council by bringing to their attention any situation that
threatens to deteriorate into genocide. The briefings
of Mr. Dieng in the Security Council on the Central
African Republic have contributed to raising the
awareness of the international community so that it can
act urgently to prevent such crimes. We must continue
to include him further in our work.

To prevent is also to act. A second note of progress
was the adoption in 2005 by the Heads of State and
of Government of the concept of responsibility to
protect. When a Government cannot or will not assume
responsibility to protect, the international community
must assume that responsibility, including by taking
resolute and timely action. France is currently engaged
in Mali and the Central African Republic, at the request
of the authorities and under Council mandate, to assist
the endangered populations. In those countries and in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Council has
given the kind of robust protection of civilians mandate
that UNAMIR lacked in 1994. That progress should be
consolidated. The Council must continue to play its full
role in implementing the responsibility to protect. As a
member of the Group of Friends on Responsibility to
Protect, France is in favour.

To prevent is to bring to justice. Adopted in1948,
the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide was a precursor to the International
Criminal Court; 58 years later, we finally adopted
the Rome Statute. In the meantime, the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda advanced justice. It was
the first to recognize that acts of sexual violence could
he acts of genocide. That jurisprudence has been used
since then. It remains an essential factor for memory
and reparation in reconciliation processes that can
avert the cycle of reprisals. The International Criminal
Court is permanent and operational. When atrocities
are committed, as they are today in Syria, there is no
excuse for inaction. The Council can refer the situation
to the International Criminal Court.

In spite of such progress, tragic situations, such as
that in Syria today, recall the ongoing need to improve
our action. In that regard, I welcome the initiatives
of the Secretary-General, including his policy of
accelerated diligence and of limited contact with those
against whom an arrest warrant or a warrant to appear
has been issued by the International Criminal Court.

The Organization must serve as a model. All tools
must be mobilized - our human rights mechanisms;
the network of focal points for the responsibility to
protect, in which we participate; our horizon-scanning
meetings in the Security Council, which are integral
parts of our preventive diplomacy efforts that would
benefit from being organized regularly.

Tragic situations arise despite early warning and
preventive action. Crimes against humanity or war
crimes are perpetrated before our very eyes, while the
Security Council remains paralysed by the abusive
use of the veto. That is why France is working for a
voluntary code of conduct for the five permanent
members to limit the use of the veto when such crimes
are committed. We owe that in particular to the Syrian
people.

Rafael Lemkin called 70 years ago for international
cooperation to free humankind from an odious scourge
whose anomic, immoral and inhumane nature shocks
the human conscience. In his lofty statement, my
Jordanian colleague tried to attribute this scourge to
fear. He may well be right, but the absolute horror of
the crime attains a metaphysical level in touching upon
the evil that is within each of us. Whether or not we are
Christian, it is difficult to not think about the original
sin in human nature.

Today, France honours the memory of all Victims
of genocide, and reiterates its commitment to doing
everything possible to ensure that the lessons of the
mistakes of the past are heeded and that such atrocities
do not recur, because such tragedies are still present
and possible.

