Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I will be brief because I
think that all the most important points have already
been made.

To summarize what David Shearer said, we must
move from talk to action and ensure that what he said
with regard to the security forces, unification and
boundaries be finally implemented and that, most
important, the date of 12 November be respected for
the formation of the transitional Government.

There is a certain momentum, which we have to
preserve, and it is very important that the international
community continue to support that. I think it is very
good that we now have some stability in the Sudan,
which certainly helps. We need the African Union, we
need the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
and we as a Security Council need to speak with one
voice on these matters and give support. It is very timely
that in October we will have the funds to travel to the
region and South Sudan just before the critical date.

I also think that it is very good what was said with
regard to the more flexible work of the United Nations
Mission in the Republic of South Sudan - that it is
not remaining stationary but going out with greater
robustness to fulfil the actual mandate of protecting the
civilian population and providing greater prevention.
What is unacceptable, as Mr. Shearer mentioned at the
margins of his statement, is that there are still severe
violations of the status of forces agreement. That is
something that we have to look at and, like the South
Sudanese Government, we will have to respond.

Mr. Shearer mentioned some improvement on
the situation on the ground, but overall it is still very
bad: there are 1.8 million internally displaced persons,
2.3 million have fled the country, the security situation
is still not where it should be, children are suffering. I
am also worried about the high level of violence against
civilians and sexual and gender-based violence. In that

regard, I can only echo - the representative of the
Dominican Republic stole my speaking points with
regard to this point - what he and the representative
of France said, namely, that violence against women
is unacceptable and perpetrators have to be brought
to justice. It is very good that they have their mobile
tribunals, but we have to go beyond them. There cannot
be impunity for perpetrators.

I would also like to pick up on what the
representatives of the Dominican Republic and Peru said
with regard to the participation ofwomen. This is still a
situation where it is men - Kiir and Machar - talking
to each other. In the peace agreement there is the 35 per
cent quota for women, which should be implemented.
In all the Committees and all the talks women should
be participating. I count on Mr. Shearer on raising the
level of participation.

Let me conclude on a positive note. Mr. Shearer
mentioned many examples of people who had been
fighting each other but are now sitting together. That is
something to build upon.

