Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I
would like to begin by thanking Ambassador Oshima
for his excellent leadership of the mission to
Afghanistan and, indeed, for the work of the Japanese
Mission here in leading work on this subject in the
Council.

The report of the mission is a comprehensive
assessment of the situation in Afghanistan, and
Ambassador Oshima's briefing today was similarly
thorough and thought-provoking. My thanks go also to
Special Representative Koenigs and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan for the job they do
day by day in Afghanistan. And I align myself with the
statement to be made in due course by the Ambassador
of Finland on behalf of the European Union (EU).

The United Kingdom is committed to assisting
Afghanistan in the long term. Tony Blair in Kabul as
recently as 20 November stressed the importance to the
international community of delivering a secure, stable
Afghanistan. The United Kingdom is a major
contributor to the international effort in Afghanistan,
through NATO, the European Union and in our
bilateral programme. And we have led the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) military operation
through this particularly challenging year. Like others
around the table, we are also heading up one of the
provincial reconstruction teams. There is one in
Helmand.

Security, particularly in the south, is proving
challenging. The Taliban's direct offensive on ISAF
this summer was defeated, but we can expect
continuing disruption from anti-Government elements.
We believe neither the Taliban nor other illegal armed
groups currently pose a credible threat to the overall
stability of Afghanistan, but they can seriously disrupt
the work of improving the quality of life of the Afghan
people. Our role is to support President Karzai in his
Government's effort to extend security and stability
throughout the country and to improve development
prospects. So, we welcome the continued commitment
to Afghan security shown at NATO's Riga summit, but
there are still some capability gaps, as Ambassador
Oshima recalled today. But allies are working to ensure
that these are filled. Equally, it is important to continue
the development of Afghan security forces, the
indigenous capability, including the Afghan National
Police.

We need to accelerate work to establish the rule
of law. As Ambassador Oshima noted earlier, capacity-
building here is a critical challenge. Failure to
consolidate gains made in this area will undermine
popular support for the wider reform programme. We
must use the Law and Order Trust Fund for
Afghanistan to support police salaries and other rule of
law-related capacity-building.

Drugs continue to remain, in our View, the
gravest threat to the long-term security, development
and effective governance of Afghanistan. The Afghan
Government's national drug control strategy, with its
four priorities - targeting the trafficker, strengthening

livelihoods, reducing demand and developing effective
institutions - seem to us the right approach. That
means that we need increased and sustained assistance,
including to the Afghan Counter Narcotics Trust Fund,
and we should provide international mentors for the
counter-narcotics police of Afghanistan. This is Vital if
we are to ensure that the progress to date is not
undermined.

It is important, generally, that we all look at what
more we can do to support international objectives in
Afghanistan. An EU fact-finding mission is in
Afghanistan now, looking at how the European Union
can further assist in developing policing and related
rule-of-law issues, including counter-narcotics. We
hope that this will lead to the deployment of new EU
assets in the new year.

The position of women in Afghanistan is an area
where we have seen important progress since 2001,
from an abysmal start, it has to be said, but some
progress, not least in the level of representation in the
National Assembly and in an increase in access to
education. There are still, of course, problems from
those years when girls were not allowed to have any
education. There is clearly, therefore, much more to be
done to consolidate education for those now coming
through and for those who missed it previously. So, we
would strongly urge the Government to reconsider any
suggestions to abolish the Ministry of Women's
Affairs. In our View, the Ministry plays an integral role
in ensuring the full participation of women in all
aspects of peace consolidation and peacebuilding in
Afghanistan.

We cannot afford to lose momentum. It is vital
that the Afghanistan Compact Joint Coordination and
Monitoring Board (JCMB) gives direction and impetus
to the programmes set out in the Compact, including on
institutional capacity-building and counter-narcotics.
So, we are pleased to see that the Council's report
notes that the JCMB capability is developing. It was
welcome that the mission participated in one of their
sessions in Kabul.

Finally, I would like to underline British support
for the report's call for enhanced regional cooperation.
This is vital, in particular, for Afghan and Pakistan
governmental contribution - that they should work
together to counter the common Taliban threat. So, the
plans for the cross-border jirgas are particularly
welcome.

