Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Let me start by thanking
Poland for convening this debate. We also thank the
Secretary-General and the Director-General of the
International Committee of the Red Cross for their
insightful briefings.

The rules of conduct of armed conflict are clearly
codified and articulated in various conventions and
legal instruments. Yet the cardinal principles of
distinction and discrimination between civilians and
combatants, military necessity and proportionality
continue to be violated, and warring parties still operate
with impunity. The legal framework is there. It is the
persistent failure to comply with those obligations
and to respect the rules of international humanitarian
law during armed conflict that remains the abiding
challenge. Whether it is plausible deniability or abuse,
the grim reality is, when the beast of conflict roars,
legal regimes fall silent.

Gone are the days when the impact of armed
conflicts on civilians was limited to collateral damage.
Targeted attacks, sexual violence, forced conscription
and indiscriminate killings collectively serve to paint
an extremely bleak picture of the human costs of
modern-day armed conflict. Civilians, who should be
the primary subject of protection, have become the
principal objects of attack. The Geneva Conventions
are violated, respect for human life is also violated,
and civilians are used as human shields in occupied
territories. Worse, perpetrators who commit such crimes
are awarded honours by their military commands.
Those crimes continue to be perpetrated in Palestine
and in Indian-occupied Jammu and Kashmir - two of
the oldest disputes on the agenda of the United Nations
and the Security Council.

As an inevitable consequence of armed conflict,
the international community is confronted with the
challenge of increasing civilian casualties, as well as
an ever-greater need for humanitarian assistance and
protection for people displaced by it. According to the
Secretary- General's report on the protection of civilians
(S/2018/462), last year alone the United Nations
recorded more than 26,000 civilian deaths in just six
situations of armed conflict, with 128 million people
in dire need of humanitarian assistance and protection.
Let me underscore five specific points in that regard.

First, the protection of civilians is a system-wide
responsibility, but host countries bear the primary
responsibility for the protection of all civilians
without discrimination.

Secondly, violations are neither inevitable nor
insurmountable. They can be mitigated by the consistent
use of the entire range of national and international
judicial and non-judicial means for promoting
compliance with international humanitarian law and
ensuring accountability. Military training, for instance,
must include familiarization with the principles of
international law governing armed conflict and a full
understanding of the legal implications of commands
issued and obeyed in situations of combat.

Thirdly, the lack of political will to fully respect
humanitarian law and other applicable rules is the
primary impediment to protecting civilians in armed
conflict. Sustained pressure from those with influence
over parties to conflicts can rectify that terrible wrong.

Fourthly, the protection of civilians, wherever
mandated by the Council, is, and should be, a priority
for United Nations peacekeeping operations. Pakistan
is one of the world's leading contributors of troops to
United Nations peacekeeping, and Blue Helmets from
my country have contributed to many of its success
stories in Africa, from Liberia to Sierra Leone. Our
well-trained and professional peacekeepers have
protected civilians, provided them with much-needed
medical care and helped to rebuild their lives.

Fifthly, the Security Council, as the primary
body tasked with maintaining international peace and
security, should focus on the root causes of emerging
and long-standing conflicts and find inclusive political
solutions. Inaction by the Council in cases of foreign
aggression and occupation produces situations where
such crimes breed.

Finally, let me say that the goal of the protection
of civilians can best be achieved by preventing the
outbreak of armed conflict in the first place. Our
collective efforts need to be geared towards that crucial
goal. Otherwise, we will be treating only the symptoms,
and not the cause.

