Mr. Schulz (Germany): Let me begin by thanking
our two Special Representatives of the Secretary-
General, Mr. James Swan and Ms. Pramila Patten,
for their comprehensive briefings. I would also like to
extend a particularly warm welcome to Mr. Swan, who
is joining us in the Council for the first time. I further
thank Ambassador Madeira and Ms. Amina Arale for
their very insightful briefings.

The situation in Somalia continues to be volatile
and fragile, and, for that reason, I will make a few
remarks from our point of view on three aspects.

First, I will address the political, security and
humanitarian aspects. We would like to start by
expressing our appreciation for the work of the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, James
Swan, and his team. We fully support the efforts of the
United Nations and joint international efforts to help
stabilize Somalia. The upcoming Somalia Partnership
Forum will be a good opportunity to take stock of
mutually agreed commitments and to set priorities for
the coming months.

With regard to the coming months, we agree
with Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Swan's assessment that we need accelerated efforts
in the next month to reach the ambitious goals for the
2020-2021 general elections. For that to succeed, we
need constructive cooperation between the Federal
Government of Somalia and the federal member states
on accomplishing the constitutional review, adopting
the electoral law and delivering on the security reform
agenda. We believe that coordination meetings should
be resumed and take place regularly in order to resolve
the remaining differences. In View ofthe 2020 elections,
political processes must noticeably catch up.

We see federalism as key to achieving sustainable
peace. A strong Federal Government and strong federal
member states do not exclude but support one another.
As many other speakers before me have said, we are
also deeply concerned about the electoral process
in the federal member states, especially in Jubaland
tomorrow. There is high potential for escalation, which
could potentially destabilize the region. Right now,
we still have two separate processes, but we need a
single agreed electoral process, and that requires some
compromise. Although we are in the very last hours
before those elections take place, we still hope that such
a compromise can still be reached.

With regard to security, for the effective and
timely implementation of the security transition
plan, a comprehensive approach involving joint and
coordinated planning and operation is essential. In
particular - as noted by many, especially by the African
Union Mission in Somalia itself - force generation
and integration, as well as the training of new police
officers, are key. That requires Somali ownership
and buy-in from all stakeholders and partners. The
progress made in the preparations for the building up
of five forward operating bases for the Somali police
is yet another milestone in strengthening the role of the
Somali police and the security architecture.

Lastly, on the humanitarian situation, given what we
have heard today, we continue to be deeply concerned
about the very difficult humanitarian situation. More
than 2 million people are severely food-insecure, and
that has worsened due to insufficient rainfalls and
ongoing conflicts. In 2017, the Federal Government,
the federal member states, the United Nations and
humanitarian organizations, together with donors, were
able to avert an even worse humanitarian catastrophe. It
continues to be urgent to continue those efforts.

Secondly and briefly, on Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Patten's briefing, we very much
welcome her visit to Somalia. As documented in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/661), cases of
conflict-related violence are still often underreported
throughout Somalia, especially due to cultural and
social factors and the limited availability of police and
justice services. Access to justice and the enhancement
of respective capabilities within Somali institutions are
therefore essential to enforce accountability. In line
with resolution 2467 (2019), survivors must be at the
centre of all efforts, and medical and psychological
care and opportunities for economic participation and
legal protection are some of the key aspects. In order to
actively prevent and address sexual violence, it remains
essential to recognize and tackle gender inequality as
the root cause and driver of sexual violence. We call
upon the Somali Government to advance gender equality
and ensure women's full and effective participation in
the implementation of the transition plan as well as in
current electoral processes.

On a more positive note before I conclude, we
very much welcome the commitment of the Somali
Government to work with the United Nations and the
Office of the Special Representative to develop a new
national action plan to end sexual violence in conflict.

Thirdly and lastly, I would also like to add my
words to those who strongly encourage the Somali
authorities to cooperate with the United Nations Panel
ofExperts to address the shortcomings in implementing
the sanctions regime.

