Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): The Nigerian delegation
appreciates your initiative, Mr. President, in convening
this open and timely debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. 1 also wish to thank Under-
Secretary-General John Holmes for his lucid briefing
and relevant comments this morning.

We believe that the protection of civilians in
armed conflict remains a daunting challenge and a
matter of deep concern for all nations. In today's
world, the grim reality is that civilians have not only
become the casualties of brutal conflicts, but also the
direct targets of dubious military tactics such as
abductions, suicide attacks, sexual violence and denial
of humanitarian access. Nigeria is concerned that those
situations still exist in spite of numerous international
laws protecting civilians.

Equally distressing is the fact that women,
children, the aged and other vulnerable groups, who are
least responsible for perpetuating conflicts, inevitably
suffer most from their adverse social and economic
consequences. Even more heinous, journalists and
humanitarian aid workers, whose services are Vital to
the well-being of refugees and internally displaced
persons, are also targeted, maimed and often killed.

Nigeria unequivocally condemns all acts of
violence either targeted at or perpetrated against non-
combatants by the protagonists in conflict. In
particular, we condemn sexual violence against women
in all its forms, the recruitment and deployment of
child soldiers and the culture of impunity.

Nigeria believes that the responsibility to protect
civilians in armed conflict situations is a shared one,
although it lies primarily with national Governments.
Protection requires early intervention and rapid
deployment of humanitarian assistance by the
international community. It also requires systematic
2

coordination and the pulling together of the capacities
of various humanitarian agencies involved in efforts to
bring relief to internally displaced persons and
refugees. More significantly, it requires humanitarian
access to rebel-held territories, so that civilians can
obtain the needed assistance.

Other measures required to stem conflict and to
deal with its consequences include the ratification and
implementation of existing conventions and protocols
on armed conflict. Efforts should be intensified to
strengthen the International Criminal Court and other
legal frameworks and mechanisms for monitoring and
reporting attacks against civilians by both State and
non-State actors. Indeed, the international community
should take vigorous and concerted action to combat
genocide, ethnic cleansing and crimes committed
against unarmed civilians.

Conflict prevention, the rule of law and good
governance are fundamental to the protection of
civilians. Experience has demonstrated that it costs less
to prevent than to control conflicts. That is why
Nigeria is fully engaged in regional and subregional
initiatives to prevent conflict. We stand firmly by
regional initiatives such as the New Partnership for
African's Development and the African Union peace
and security mechanism. At the subregional level, we
have steadily coordinated initiatives with other States
members of the Economic Community of West African
States to implement the Community's evolving security
architecture.

Consequently, Nigeria calls for more
international support for those regional and subregional
organizations in order to strengthen their capacities
through increased financial and technical assistance.
Such support and assistance are necessary, since those
organizations now bear most of the peacekeeping
responsibilities on the continent.

In addition, we call on the international
community to intensify its post-conflict peacebuilding
efforts through the Peacebuilding Commission.
Peacebuilding strategies should address short-term
measures such as rehabilitating educational and health-
care systems and laying the foundation for growth and
long-term development.

The deliberate targeting of civilians and other
protected persons in situations of armed conflict
constitutes a threat to international peace and security.
Hence, it is an issue within the remit of this Council.
08-35364
However, it is only when we collectively muster the
political will and common cause to act in unity that we
can truly hope to establish a viable practice for the
protection of civilians in conflict. Nigeria therefore
invites Governments, the private sector, civil society
and the international community to fully commit
themselves to their obligations.

