Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to thank the representatives of the
Secretariat for their important briefings. I should like
also to thank all of the departments and units that
contributed to the report that is before us today - that
is, the report of the Inter-Agency Mission that visited
West Africa last March.

The contents of the report have convinced us that
what is needed is a subregional approach by the United
Nations system to promote peace and economic
development in the countries of West Africa. The
report contains a wealth of ideas and proposals which
deserve to be fully analysed by the Council. They
should also be studied by other agencies of the
Organization and by other related institutions.

Today I should like to draw attention to the last
paragraph of the report, which discusses follow-up.
Perhaps here one could anticipate the work that will be
done by the Organization in handling other activities
and conflict situations in Africa. It states that following
successful implementation of the report, similar
approaches should be explored in other parts of Africa.
This would certainly be very effective, and, from the
budgetary standpoint, it would probably also be much
cheaper. It would also be relevant to the advancement
of the work of the Security Council itself.

I should like to touch on three points that my
delegation considers very important in the promotion
of peace and security in the region.

The first point is the role of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS). As we
said earlier, we cannot conceive of a regional approach
to United Nations operations in West Africa that would
not include a broad and dynamic interaction with
ECOWAS. The Inter-Agency Mission has made several
recommendations, mostly geared towards strengthening
the institutional capacity of that regional organization
in various areas, inter alia, conflict management,
promotion of development and electoral assistance.

On this point, I should like to ask some questions.
I should like to ask the representatives of the
Secretariat about the level of cooperation between each
of their departments and ECOWAS. Also, how can we
make the dialogue between the Council and ECOWAS
more productive? Here I would highlight the very
important role being played by the Ambassador of
Mali.

The second point I would take up is illicit arms
trafficking in the region. The arms trade in itself does
not in and of itself give rise to conflicts, but broad-
ranging circulation of arms destabilizes Governments
and aggravates conflict situations. We have noted in
particular the presence in West Africa of hired fighters,
mercenaries and uncontrolled militias. The countries in
the region have committed themselves to a moratorium
on the import of small arms and light weapons.

My questions here are as follows. What
contribution have the arms-exporting countries made to
the moratorium? Does the Secretariat have any
information in that respect? Would it help to draw up
an international list of arms traders, and would
international weapons-control measures not avoid
future expenditures on disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes?

My last point relates to the humanitarian crisis.
There is concern about "donor fatigue" in connection
with humanitarian relief in the region. Various figures
have been mentioned, and there have been meetings
and conferences in various countries calling for greater
resources, but it is well known that donor fatigue
exists. There is also "asylum fatigue" on the part of
countries that take in refugees. Guinea and Cote
d'Ivoire are two recent cases of this, despite their long
history of taking in refugees. Furthermore, the number
of internally displaced persons continues to increase
with every new outbreak of fighting.

Here my questions are: How could a regional
strategy help stop these two kinds of fatigue? What is
the local capability to provide humanitarian assistance?
And, finally, is it viable to think about a rapid-response
capability in the region to deal with the humanitarian
crisis?

