Mr. Matjila (South Africa): As this is the first open debate for the year 2020, South Africa would like to take this opportunity to welcome the new elected members - Estonia, the Niger, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Tunisia and Viet Nam - to the Security Council. We wish them all the best during their two- year terms. We have no doubt that the newly elected members will play a constructive role in the work of the Council, and we look forward to working with them to that end. We also' thank the outgoing - elected members - Cote d'Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Kuwait, Peru and Poland - for their positive contributions to the work of the Council. Finally, we thank you, Mr. President, for dedicating the first thematic debate, during this historic seventy-fifth year of the Organization, to the Charter of the United Nations, which forms the foundation of the Organization's very existence and our ongoing work. As a founding Member of the United Nations, South Africa - together with fellow African States Ethiopia, Egypt and Liberia - participated in the drafting and adoption of the Charter in San Francisco. South Africa deposited its instrument of ratification on 7 November 1945. We note with regret that the Foreign Minister of Iran was not granted a visa to attend this meeting, thereby denying an important actor in the troubled Gulf region an opportunity to express the country's views on peace and security in the context of a debate on the United Nations Charter. The denial of entry to the States Members of the United Nations - in this case to one that participated in the drafting of the Charter and deposited its instrument of ratification on 24 October 1945 - to participate in a United Nations debate contravenes the 1947 hosting agreement and undermines the resolution of disputes through constructive dialogue. The signing of the Charter of the United Nations in San Francisco in 1945 was a seminal moment in the relations of States that invoked a sense of unity for a common cause - a moment during which, as the second Secretary-General, Dag Hammarskjeld, later pointed out, "The hopes that were then aroused in many hearts outran the limitations of human nature" (see SG/382). The signing of the United Nations Charter was and remains an expression of hope that the peoples of the world can live in peace and prosperity, in larger freedom. The United Nations Charter represents a normative and contractual framework for the values that we as nations of the world aspire to and the commitments we intend to abide by. Following the unsuccessful attempt of the Covenant of the League of Nations to create an environment in which another world war could be averted, the United Nations Charter succeeded in the creation of a multilateral system of governance that has ensured that countries are able to convene within a rules-based environment and framework to discuss and promote issues of international peace and security, human rights and development. We recognize that since its inception the Charter has played a significant role in regulating relations between Member States by forbidding the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State and advocating for the peaceful settlement of disputes. While the Charter reinforces respect for the sovereignty of nations, it also, in Article 33, calls on all nations to collectively pursue a non-antagonistic and mutually beneficial approach to its international relations. Despite the noble aspirations of the Charter and its positive impact, some Member States have violated, and continue to violate, some of its central tenets. Article 2.1 of the Charter maintains that the United Nations is based on the principle of the sovereign equality of all its Members; however, unilateral actions and disregard for international law continue to this day. We must stress that the Charter is a compact that Member States have agreed to voluntarily abide by for their mutual benefit. There cannot be selective adherence to the Charter, as that would undermine the very credibility of the compact. The selective implementation of the Charter undermines the Organization and the post-Second World War international system of governance that we have developed. The Charter makes very clear that the Security Council is the sole body that can authorize the use of force. Additionally, the Charter provides that States may act in self-defence, including confronting imminent threats; but such threats must be credible, real and objectively verifiable for the use of force without Security Council authorization to be justifiable. South Africa is of the view that, to uphold the original intention of the Charter, which ultimately is predicated on peace, even in the event that there is evidence of a real and credible threat, any recourse to the use of force based on self-defence should be brought to the Security Council for authorization. Ultimately, the Charter seeks to prevent the use of force. Therefore, the issue is not just about whether the use of force is legal or not, but whether its use contributes to the Charter's vision of a more peaceful and prosperous world. The Charter provisions of the equality of nations, mutual respect and adherence to international law must be upheld if we are to resolve current disputes through negotiated settlements and prevent the outbreak of further conflicts. This approach is necessary in the context of emerging threats to international peace and security such as the growing number of intra-State and trans-State conflicts, the rise of non-State actors, terrorism, transnational organized crime and other such acutely global threats. We should not allow for competing political interests to undermine respect for international law and self-determination in cases such as that of the Western Sahara and the occupied Palestinian territories. The Charter is explicit on the role of regional organizations, as reflected in Chapter VIII, which makes provisions for regional arrangements to address matters relating to the maintenance of international peace and security. That is a testament to the vision of the drafters of the Charter, as, at the time, regional organizations were not as developed or equipped to deal with peace and security matters as they are today. Today Chapter VIII is even more relevant in terms of regional organizations, particularly the African Union and regional economic communities on the African continent, as they have established peace and security mechanisms, including those dealing with mediation, peacekeeping and peacebuilding. As Members of the United Nations, we must continue our efforts to strengthen cooperation and coordination with regional arrangements to ensure that our efforts are complementary and mutually reinforcing. While the Charter remains relevant, we must acknowledge that the world today is very different from the world that existed 75 years ago, when the Charter was signed. At the time of signing, there were 51 Member States. The majority of Member States from Africa and Asia that make up today's 193 Member States were not yet independent but still colonized. While the values that underpin the Organization should not be changed, Charter amendments are necessary to ensure that the Organization reflects the current global reality. In the first few years of the Organization's existence, Member States were willing to make the necessary amendments to the Charter, and the five Charter amendments that were made accommodated the growing membership of the United Nations. However, it has been 47 years since the most recent Charter amendment. For the Organization to be effective and remain relevant, it must reflect the current state of the world, and we must be willing to make the changes necessary to ensure that Member States are adequately represented in all the principal organs, including the Security Council. We must use the opportunity of the commemoration of the seventy-fifth anniversary of the Charter and the United Nations itself to recommit to the aspirations we had when it was signed. That would require us to recommit to upholding and returning to the letter and spirit of the Charter and its central principles, through which we pursue international peace and security and continue to pursue the mutual benefit and development of all. That is not an optional approach but a prerequisite and necessity for international peace and security and for creating a world that understands that the interests of each nation are imbedded in the interests of all of us.
