Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): I should
first like to thank the Turkish presidency of the Council
for organizing this debate. France is very committed to
improving the functioning of United Nations
peacekeeping. We welcome the current heightened
activity on this issue, which seems to us to reflect, first
of all, a convergence of concerns emanating from
various quarters and the growing desire that this
question has aroused to ensure the effectiveness of our
efforts among the Security Council, Member States as
a whole and the Secretariat.

With regard to the initiative that we and the
United Nations have launched in connection with this
issue, France has repeatedly asked that the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of
Field Support make quarterly presentations on the state
of United Nations peacekeeping in connection with
operational, administrative, budgetary and financial
aspects. It is therefore with pleasure that we welcome
today's debate, which we hope will be followed by
other similar meetings. I should like in particular to
thank Mr. Alain Le Roy and Ms. Susana Malcorra for
their presentation of the upcoming New Horizon study.
We await the presentation of the final report later this
year with great interest and anticipation.

Of course, I should also like to associate myself
with the statement that will be made shortly by my
Czech colleague on behalf of the European Union.

The elements set out by the Secretariat are
especially encouraging to us. I would briefly first like
to recall the three-pillar initiative that we launched
with the United Kingdom as a way of underscoring the
unity of perspective between the two approaches. The
first part of our initiative pertains to the strategic
conduct of operations. As the Secretariat has also done
today, we have called for improvements in how
mandates are drafted, how they are coordinated with
planning, how goals are set and how benchmarks for
success are established.

We fully support the idea of strengthening
command and control mechanisms, in particular at the
level of the Secretariat in New York. We also support
the idea of improved dialogue among the main partners
during the planning and implementation of operations.
Meetings of political and military experts have proven

to be very useful in that regard. We believe they should
be expanded to most operations.

It is also desirable to provide the Security
Council with genuine military expertise by organizing,
under a format yet to be determined, regular meetings
of military advisers, including with the possible
participation of troop-contributing countries.

The second pillar of our initiative pertains to the
implementation of complex mandates. In that regard,
we fully support the idea that the United Nations
should be in a position to undertake more robust
efforts. I should also like to underscore that it would be
a mistake to prevent the United Nations from carrying
out robust peacekeeping and to ignore the importance
of the contributions of countries deeply involved in
robust operations - not necessarily using Blue
Helmets but nevertheless mandated by the
Organization - such as, for example, in Afghanistan.

In that regard, I should like to point out that
France is one of the main contributors to United
Nations peacekeeping operations, to which it is the
fifth-largest financial contributor. France provides
almost 2,250 Blue Helmets and Berets. We also
contribute some 1,300 men to peacekeeping operations
under United Nations mandates in the framework of
the European Union, NATO or at the national level -
operations quite often in especially dangerous areas.

In our joint initiative, we of course fully support
the implementation by peacekeeping operations of
civilian protection mandates. In public opinion in the
countries where the United Nations operates, the
ability of the Organization to protect civilians is the
standard by which we will be judged. In doing so, we
acknowledge that we must be aware of the
contradiction that sometimes exists - as we heard
during the Security Council's recent visit to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo - between
simultaneously asking peacekeeping operations to take
on a more robust posture and protect civilians more
effectively. The contradiction clearly illustrates the
need to adapt a mission's internal structure to the
complexity of its mandate.
The third important point relates to the premature
integration of post-conflict reconstruction into our
strategies, as noted by the Under-Secretary-General.
With respect to mandate priorities, as the Council is
aware a significant effort has been made, reflected in
particular in resolution 1856 (2008), on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. That effort should be pursued.
However, resolutions are documents negotiated by
sovereign States in the Security Council, including
with non-member States. Given the respective political
goals of participants, it is not always possible to
establish a full or satisfactory hierarchy of objectives.

The issue of sequential implementation deserves
further consideration. It is difficult to give a new
mission too many tasks. We must therefore avoid that
contradiction, as Alain Le Roy has also mentioned; in
prioritizing urgent tasks, we neglect structural elements
necessary both for an exit strategy and to ensure that
conflicts do not recur or become prolonged. The
establishment of the rule of law and the setting up of
security forces fall under that category.

The same point could be made about the problem
of better integrating United Nations military operations
into the efforts of the rest of the system. The
identification of an integrated approach 4 as was done
in Timor-Leste, Liberia and the Congo - is clearly
needed today. We must make it a reality. In that regard,
defining concrete guidelines aimed at system-wide
coherence is both crucial and urgent, and must be part
of our discussion of peacekeeping.

In that regard, I should like to conclude by
expressing our hope that the Working Group chaired by
our colleague Ambassador Takasu will now turn its
attention to a detailed consideration of the provisions
of the mandates for peacekeeping operations. That
would make a valuable contribution to the Council's
future work.

Lastly, the third part of our initiative pertains to
resources. We call for efforts to be made in the areas of
effectiveness and cost. In that regard, we very much
welcome the preliminary ideas set out today by Ms.
Malcorra, including the crucial aspect of financial
flexibility and responsibility and the adoption of new
strategies for rapid deployment through a series of
initiatives that the Secretariat could itself undertake.
Those proposals will be fleshed out later. Ms. Malcorra
can count on us to do everything possible to enable her
to implement as soon as possible in the United Nations
system ideas that are so simple and obvious that we
could rightly wonder why they have not yet been
implemented already. We shall help her do that as soon
as possible.

Moreover, the future New Horizon study will
rightly focus on the issue of force generation. That is a
key challenge in an overall climate of tensions ever the
poor equipping and funding of troops. We are of course
in favour of expanding the pool of troop and police
contributors. In that regard, I recall the very significant
efforts made by France and the European Union, in
particular with regard to training African forces
through the European Reinforcement of African
Peacekeeping Capacities programme and the
establishment of a network of military schools on the
continent.

In that connection, I should like to mention the
important issue of language training and promoting
participation in peacekeeping operations by staff
speaking local languages. In that connection, I am of
course calling for francophone military, police and
civilian personnel. Many operations are today deployed
to francophone areas. The lack of French-speaking
staff and the insufficient mastery of it by a significant
number of peacekeeping staff both hinders the proper
execution of operations and can even pose a risk to
staff security. At any rate, that situation does not
contribute to engendering good relations and trust
among local populations. The issue of language must
not be taboo when it comes to respecting Charter
provisions and rules pertaining to the use of official
languages at the Secretariat and in peacekeeping
operations. We hope that an effort will be made in that
regard.

The group of francophone countries over which I
have the honour to preside has conferred with other
language groups to clearly illustrate that this is a
generalized problem of adapting to the situation on the
ground. In that connection, I would just like to mention
that we welcome the participation of the Under-
Secretary-General at the seminars on peacekeeping
operations organized recently at Bamako by the
International Organization of la Francophonie. We also
support a discussion on the mobility of reserves and the
calls for sustainable resources.

My delegation welcomes the emphasis in the
document - and the assumption underlying today's
debate - on the need for consultations with the main
contributors. Such consultations are of basic importance
for the United Nations system of shared responsibility.

To conclude, I would like to reiterate our support
for the Secretariat. The various aspects of the
consideration of this issue must, of course, be taken up
within in the competent entities: the Committee of

Thirty-Four, the Fifth Committee and, of course, in the
Security Council. In the framework of the Council, we
are determined to promote the various proposals of our
initiative, which will reach a new stage in August
under the British presidency of the Council. We hope
that we will be able to adopt an organizing framework
at that point.

