Mr. Listre (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I should
like to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened this
meeting to enable us to listen to the valuable information
that Mrs. Ogata has provided, not only to the members of
the Security Council but to all the States Members of the
United Nations. We believe that this practice contributes
greatly to enhancing transparency in the work of the Council.

We should like to thank Mrs. Ogata for her work at
the head of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), and to thank all
of the staff of that agency, which this year is celebrating
its fiftieth anniversary. Her statement, which was as
pertinent and enlightening as always, reaffirms our
conviction that the refugee problem is complex and urgent
from a humanitarian standpoint and from the perspective
of providing protection.

 

While the urgency of the situation is not restricted to
Africa - last year we witnessed dramatic refugee flows in
Kosovo and East Timor - the persistence of the problem
on the African continent requires particular attention. The
statistics on Africa speak for themselves. The conflicts in
Angola, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Sierra
Leone, Burundi and other countries of the region have
resulted in millions of refugees and internally displaced
persons, most of whom are living in great insecurity under
horribly unsanitary conditions, as Mrs. Ogata has explained.
Many of them are women and children, which makes the
problem even more tragic.

We must ask ourselves what we can do in the Council
to deal with these recurrent crises. In our view, there is a
direct correlation between conflict and the forced
displacement of people. The Council should therefore find
a speedy and lasting solution to the first problem, with a
view to eliminating the causes of the second. I should like
to endorse the graphic words of the representative of the
United Kingdom, who described the very tragic and
difficult situation of not dealing with the causes of conflict
and the discouragement on the part of the international
community with regard to continuing to help in a situation
which cannot be resolved if such causes are not dealt with.

With regard to the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
we hope the debates scheduled to take place during this
month will give an impetus to the Lusaka peace process. In
Sierra Leone, we hope that an enhanced United Nations
presence will help to stabilize the peace that was obtained
with such difficulty through the Lome Agreement. In
Burundi, the designation as facilitator of the Arusha process
of former President Mandela, to whom we will have the
opportunity of listening later this month, must also be
supported by this Council. We believe that it is very
important for Africans to see that there are no double
standards in the way those problems are dealt with. That is
why the message sent by this Council must be clear; the
Council must respond effectively.

1 should like to refer briefly to the issue of security
and the well-being of refugees and internally displaced
persons. In addition to the instruments at our disposal, the
report of the Secretary-General on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, issued last September, contains
various recommendations on protecting refugees and
internally displaced persons, which we believe should guide
the Council. Many of those recommendations can and
should be implemented as quickly as possible, particularly
those relating to humanitarian access and the security of
people in the camps. In this context, we should like to
thank Canada for its initiative to follow up the
implementation of those recommendations, which are
currently being analysed by the Security Council working
group chaired by that country.

In our opinion, the protection of refugees will also
involve guaranteeing access and security for the
humanitarian workers who help them. In recent years
there has been an increase in the number of incidents in
which the staff of the United Nations and other
humanitarian agencies have lost their lives. That is a
worrying problem; we believe that it should concern the
entire international community and that requires urgent
resolution. In this context, we would like Mrs. Ogata to
tell us, perhaps during this meeting, what measures she
believes are possible or in her judgement should be
adopted to enhance the security of humanitarian workers
in such operations.
But above and beyond any concrete measures that
the Council might adopt, it is clear that any action that is
undertaken will require considerable resources. Such
resources were obtained for Kosovo and for East Timor,
a response on the part of the international community that
left no doubt about the commitment of the donors to
those peoples. But as the Ambassador of the United
Kingdom so wisely said, similar resources are not found
with the same ease for some African conflicts, because
the causes of those conflicts are not addressed, and so it
often seems that the funds are going into, as he said, a
bottomless box.

I believe, Mr. President, that your decision to make
January the "month of Africa" is wise and commendable.
We hope that Africa continues to receive the same
response from the international community that others
have received with respect to these issues.

