The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Algeria, Angola, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Botswana, Brazil, Burundi, Cameroon,
Canada, the Central African Republic, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Egypt, Guatemala, Kenya,
Namibia, the Netherlands, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan,
the Republic of Korea, Rwanda, Senegal, South Africa,
the Sudan, Tunisia, Uganda, Zambia and Zimbabwe in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

It is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President: I am pleased to acknowledge the
participation at this meeting of a number of ministers:
Mr. Karel De Gucht of Belgium, The Honourable
Lieutenant General Mompati S. Merafhe of Botswana,
Madame Antoinette Batumubwira of Burundi,
Mr. Rodolphe Adada of the Congo, Mr. Raymond Baya
Ramazani of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Mr. Raphael Tuju of Kenya, Mr. Marco Hausiku of
Namibia, Mr. Ahmad bin Abdullah Al-Mahmoud of
Qatar, Mr. Lam Akol Ajawin of the Sudan, Mr. Sam K.
Kutesa of Uganda, Lieutenant General Reverend Ronnie
S. Shikapwasha, MP, of Zambia, Mr. Simbarashe S.
Mumbengegwi of Zimbabwe, and Mr. Georges Rebelo
Chicoti, Deputy Minister for External Relations of
Angola.

On behalf of the Security Council, I extend a
warm welcome to each of them.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule
39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Ibrahima
Fall, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for the Great Lakes Region.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Ibrahima Fall to take the seat
reserved for him at the side of the Council Chamber.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 25 January 2006 from the Charge
d'affaires of the Permanent Mission of the Congo to the
United Nations requesting that Mr. Said Djinnit,
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union, be invited to participate in the meeting under
rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Security
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of
its provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Djinnit.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Djinnit to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule
39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Louis
Michel, Commissioner for Development and
Humanitarian Aid of the European Commission.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Louis Michel to take the seat reserved
for him at the side of the Council Chamber.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on the preparations for
the International Conference on the Great Lakes
region, document S/2006/46.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/2006/51, which contains the text of a draft
resolution prepared in the course of the Council's prior
consultations. I should like to draw the attention of
Council members to document S/2006/27, which
contains the text of a letter dated 18 January 2006 from
the Permanent Representative of the United Republic
of Tanzania to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General.

In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I wish to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than five minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously.

As another measure to optimize the use of our
time in order to allow as many delegations to take the
floor as possible, I will not individually invite speakers
to take seats at the table and invite them to resume
their seats on the side. When a speaker is taking the
floor, the Conference Officer will seat the next speaker
on the list at the table.

With the agreement of the members, I will give
the floor to a number of Security Council members,
and then to a number of non-Council members, until
the list of speakers is exhausted.

I am now pleased to welcome participants to this
historic meeting on peace, security and development in
the Great Lakes region under the presidency of my
country, the United Republic of Tanzania. It is my
singular honour and privilege to lead this open debate.

We are meeting here today to refocus world
attention and our thinking on ways and strategies to
prevent and resolve recurrent conflicts in the Great
Lakes region. Our shared vision has been to create a
region where lasting peace and stability would prevail
and allow for sustainable development.

The Great Lakes region peace process is an
initiative of countries of the region with the support of
the United Nations, the African Union and the Group
of Friends of the Great Lakes Region. The initiative is
embodied in the Dar es-Salaam Declaration, adopted at
the end of the first International Conference on Peace,
Security, Democracy and Development in the Great
Lakes Region, held in Dar es-Salaam in November
2004. The Declaration is a foundation upon which
countries of the region seek to build a framework for
realizing enduring peace, democratic governance and
respect for human rights, economic cooperation and
sustainable development.

The 1994 genocide in Rwanda will remain a
painful reminder of our collective failure to stop it. On
the other hand, the genocide unveiled deficiencies in
the societal moral fabric. It should never happen again.
The violent conflicts, human displacements and
refugee influxes that have plagued our region in the
past decades have adversely affected all of us. We
therefore have to work together to avoid a repeat of
such catastrophes and create a better future for our
people. We need collective political will to prevent and
resolve conflicts, consolidate peace and build
institutions of democratic governance based on the rule
of law and respect for human rights. Peace is a
necessary prerequisite for development, and, in turn,
development reinforces political stability and underlies
socio-economic prosperity. We must strive to attain and
uphold those ideals.

For us, the countries of the region, the Security
Council is our key partner in promoting and
maintaining peace and security in our region. We
appreciate the response and initiatives of the Council to
work with us. Nevertheless, we are still facing residual
and new challenges. We therefore need to consolidate
what we have achieved so far and mobilize the support
of the international community in accomplishing our
objectives. The newly established Peacebuilding
Commission should focus its early attention on the
countries of the region as we create the necessary
political environment for irreversible peace.

We in the region want to assure the Security
Council and other members of the international
community of our collective political determination to
make the Great Lakes process a practical
accomplishment. We are working at national and
regional levels to create mechanisms to strengthen
mutual confidence and trust as a basis for peace and
stability in the region. In that regard, we are committed
to developing arrangements that will deepen
cooperation and sustain peace and security. Similarly,
we have embraced democracy and good governance
not only as intrinsic values but also as necessary for
our peaceful coexistence and crucial for our
development. The desirability of a regional approach in
this endeavour cannot be overemphasized. At the next
Summit, in Nairobi, we should be able to codify and
adopt these undertakings.

The work of the United Nations Office in Nairobi
was pivotal in preparing for the first Summit and will
be equally so for the upcoming Summit. We need the
support of the Office and of our friends in sustaining
the process leading to the Nairobi Summit and its
follow-up.

In conclusion, I wish to say on behalf of the
United Republic of Tanzania that Tanzania pledges to
continue working closely with the Security Council
and the Secretary-General in implementing the current
mandate of the Council in the Great Lakes region.
Together, we should be able to evolve future initiatives
that will consolidate international peace and security in
our region.

I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Congo, His Excellency Mr. Rodolphe
Adada.


