Ms. Malcorra: I am grateful for the opportunity
to brief the Council once again on the progress made to
strengthen the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and Somalia's security institutions.
Security Council resolution 1863 (2009), adopted in
January, endorsed the Secretary-General's proposed
strategy for Somalia, consisting of a United Nations
support package for AMISOM. and the building of the
capacity of the Somali security sector. That support is
funded through a combination of voluntary
contributions through United Nations trust funds,
bilateral support for AMISOM. and Somali security
institutions and assessed contributions for the United
Nations logistics support package. It is an integrated
strategy that recognizes the importance of each of
those components in strengthening peace and security
in Somalia and was devised by the Secretary-General
to support the political process, build security and
stability in the country, promote humanitarian
assistance and help recovery efforts in a manner that is
responsive to the prevailing conditions on the ground.

The international community's commitment to
peace and stability in Somalia was further expressed by
the Council in its resolution 1872 (2009) which called
on the Secretary-General to, among other activities,
continue to provide logistical support to AMISOM
through 31 January 2010.

The success of the Somalia donors conference
held in Brussels on 23 April was evidenced by pledges
totalling approximately well over $200 million.
Currently, $15 million has been received by the United
Nations trust fund for AMISOM. Specific discussions
are under way with other donors, with the possibility of
soon doubling the contributions to the trust fund.

The current military strength of AMISOM. in
Mogadishu stands at 4,274 troops comprising three
battalions from Uganda and two battalions from
Burundi. The African Union's continued efforts to
bring the AMISOM. force up to its full mandated
strength of 8,000 troops, reinforced with maritime and
air components, is critical to secure key installations
and humanitarian supply lines in Mogadishu, including
the airport, the seaport and other strategic locations.

Voluntary support for AMISOM. remains an
essential complement to the United Nations logistics
support package. Those requirements include funding
and in-kind support to meet troop payments and
urgently needed contingent equipment. However, with
the majority of pledged donor support to the African
Union and troop-contributing countries to be provided
bilaterally, effective coordination is critical if
AMISOM. is to be properly supported without gaps or
duplication.

To date, the United Nations has not applied any
of the funding available in the trust fund for support to
AMISOM. This has been done as part of an effort to
ensure that this funding is available to meet those
requirements that will not be supported by major
bilateral contributors. I urge all Member States and
regional organizations, including the European Union
and the League of Arab States, to redouble their efforts
to expedite the disbursement of pledges and to work
closely with the United Nations to ensure that the
combined support for AMISOM. can be identified and
prioritized. On the ground, we are gathering
momentum.

I would like to take this opportunity to brief the
Council on key support achievements and specific
actions taken to date. Of the initial funding of
$72 million provided up to 30 June 2009 for United
Nations logistical support to AMISOM, approximately
95 per cent was committed. With a focus on initial
start-up equipment requirements, the available funding
has been used to initiate the procurement of equipment
and supplies for both direct support to AMISOM. and
necessary requirements of the new United Nations
Support Office for AMISOM. (UNSOA).

Interim "life support" supplies for AMISOM
continue to be provided by a Member State with its
own vendor. The commercial supply arrangements of
the United Nations, sourced to United Nations
procurement and supply standards, are expected to
come into effect in a phased manner beginning next
month. In the meantime, the United Nations has
enhanced AMISOM's existing supply arrangements
where possible, including by providing additional
rations, medical supplies, specialized equipment and
field defence resources.

On rations, UNSOA has commenced the weekly
delivery of combat ration packs to supplement
AMISOM's current fresh food supplies and to raise the
daily caloric count to United Nations standards. Over
6,500 ration packs have been airlifted into Mogadishu
to date, with the objective of delivering 12,000 ration
packs per week until the United Nations support
package is fully implemented. Arrangements were also
put in place to provide AMISOM. with strategic
reserves of rations to mitigate risks to AMISOM's
supply chain. An initial United Nations rations contract
is expected to be operational in August.

With regard to air support, in the light of the
security conditions in Mogadishu, short-term
arrangements for commercial MEDEVAC capacity
have been enhanced. The Department of Field Support
is working closely with the Department of Safety and
Security to assess the feasibility of supply flights to
AMISOM.

On the subject of fuel, a fuel contract is expected
to be awarded in August.

Regarding sea freight, options for services -
chartering a vessel or using a freight forwarding
vendor - are being established to enable UNSOA to
commence sea delivery services to Mogadishu in
August.

Field defence stores, medical and pharmaceutical
supplies and a mobile airfield lighting system have
been deployed to Mogadishu. Training for those
capacities is being conducted in Entebbe. Additional
training requirements have been identified by
AMISOM. troop-contributors to operate specialized
equipment for strategic communications systems,
firefighting, first aid and trauma care and movement
control and property management, which is also
ongoing.

The ex-UNMEE - United Nations Mission in
Ethiopia and Eritrea - donation is now starting to be
used. I can report that, following training in Entebbe,
containers and prefabricated buildings are now being
erected and that about 50 vehicles are also in use
within the airport defensive area.

A remaining priority is the construction of a force
headquarters and level II hospital in Mogadishu, to
provide facilities for a United Nations presence in
country and to allow AMISOM. to expand from a
military mission to an integrated civilian, police and
military operation. The construction requirements have
been released to vendors and a contract award is
targeted for August.

Much of the required equipment mobilized to
date has been sourced through the strategic deployment
stocks located at our logistics base in Brindisi,
highlighting the importance of the readiness of the
United Nations to quickly respond to Security Council
mandates. Although a number of critical items have
already been moved by air, the first significant United
Nations consignment of support assets, worth over
$15 million, is expected to arrive in Mombasa this
week. These assets will provide essential capabilities to
AMISOM. in Mogadishu. They include prefabricated
buildings, medical equipment, workshops, sanitation
systems, refrigeration units for food storage and
armoured vehicles.

This consignment from Brindisi is being
transported by a United Nations-chartered ship, and I
wish to acknowledge and extend our appreciation to
the international maritime task force, especially
Operation Atalanta, for the escort and security
assistance that is being provided to our consignment.

We have recently received confirmation that the
Government of Kenya has given its approval for
UNSOA to establish a logistics support base in
Mombasa. We welcome this development, which paves
the way for immediate and long-term support and
improved means of delivery.

The memorandum of understanding between the
United Nations and the African Union for the provision
of support to the African Union Mission in Somalia,
which establishes appropriate internal controls to
ensure that all equipment and services provided by the
United Nations are provided in a transparent manner,
has been endorsed by the United Nations Controller
and submitted to the African Union for final approval
and signature. It includes payments and other support
provided through the United Nations Trust Fund. We
expect the memorandum will be signed by the African
Union shortly.

Further funding of $139 million has recently been
approved by the General Assembly for the start of the
new budget period effective 1 July. Under existing
plans, this level of funding effectively provides for
logistics support operations to continue for
approximately four months. The Assembly is scheduled

09-3985]
to consider funding for the full 2009-2010 budget cycle
this October.

The start-up phase of any field operation,
including logistics support for AMISOM, requires
certainty of resources. Permit me to offer an
observation here. This short-term approach to funding
limits the field mission in undertaking longer-term
strategic planning critical to its core objectives, has
implications for procurement arrangements and can
hamper efforts to attract experienced staff. Member
States' support for stable, full-year funding will ensure
that UNSOA can continue its operations in a manner
more conducive to its fully meeting its mandate.

We continue to make systematic progress in the
implementation of the support package to AMISOM.
We are pleased to report our continued close
partnership with the African Union in supporting the
Somali peace process and our close cooperation with
AMISOM. on the ground in the delivery of the support
package.

The establishment of UNSOA in the premises of
the United Nations Office in Nairobi has been
achieved. Recruitment of international and national
staff is ongoing. The proximity of AMISOM
headquarters, the United Nations Political Office for
Somalia and UNSOA in Nairobi, as well as United
Nations agencies, funds and programmes, continues to
promote collaboration, information sharing and
responsiveness among all of the key players in the
support effort.

Important progress has also been made with
respect to access for missions to Mogadishu. Working
closely with the Department of Safety and Security,
UNSOA representatives have recently undertaken three
visits to AMISOM, and preparations are underway to
build up essential security aimed at enabling the
establishment of a small rotating permanent presence
in the capital. The deployment of international staff is
instrumental in enabling the delivery of the required
level of support associated with a United Nations
peacekeeping operation. Until security conditions
permit UNSOA to establish this small footprint in
Mogadishu, interim oversight mechanisms will
continue using United Nations, AU and contracted
personnel in order to achieve our objectives.
When the required capability is fully
implemented, UNSOA and the logistics support
package for AMISOM. will provide one of the key steps
for implementing the strategy endorsed by the Security
Council in its resolution 1872 (2009).

In this regard, a fully functioning UNSOA and
established supply arrangements will enhance the
operating standards of AMISOM. troops towards United
Nations standards. Although valuable gains are now
being made in this effort, it will be some months,
probably only in early 2010, before the logistics
support package is fully rolled out. However, its
effectiveness in supporting AMISOM's implementation
of its mandate also depends on increasing the numbers
of AMISOM. troops on the ground.

Finally, allow me to pay tribute to the Ugandan
and Burundian battalions, led by Force Commander
Major General Okello, and their efforts on very
difficult terrain.

