Mr. Bui The Giang (Viet Nam): I join previous
speakers in thanking Mr. Robert Serry for his
informative and detailed briefing.
As the Council is reviewing a month that saw a
wide array of developments across the region, my
delegation recognizes the commitment of Palestine and
Israel to carrying forward bilateral negotiations into
2009, the strengthened efforts of the Palestinian
Authority in preparation for statehood, the recent
decision of Israel to evacuate illegal settlers from
Hebron and release more than 200 Palestinian
prisoners, and the continued cooperation between both
parties in enhancing the rule of law and security sector
reforms in J enin.

We take note of the affirmation by the Quartet in
its statement of 15 December 2008 that a final treaty
and a lasting peace would be reached through
simultaneous and mutually re-enforcing efforts on the
basis of peaceful negotiations, the institutional building
of a Palestinian State and the implementation of the
obligations of both parties under the Road Map and the
Annapolis joint understanding.

We welcome resolution 1850 (2008), adopted two
days ago by the Council, the first resolution on the
situation in the Middle East after a gap of almost five
years. We consider it, despite its understandable
imperfections, a good basis on which all relevant
parties can overcome setbacks and achieve further
concrete results. Thus, if and when the resolution is
strictly implemented, it will contribute practically to
realizing the vision of an independent, viable and
sovereign State of Palestine, living side by side and in
peace with Israel and the wider Middle East, whose
constituent nations remain at peace with each other and
with the world at large.

An honest assessment of the current situation
regrettably reveals the extent of obstacles ahead. My
delegation fully shares Mr. Robert Serry's recognition
of and grave concern over the many problems still
prevailing in the region. In that context, it is our view
that the success of the peace process will require
prompt effort by the international community to rectify
the aggravating situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory and commit Israel to its obligations under the
Road Map and related provisions of international law,
including, inter alia, an immediate end to all settlement
activities, the removal of obstacles to freedom of
access and movement, and the reopening of border
crossings to end the humanitarian crisis in Gaza.

The parties concerned must also refrain from any
act that may vitiate the atmosphere for a result-oriented
dialogue based on mutual confidence and trust, and
explore every possible way to maintain constructive
negotiations so as to arrive at a just and sustainable
solution in keeping with resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973), 1397 (2002), 1515 (2003) and 1850 (2008), the
principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative,
the Road Map and the other agreements that have been
concluded.
While the resolution of the six-decade tragedy of
Palestine would have a profound impact on the
situation in the Middle East, peace in the region also
requires forward movement on the other axes of the
peace process. In that regard, we commend regional
efforts facilitated by Turkey to re-energize the Syria-
Israel track and those to resume good-faith negotiations
on the Syrian and Lebanese tracks. We call upon the
international community to support in the coming
months the positive steps taken by the Lebanese
Government to fully assert authority over its territory
and to promote the national course of reconciliation,
political stability, socio-economic development and
regional and international integration.

We urge all the parties concerned to strictly
observe resolution 1701 (2006), put an end to those
acts that may further complicate that process, including
the targeted attacks against Lebanese civilians and
personnel of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon, violations of Lebanese airspace, the
continued detention of prisoners and the unresolved
status of the Shab'a Farms. While we know that much
remains to be done, at the same time we have
confidence in the wisdom and determination of the
Lebanese people and in the cooperation and assistance
of the United Nations, the Quartet, the League of Arab
States, regional countries and the international
community in ensuring that the tragic past of Lebanon
is never repeated.

