Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the
outset I should like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on the accession of Croatia to the presidency of the
Council - an accession that constitutes a historic
event for your country - and to assure you of the full
support of my delegation during the month of
December.

I would now like speak in my capacity as Chair
of the Central African Republic country configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission.

Over the past few years, the Government of the
Central African Republic has focused on restoring
08-62886

stability throughout its territory and launching a
process of national reconciliation, although the living
conditions of the Central African population remain
extremely difficult as a result of insecurity and extreme
poverty. This progress has awakened a hope in the
international community of seeing the situation in the
Central African Republic improve over the coming
years. And that hope has in turn awakened a new
confidence in the political will of Central African
actors.

It is in that context that, last May, the
Peacebuilding Commission was entrusted with the
responsibility of accompanying the Central African
Republic on the road to stabilization. Since then, our
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission has
been making rapid progress towards the definition of a
strategic framework, expected to be completed in
February 2009, which will establish the precise
parameters for the joint commitments of the Central
African configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Central African Government.

The Central African Republic is the fourth
country on the agenda of the Peacebuilding
Commission, and we have the opportunity to benefit
from the experience of our predecessors. However, the
situation in the Central African Republic is of a
different scale, when compared to the situations in the
other countries on the Peacebuilding Commission
agenda. Effectively, this country has just emerged from
decades of instability and conflict. The inclusive
political dialogue to be launched in Bangui this Friday,
5 December, where I will be present, a few days after
the fiftieth anniversary of the independence of the
Central African Republic, should mark a decisive step
towards agreement among all political, economic and
social actors and those of civil society. The
Peacebuilding Commission is convinced that the
Government is aware of the historic importance of this
dialogue, and the international community awaits its
outcome with interest. The success of this dialogue
should see the Central African Republic move from the
conflict phase to the post-conflict phase in its
development.

I would also like to indicate that, on two
occasions over the past few months, the Secretary-
General of the United Nations has impressed upon the
Central African authorities that this political dialogue
must be facilitated. I am convinced that these personal
interventions on the part of the Secretary-General have
5
not been without effect. I would also like to refer to the
decisive role of President Omar Bongo Ondimba of
Gabon in the process that led to the launching of these
dialogues.

The process of peacebuilding in the Central
African Republic is only beginning. That is why the
Central African Government and our configuration
have focused our talks on a limited number of
priorities. Together we have identified three priority
areas for peacebuilding, to which Mr. Fall has already
referred.

The first is security sector reform, which
concerns in-depth reform of those institutions that are
crucial for the stability of a democratic State and which
includes efforts focused on demobilization,
disarmament and the reintegration of politico-military
groups. This process of demobilization, disarmament
and reintegration should be launched as soon as
possible after the conclusion of the inclusive political
dialogue, on the basis of a plan of action prepared by
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP).
One of the first priorities of the Peacebuilding
Commission will be the mobilization of additional
resource for this process.

The second priority is good governance and the
rule of law, which represent important challenges in
this country still suffering from serious human rights
violations, insufficient democratic structures, an
administrative culture in need of modernization and
public services that must do more to reach the
population beyond the capital. In close cooperation
with Central African authorities, UNDP launched two
good-governance programmes in October. The recent
human rights report by the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office in the Central African
Republic (BONUCA) also provides a good platform
for cooperation with the Central African authorities.
Impunity, too often enjoyed by human rights violators,
including members of the armed forces and the police,
remains a serious problem.

The third priority is the establishment of focal
points for development with the three-fold objective of
restoring Government authority throughout the entire
territory through a decentralized structure, revitalizing
economic areas and improving access to public
services in densely populated areas. This concept was
developed by the European Commission in cooperation
with the Central African Government, which
6
incorporated it into its poverty reduction strategy
paper.

During this watershed period, the joint
perspectives of the inclusive political dialogue and
peacebuilding efforts must not, however, allow us to
forget that the presence of a peacekeeping operation
continues to be indispensable at this point. Even
though the mandate of the United Nations Mission in
the Central African Republic and Chad is not on our
agenda today, I should like to advocate that the
European Union Force be replaced at the end of its
mandate by troops of a United Nations force in the
north-east of the Central African Republic, as the
Government has requested. Such measures are
necessary until the Central African armed forces are
themselves in a position to guarantee security in this
part of the territory. In this context, my delegation and
the Peacebuilding Commission welcome the transition
from the Multinational Force of the Central African
Economic and Monetary Community (FOMUC) to the
Mission for the consolidation of peace (MICOPAX),
the regional peacebuilding force of the Economic
Community of Central African States.

Faced with the magnitude of these challenges, it
is also fundamentally important for the international
community and the entire United Nations system to
work in an even more concerted fashion, something
that our specific configuration will exert itself to
achieve. The recent visit to Bangui of a delegation of
our configuration enabled us to gauge to what extent it
would be desirable for the United Nations in the
Central African Republic to be able to speak with one
voice and to act in a more coordinated fashion. In this
context, the Peacebuilding Commission welcomes the
intention of the Secretary-General, set out in his last
report on BONUCA, to rapidly issue recommendations
for the establishment of an integrated United Nations
office in the Central African Republic. That integration
is absolutely indispensable. In the meantime, the
Peacebuilding Commission supports the Secretary-
General's recommendation to prolong BONUCA's
mandate for one year with the objectives described in
the report.

I would like to conclude by emphasizing the hope
represented by the process now underway for the
Central African people so long as the necessary will
and vision to build a better future are present. Within
our formation, national ownership has already been
reflected in the identification of peacebuilding
priorities. On the eve of the inclusive political dialogue
We welcome the commitment of the Central African
Government to put in place the necessary conditions
for the work of our special formation.

In order to restore stability and peace throughout
all of the territory, the process of political dialogue
must be relaunched with the inclusion of all political
actors and armed groups. It will, therefore, be
necessary, on the one hand, for the international
community to support the Government in its efforts
and, on the other, for the Government to display
genuine political determination in order to build,
08-62886
through joint action, lasting peace in the Central
African Republic.

Finally I would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ambassador
Francois Fall, and his team in BONUCA for their
commitment and their excellent collaboration with my
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission.

