Mr. Martinez Blanco (Honduras) (interpretation from Spanish): The international community has come to see the
presence of land-mines and other unexploded munitions in
various parts of the world as an enormous humanitarian
problem with serious economic and social consequences for
the populations of the countries facing these threats, which
prevent refugees and displaced persons from returning to
their homes and hamper humanitarian programmes and
operations, national-reconstruction activities and economic
development.

Every year, thousands of people die or are maimed by
the explosion of uncleared land-mines. Every day, tens of
millions of mines in 65 countries threaten life and limb,
especially of the rural population and of children. With
increasing frequency, owing to the presence of land-mines,
it is hardly possible to deliver humanitarian assistance to
those affected by armed conflicts, and in the worst of cases
it is halted altogether. More and more, the continued
manufacture and export of mines is worsening humanitarian
crises and makes it urgently necessary that the international
community step up mine-clearance activities and its support
for national demining arrangements, and agree on a total
ban on anti-personnel mines.

This is a worldwide crisis, and my delegation hails the
endeavours of the United Nations through the Department
of Humanitarian Affairs, the Department of Peace-keeping
Operations, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the United Nations Children's
Fund and other agencies and programmes. We cannot fail
also to acknowledge the active work of the International
Committee of the Red Cross in the treatment and
rehabilitation of the wounded, as well as the informational
activities of numerous non-governmental organizations
concerning the dangers posed by unexploded land-mines.
In his "An Agenda for Peace" and his Agenda for
Development, the Secretary-General has laid stress on the
fundamental relationship between peace and development.
It is a fact that disputes and armed conflicts frequently stem
from poor economic and social conditions; it is also a fact
that unless the foundations for economic and social
development are laid before a conflict is brought to a
formal conclusion, peace will be unable to take root. Thus,
efforts towards peace and security must not only focus on
humanitarian relief but must also include activities that
promote development.

This approach is clearly reflected in the
multidimensional nature of peace-keeping operations carried
out by the United Nations since 1989. Current peace-
keeping operations include not only military and
humanitarian relief components, but also elements for
maintaining law and order, safeguarding human rights,
strengthening political institutions, making possible the
return of refugees and displaced persons, holding free and
fair elections, and helping rebuild the national
infrastructure and carry out economic and social
development projects; they also include an element that
has come to be very important in the discharge of peace-
keeping mandates: mine-clearance.

The inclusion of this element among the functions of
peace-keeping operations needs no justification. Without
mine-clearance, social and economic stability cannot be
restored after armed conflicts. Without mine-clearance,
agriculture cannot resume, the infrastructure providing
basic services cannot be repaired, transportation is
impossible, the delivery of humanitarian assistance is
interrupted, and refugees and displaced persons cannot
return home. In other words, without mine-clearance the
consolidation of peace in a nation after a conflict cannot
occur.

On the basis of the experiences of Cambodia,
Somalia, Mozambique, Angola, Afghanistan and Bosnia
and Herzegovina, the importance of having peace-keeping
forces actively participate in mine-clearance programmes
as part of their mandates has been recognized, because
this contributes to the establishment of a safe environment
and, most importantly, helps create or improve national
mine-clearance capacities, which is central to the
assistance provided by the United Nations in this field.

My delegation strongly supports the inclusion of this
element in peace-keeping operations. At the same time,
we emphasize that demining alone does not constitute a
comprehensive solution to all the problems relating to
land-mines. The only possible solution remains their total
eradication. How many more lives must be lost? How
many more people must be maimed before the
international community completely bans the production,
stockpiling, use and export of these death-dealing
devices? When will there be consensus among
Governments that a ban is the only solution to this
tremendous humanitarian crisis? For all those whose lives
have already been destroyed by mines, there are no
answers. It is already too late.

