Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We express appreciation
to Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Ghassan Salame for his briefing as well as for his
continued diplomatic endeavours to bring about
lasting peace and stability in Libya. We also Sweden's
leadership of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) and thank
the Deputy Permanent Representative, Ambassador
Irina Schoulgin Nyoni, for her briefing on the activities
of the Committee. We also thank Ms. Hajer Sharief for
her remarks.

We once again reiterate our support for the United
Nations action plan endorsed by the Security Council
in its efforts to bring about a Libyan-owned political
solution under the auspices of the United Nations. We
commend the Special Representative for his continued
efforts to facilitate the implementation of the action
plan in close collaboration with the Libyans and other
stakeholders. It is encouraging that progress has been
made on a limited amendment of the Libyan Political
Agreement, which we believe remains the only viable
framework for ending the transitional period.

We also appreciate the provision of assistance by
the United Nations to the relevant Libyan authorities in
order to facilitate the holding of elections in 2018. We
believe the registration of more than 2 million voters
demonstrates the commitment and readiness of the
Libyans to engage in a democratic electoral process
that would end the transitional period. Furthermore,
the efforts of the Special Representative to promote
local reconciliation and dialogue, including through the
holding of several town hall meetings and preparations
to hold a national conference, will contribute to
addressing the internal division among Libyans and
help foster a spirit of harmonious coexistence among
all segments of society.

We recognize that serious challenges remain
in fully implementing the action plan, including
the lack of effective and unified State institutions,
insecurity - including the recent outbreak of fighting
in Tripoli - and human trafficking, inter alia.
Therefore, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General's continued efforts to implement the United
Nations action plan requires more coordinated and
coherent support from Libyans and the international
community. In that regard, we urge all Libyan actors
to continue their engagement in the political process
in a constructive spirit with a view to finding a lasting
political solution and realizing the legitimate aspirations
of the Libyan people.
To seize the current window of opportunity, the
United Nations should further strengthen its partnership
with Libyans. In that regard, we welcome the recent
Visit of Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman to
Libya, which further demonstrated the commitment
and readiness of the United Nations to support Libyans
in their endeavours aimed at bringing about peace
and stability.

The international community, and in particular
the Security Council, should also continue to support
the implementation of the action plan. We believe
the Council's presidential statement of 14 December
2017 (S/PRST/2017/26) sent the right message, and its
full implementation will be vital to accelerating the
progress already made with respect to the action plan.

The role of neighbouring countries and regional
organizations also remains critical to ending the Libyan
crisis. In that regard, we welcome the visit ofthe Special
Representative to Addis Ababa and commend him for
holding useful and extensive discussions with senior
officials of the African Union (AU), including the
Chairperson of the AU Commission. We believe that
such meetings could further strengthen coordination
and ensure greater collaboration between the two
organizations with a view to achieving lasting peace
in Libya.

The agreement reached between the two
organizations to work together to build consensus
among Libyans, unify the Libyan institutions, form
an inclusive national Government, hold free and
fair elections in the country based on the relevant
decisions of the Security Council and the AU Peace
and Security Council, and build on the African Union
road map and the United Nations action plan is very
welcome. In addition, addressing the plight of migrants
should also remain one of the top priorities of the
international community.

Finally, I would like to conclude by reiterating our
support for the Special Representative and the work
that he has been doing to facilitate the implementation
of the United Nations action plan. We all know that the
road ahead will not be easy, which is why it is Vital to
further galvanize the support of the Libyans themselves
and the international community in order to bring to
fruition a Libyan-led political solution under the
auspices of the United Nations.

