Mr. Lal (India): I thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing today's debate and for circulating the related
comprehensive concept paper (S/2016/867, annex). We
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
remarks on this important topic.

Regional and subregional organizations have an
important role to play in maintaining international peace
and security. Accordingly, the United Nations interacts
with several regional organizations - for example, the
African Union on the African continent - and India
has supported such cooperation, pursuant to Chapter
VIII of the United Nations Charter. Indeed, Article 54
of the Charter directs such organizations to keep the
Security Council fully informed of their activities for
the maintenance of international peace and security.

Today, few security problems begin and remain
within the borders of one country; they invariably
radiate beyond the national borders. Terrorism, drug
trafficking, transnational crime, pandemics and
environmental degradation do not respect any borders.

Terrorism constitutes a growing threat to
international peace and security. The international
community is increasingly confronted with terrorist
groups that have influence across continents in terms
of the sourcing of their finances, recruitment, the
spread of their ideologies of hate and their areas of
operation. This has been made possible by the forces
of globalization over the last two decades. The battle
against such groups can be won only collectively
and through much closer international cooperation.
Regional and subregional groups can play an important
role in facilitating such cooperation.

Among the organizations being discussed
today, India has been an observer in the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization (SCO) for the past decade
and is now an acceding State. India brings principles
to the organization that are in tune with the philosophy
of the SCO. India's capacities in trade, investments,
information and communication technology, space,
science and technology, agriculture, health care,
and small and medium-sized industry can create far-
reaching synergies with SCO countries.

The SCO is a young organization. With India
as a full member, the boundaries of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization will stretch from the Pacific
to Europe and from the Arctic to the Indian Ocean.
It will represent 40 percent of humankind and over
1 billion young people.

There already exists a Joint Declaration on
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization. This cooperation
can be taken forward. For the partnership between
the United Nations and regional organizations to
be effective, it needs to be one based on respect for
regional processes, complementarity and a division of
labour based on comparative advantage.

While acting under Chapter VIII of the United
Nations Charter, regional and subregional organizations
should make every effort to assist their member
States to achieve pacific settlement of disputes, in
cooperation with the United Nations, as appropriate.
Such cooperation should encompass all relevant issues
related to international peace and security, including
the fight against terrorism.

It is important that cooperation between the
United Nations and the SCO and other regional bodies
grow organically. Periodic debates like the today's
offer a useful opportunity for the United Nations and
regional organizations and their member States to
discuss how such growth could proceed in a mutually
supportive manner.

