Mr. Dahlgren (Sweden): Since the first nuclear bomb
fell on Hiroshima on 6 August 1945 the whole issue of
peace and survival has gained a new dimension. The
development of nuclear weapons, and their proliferation,
came to pose a new threat to mankind. And it was a unique
threat, because we reached a stage where it was possible
not only to destroy the enemy and oneself with these
terrible weapons, but also everyone else, and all and
everything that would come after us. The entire future of
civilization was at stake.

We have all become aware of this in the years that
have lapsed since 1945, and many efforts have been made
to help reverse the trend - to stop proliferation, to halt
nuclear testing and to start real nuclear disarmament.

This is one reason why my Government has taken the
events of the last few weeks so seriously. We have
condemned the nuclear tests by India and Pakistan. Those
tests constitute a serious setback for the hope for a world
free from nuclear weapons. They are in complete disregard
of the will of the international community to ban all
nuclear testing. And they also create grave risks for
regional security in South Asia and beyond.

The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction is
indeed a threat to international peace and security. It is of
great significance that the Security Council, by today's
draft resolution, will put its weight and its authority
behind the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons and the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty. This will strengthen international efforts to
prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons and to
achieve nuclear disarmament.

It is not enough to stem the flow; we must also turn
the tide. The ultimate goal is to eliminate all weapons of
mass destruction. The five nuclear-weapon States bear a
particular responsibility to make that possible. But this in
no way reduces the duty of other States to contribute to
disarmament and to prevent the proliferation of nuclear
weapons.

My Government utterly rejects the notion that
nuclear weapons increase security and international
standing, and we believe that today's message to India
and Pakistan is very clear: nuclear testing will not give
them more security - only the opposite. Nor will it
enhance their status and standing among other nations.
Instead, through their own actions these two countries, in
one essential field, have removed themselves from the
mainstream of the international community. We want
them to return. The one road to take for India and
Pakistan is the one taken by South Africa: to reconsider,
to renounce their nuclear option, and to join the treaty
regimes.

We recognize the complex political and historical
background to the tension in South Asia. We wish to
encourage India and Pakistan to resume and strengthen a
political dialogue on all outstanding issues, including
Kashmir. The international community should stand ready
to facilitate such dialogue, at the request of the parties, in
order to reduce tension and build confidence and security
between them.

The Security Council itself can never - and
nowhere - abdicate its responsibility for international
peace and security. That is also the reason why Japan and
Sweden, together with Costa Rica and Slovenia, initiated
today's draft resolution. We deem it a significant response
to a perilous international situation.

 

