Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic):
My delegation voted in favour of resolution 2298
(2016) because we are convinced of the need for the
international community to come together to prevent
non-State actors, and in particular terrorist groups like
Da'esh, from acquiring weapons of mass destruction.
Egypt, as a neighbour ofLibya, insists on the importance
of removing dangerous materials and preventing all
terrorist organizations from acquiring them.

The unanimous vote in favour of resolution 2298
(2016), calling for the removal and destruction of
chemical weapons in Libya, clearly reflects the strong
determination of the international community to take
the necessary measures in line with previous Security
Council resolutions, including resolution 1540 (2004).
Our endorsement and vote in favour of the resolution
do not mean, however, that we are without important
comments on its text, some of which I wish to share
here.

First, the resolution does not mention the strategic
framework of this initiative, namely, making the Middle
East a zone free of nuclear weapons and all weapons
of mass destruction, in line with resolution 687 (1991).
The Middle East is a region that remains uncovered
by any relevant treaties. Secondly, the resolution does
not mention the major threat represented by Da'esh

and other terrorist organizations in Libya. Thirdly,
resolution 2298 (2016) does not mention the time
frame for the various measures and mechanisms that
will be used by the Organisation for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons and its member States in the
transfer of the chemical materials. It is also unclear
how necessary it was to adopt the resolution under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations in
order to take into account the declarations made by the
Libyan Government.

Finally, I note the lack of explicit steps taken to
facilitate the adoption. Council members did not have
sufficient time to consider the text, which they saw for
the first time only 72 hours before it was put to the vote,
which did not allow some members to discuss or add
to parts of the text. My delegation is not convinced by
the justifications that certain Council members made
for the need for a quick adoption. The way in which
the draft resolution was submitted runs contrary to the
rules of transparency in the work of the Council and
does not reflect the efficiency or cooperation desired in
its work, which were mentioned at our meeting earlier
this week (see S/PV.7740).

