Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia welcomes the report
(see S/2017/922, annex) presented by Mr. Valentin Inzko,
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
the Security Council's unanimous adoption of resolution
2384 (2017). The Council's support for the extension
of the European Union-led peacekeeping force Althea
operation shows its willingness to defend security and
stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina and respect its
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity,
as well as its support for the Dayton Agreement. We
hope that Althea will continue to cooperate closely with
Bosnia and Herzegovina and to play a constructive role
in maintaining peace and stability in the country within
the framework of its mandate.

Wealsocommendthepositivepoliticaldevelopments
in Bosnia and Herzegovina during the reporting period,
particularly, the steps taken to implement the reform
agenda and the signing ofa transport community treaty
by Bosnia and Herzegovina, the European Union and five
other Balkan countries. Those efforts are a testimony
to the commitment of the Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to continuing to undertake the reforms
needed to foster stability and contribute to initiatives
aimed at achieving the development and stability the
country wants. In that regard, we urge the authorities to
focus on those aspects and to intensify their efforts to
implement the 5+2 agenda, which is a prerequisite for
the closure of the Office of the High Representative.

While we also welcome the progress that Bosnia
and Herzegovina has made with economic development,
we are concerned about the continuing challenges
on the political front, which represent a major threat
to Bosnia and Herzegovina's territorial integrity and
sovereignty whose repercussions could put not just the
country but the entire region of the Balkans at risk. In
that regard, we encourage all the country's political

leaders to put the interests of the Bosnian people before
their own ethnic political concerns. We appeal to all
those leaders to deal with these challenges in a spirit of
consensus and in an atmosphere of inclusion in which
all Bosnian political parties are full participants, in line
with the Dayton Peace Agreement, which remains the
legal basis and benchmark for stability and the peaceful
resolution of disputes between the parties in their quest
for lasting peace. In that regard, we should emphasize
the importance of ensuring that all the parties respect
Bosnia and Herzegovina's sovereignty, territorial
integrity and Constitution, as well as the decisions
handed down by its judiciary with regard to the rule
of law. We also urge political leaders and all parties to
refrain from engaging in divisive nationalist rhetoric.

Lastly, we reiterate our support to all the peoples
of Bosnian and Herzegovina in living together in
harmony for their shared development. We call on the
international community to heed the concerns of all the
parties concerned by taking a neutral, fair approach
with a View to leaving the divisions of the past behind.

