Mr. Malhas (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): First and
foremost, allow me to thank the United States Secretary
of the Treasury, Mr. Jacob Lew, for presiding over this
very important meeting. My country appreciates the
efforts ofthe United States of America, which have led
to the convening of this meeting, the very first in the
history of the Security Council.

We too are gratified by the adoption by consensus
of resolution 2253 (2015), at a time when many terrorist
attacks have been carried out throughout the world,
killing innocent people and exacerbating humanitarian
crises - attacks that, as we all know, disregard all
precepts of morality and humanity. I would like to
thank the lead delegations of the resolution, namely, the
delegations of the Russian Federation and the United
States of America, for their efforts. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for
his statement, and I would like to thank Mr. Je-Yoon
Shin for his briefing. We fully support the efforts of
the Financial Action Task Force, as well as its close
cooperation with all States within the framework of the
fight against terrorism.

The resolution we have just adopted is a watershed,
given its specificity and its major thrust. It updates
the sanctions regime, which will now be known as
the sanctions regime against Al-Qaida and the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant. It expands the criteria for
listing on the sanctions list to ensure that they include
activities that demonstrate a link between individuals
and entities tied to Daesh, so that those criteria are not
limited solely to links with Al-Qaida. That is a point
that we stressed during the negotiations, because it
is in keeping with today's reality and shows that the
international community is determined to face the
international threat posed by Daesh.

Jordan has always stressed the importance of
the fight to combat the financing of terrorism and
cut off its sources. That is one of the pillars and
prerequisites when it comes to any efforts aimed at
combating terrorism. It behooves me to say here that
the fight against the financing of terrorism, including
the financing of Daesh, cannot rest on the shoulders
of a single country or a single independent institution.
The multifaceted sources of that financing mean that
we need to strengthen cooperation among national
institutions and among institutions at the regional and
international levels. Terrorist organizations thrive
on the illicit trafficking in oil, natural resources and
antiquities and the seizing of hostages for ransom, not
to mention the taxes they impose on the population and
the exploitation, to put it baldly, of innocent citizens.
The lack of international cooperation and cooperation
at the regional level has contributed to the success of
those terrorist organizations. With respect to the fight
against the financing of terrorism, my country would
like to stress several important points.

We need to bolster the International Convention
for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism.
All countries must adhere to that Convention, which
focuses specifically on the financing of terrorism
and strengthens judicial cooperation among States.
Countries must also live up to their commitments
and must ensure that their citizens and residents do
not support terrorist organizations financially. All
sanctions committees must include on their sanctions
lists any individuals guilty of such actions, and we must
also ensure that individuals included on either national
or United Nations sanctions lists have no access to the
financial system, in accordance with all the relevant
resolutions. Donor countries, as well as their partners
and the relevant United Nations agencies, must provide
assistance to States so as to strengthen their capacities
and capabilities in the fight against terrorism, including
strengthening their public and private banking sectors.
Individuals guilty of the crimes at issue here must
be brought to justice or extradited to States with
jurisdiction. I would like to share with the Council
some of the measures we have undertaken in Jordan in
that regard.

Jordanian parliamentarians have taken note of the
expansion of terrorist groups in the region. We have
strengthened our legislation so as to take that new
reality into account. We have criminalized any acts
involving the financing of terrorism or the lending of
support to terrorist organizations. Any individual who
provides financing to those preparing or committing an
attack will be brought tojustice, pursuant to the updated
law on the suppression of the financing of terrorism of
1994, as well as the 2010 law on money-laundering.
Our national authorities have also undertaken practical
measures at all crossing and border points so as to
prevent the entry of oil shipments from areas controlled
by Daesh or the entry of any stolen goods or antiquities.
Those two forms of trafficking are the main sources
of financing for terrorist organizations in both Syria
and Iraq. We have also raised the level of awareness
and vigilance in the financial and currency sectors.
We have taken measures to ensure that both the public
and private banking sectors prevent Daesh, as well as
any other terrorist organization, from accessing the
Jordanian or international financial system. The new
law on currency exchange is being studied so as to
ensure that it is in keeping with the provisions of our
Constitution. Following the adoption of resolution 2199
(2015) by the Council, we have undertaken a number of
measures and steps aimed at combating trafficking in
antiquities. Those measures form part of the efforts we
have undertaken to combat the financing of terrorism,
since we know that trafficking in antiquities is the
second most important source of funding for terrorist
organizations.

The atrocities committed by terrorist organizations,
including Daesh, clearly demonstrate that the terrorists
want to prevent us from living in peaceful coexistence.
The fight against terrorism is therefore truly a global
one. Combating Daesh and similar organizations

requires a global approach based on three axes - the
military, security and ideological.

I would like to reiterate the importance of
weakening Daesh, especially at the financial level. That
will require international efforts, as well as serious
collective efforts at all levels.

