Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
was recently interviewed by Swiss journalist Patrick
Vallelian. The interview would not have taken place if
the journalist in question had not been extremely lucky.
Indeed, he miraculously survived an incident in Homs
last year. If one believes his story, the incident was
nothing less than a trap. His French colleague, Gilles
Jacquier, however, was killed in the same incident.

That is but one example among many that
demonstrate that around the world journalists face
threats, assaults, abductions, disappearances and
even murder. A worldwide increase in murders and
imprisonment ofjournalists has been noted during the
past few years.

Switzerland recalls that journalists engaged in
dangerous professional missions in areas of armed
conflict are civilians and should not be taken for targets
unless they are directly participating in hostilities. We
also recall resolution 1738 (2006), which calls on States
to prevent attacks on journalists and emphasizes the
importance of protective legal instruments such as the
Additional Protocols to the Geneva Conventions.

Impunity, often a result of the political impact of
the work ofjournalists, can be seen as one of the major
causes of repeated attacks on them. And the media
cannot be free if journalists are deliberately targeted or
if those who attack them go unpunished.

That is why I thank the United States for
organizing today's debate. Without freedom of opinion
and expression there can be neither democracy nor
good governance. Moreover, during armed conflicts,
reliable and independent information is essential for
the international community to play its role. The work
of journalists can, for example, make an important
contribution to gathering information on violations
of international law. In that way, representatives of
the media play a non-negligible role in preventing
such Violations and participate in the fight against the
impunity of their perpetrators.

As long as journalists continue to be harassed
or even killed because of their work, freedom of the
media will remain but an empty promise. Not only do
journalists have the right to be protected, but the acts
of Violence against them must be promptly, impartially
and effectively investigated.

