Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): In
View of the commitment of the French and German
authorities to resolving the crisis in Ukraine within the
framework of the Normandy format, this statement is
made on behalf of France and Germany.

The maritime incidents that occurred yesterday are
serious and cause us great concern. As we have just
heard, the Kerch Strait, the Black Sea and the Sea of
Azov were the scene of Violent manoeuvres yesterday
that have considerably increased tensions and the risk
of escalation, thereby highlighting the instability of the
region. Russian forces reported that they had collided
with and then seized with force three Ukrainian
warships that were attempting to cross the Strait. Six
Ukrainian sailors were wounded. We are aware of
nothing that could justify that use of force.

As indicated this morning by our authorities, as
well as the Permanent Representatives of the European
members of the Security Council Visiting Beijing, we
express our deep concern at the actions of the past 24
hours and call on the parties to exercise the utmost
restraint. France and Germany call in particular on
Russia to restore and respect, in accordance with
international law of the sea, the freedom of passage in
the Kerch Strait, as well as the right of access to the Sea
of Azov, which is currently temporarily blocked, and to
act immediately to de-escalate tensions. We also call
on Russia to release the detained Ukrainian seamen as
soon as possible and return the seized vessels.
I wish to assure Ukraine of our solidarity and
strongly reaffirm the commitment of France and
Germany to full respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Ukraine within its internationally
recognized borders. Yesterday's incidents are the direct
consequence of Russia's annexation of Crimea in March
2014, in Violation of international law. In that regard, we
recall that we condemned Russia's construction of the
Kerch Bridge, which contributes to depriving Ukraine
of full access to its maritime areas in the Sea of Azov.

Yesterday's serious incidents also serve to
highlight the need for a lasting solution to the situation
throughout eastern Ukraine. France and Germany will
continue to mobilize as they have done for the past
four years to calm the situation in eastern Ukraine and
promote a long-term resolution of the crisis, through
the Normandy format.

Let us be clear: all parties, in particular Russia,
must respect the commitments they themselves
have made. The full implementation of the Minsk
agreements, to which both Russia and Ukraine have
committed themselves, remains the only way to find a
peaceful and lasting solution to this conflict, which has
been going on for almost five years.

France and Germany will continue to stand by the
side of the Ukrainian people scarred in recent years by
the Donbas conflict and the illegal annexation ofCrimea.
The Council may rest assured that we will continue our
efforts in this direction, within the framework of the
Normandy format and in all appropriate forums.

