Mr. Shalgham (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): I would first like to express my gratitude to
you, Mr. President, for organizing this meeting - the
first Security Council debate of its kind - on the
effects of illegal drug trafficking on international
security, and for personally presiding over this
important meeting. On behalf of the Libyan delegation,
I should also like to thank you and your delegation for
preparing the presidential statement (S/PRST/2009/32)
that the Council has adopted. I also wish to thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his statement, as
well as Mr. Costa, Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), for his
important briefing.

There is no doubt that, in debating this important
issue, the Security Council is contributing to the efforts
of other United Nations bodies to address the illicit
drug trade and its serious consequences. With support
from UNODC, the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council have addressed several
aspects of drug trafficking, in particular in connection
with its effects on public health and development and
its links and contribution to organized crime.

There is also no doubt that, several decades ago,
the international community realized the importance of
international cooperation in controlling both drug
trafficking and drug use. The Single Convention on

Narcotic Drugs was concluded in 1961 and amended in
1972; the Convention on Psychotropic Substances was
signed in 1971; and the United Nations Convention
against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances was finalized in 1988. In
addition, the General Assembly, which devoted its
twentieth special session to the problem of drugs,
adopted a Political Declaration (resolution S-20/2, annex) that identified the objectives of international
cooperation in addressing this issue. At its fifty-second
session, held this year, the Commission on Narcotic
Drugs devoted a high-level segment to evaluating the
progress made since 1988 in achieving the goals
identified at the twentieth special session, as well as to
establishing priorities for the future. In that connection,
on 12 March 2009, ministers and representatives
participating in the segment issued the Political
Declaration and Plan of Action on International
Cooperation towards an Integrated and Balanced
Strategy to Counter the World Drug Problem.

Against the backdrop of advances in
communications and transportation - and the
opportunities they provide for criminals to move
quickly and en masse - as well as the existence of a
large number of vulnerable States, promoting
international cooperation to combat the drug trade is
more urgent than ever. Studies have shown that there
are strong links between drug trafficking and armed
conflicts, the proliferation of small arms, money-
laundering and the financing of organized crime and
terrorism. The illicit traffic in drugs now constitutes a
significant source of laundered funds. It is also an
important tool in the hands of those who seek to spread
instability by promoting corruption and proliferating
small arms, which are the most important component in
fuelling conflicts in Africa.

Recent reports point to a disturbing increase in
cocaine trafficking across West Africa, as well as
heroin trafficking in East Africa. That is due to the
precarious security situation in several States in those
regions. That creates a serious threat to the security and
the stability of those States and creates obstacles to
sustainable development in them. It also constitutes a
serious threat to all the States in the region.

In the expansive Sahel region of Africa, there is a
concern that drug trafficking might be a principal
source of financing for terrorist groups that are
rampant in those desert areas and that continuously
threaten the lives of the populations and of tourists.
Those groups seek to destabilize the States of the
region.

The current situation in West Africa and the Sahel
region requires international financial and technical
support to the efforts of States in the region to promote
cooperation among themselves in controlling their
borders and in combating organized crime. We wish to
express our gratitude to UNODC for their efforts in
that area.

In countries where significant numbers of the
population depend on the cultivation of drugs - such
as Afghanistan, Colombia, Peru, Bolivia and Laos -
there is a need for the international community to
continue providing support to farmers and to urge them
to take on legitimate and peaceful agricultural
activities that are economically sound and sustainable.
In that way, the production and supply of narcotics and
drugs throughout the world will be reduced while food
security would be strengthened and poverty reduced.

In conclusion, we commend the important role of
UNODC, under the leadership of Mr. Costa, and we
value his role in promoting and strengthening the
capacity of Member States to confront illicit drug
trafficking, crime and terrorism. We urge that UNODC
be provided with the necessary financial resources to
support its work.

