Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I wish warmly
to thank you, Madam President, for putting the key issue
of improving the performance of peacekeepers on our
agenda. It is one ofthe three priorities for the Kingdom of
the Netherlands during our membership in the Council.
I also thank Mr. Lacroix and Ms. Blakemore for their
briefings. May I add that I was deeply impressed by
Ms. Blakemore's testimony on the criminal abuse of
children by peacekeepers. This is simply unacceptable,
and I think that she has strengthened our common
resolve to end such crimes.
To quote the Secretary-General,

"At its best, United Nations peacekeeping is a
remarkable enterprise of multilateralism and
international solidarity." (S/PV8218, p. 2)

But peacekeeping has its dark chapters, and we in
the Netherlands know that all too well from our own
history. Today United Nations peacekeeping faces
serious challenges, so let me first pay tribute to and
commemorate the brave Blue Helmets, women and
men, who have given their lives for a safer world.

We were honoured that the Secretary-General
launched his Action for Peacekeeping initiative during
the Dutch presidency of the Council, in March, in the
presence of our Prime Minister, Mark Rutte, and that
of the Minister of Defence of C6te d'Ivoire, on behalf
of President Ouattara (see S/PV.8218). We were pleased
to play a role in co-facilitating, together with other
members of the Council, the Action for Peacekeeping
Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations
Peacekeeping Operations, and we salute the leadership
of Cote d'Ivoire as Chair of the Council's Working
Group on Peacekeeping Operations and our cooperation
on the presidential statement we adopted on 14 May
(S/PRST/2018/10).

We look forward to the high-level event on
peacekeeping, to be held in two weeks, and we
are heartened to see so many countries recommit
themselves the great enterprise ofpeacekeeping in such
a short time. We encourage those countries that have
not yet signed on to the Declaration to do so; indeed, I
see that the representatives of some of those countries
are present here today.

Today we will focus on performance, which
is a key element of the reform of United Nations
peacekeeping. In that light, I will focus on three issues:
first, women in peacekeeping; secondly, performance
and accountability; and, thirdly, training and effective
force generation. Of course, I align myself with the
statement to be made later today by the observer of the
European Union.

First, increasing the number of uniformed
women in peace operations is essential. I welcome
Mr. Lacroix's personal commitment, which he has
just expressed, to the issue. As the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations stated in its 2017 report,
the meaningful participation of women at all levels
and in all pillars of a mission is key to the operational
effectiveness, the success and sustainability of peace
processes and peacebuilding efforts. Therefore, we
look forward to the furhter development of a gender-
sensitive force- and police-generation strategy by the
Secretariat. We welcome the development of female
engagement teams and efforts to institutionalize such
teams in deployments by troop-contributing countries.
We also support initiatives by Member States and the
United Nations, such as the Elsie initiative and the UN-
Women female military officers course. We try to do
our part. Together with Spain, we organize a yearly
female peacekeepers course.

Secondly, with regard to performance and
accountability, we need a comprehensive and integrated
performance policy with clear standards as an important
basis to provide guidance and improve accountability.
The same holds true for scrutiny in vetting and
transparent evaluation standards. Adherence to a
zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse
demands our continuous attention. Part of the moral
compass of peacekeepers should be a very simple
rule - there is no such thing as an equal and consensual
relationship between peacekeepers and residents of
local communities. It simply does not exist. In our view,
the Secretariat and missions can further improve data-
and intelligence-based analysis and decision-making. It
is obvious that being aware of the context and security
situation, in real time, in their area of operations is
vital to missions and to the safety of peacekeepers. In
asymmetrical environments, peacekeeping intelligence
is even more crucial. Therefore, we strongly support
the development of that concept.

Excellence in duties and leadership should be
rewarded. We must continue to learn from positive and
negative lessons We welcome the use of independent
strategic reviews in that regard. We call on the
Secretariat to continue to further enhance measures
to inform the Council of the planning and outcomes
of such reviews. We welcome your initiative, Madam
President, for a draft resolution on peacekeeping and
we will continue to work closely with you and your
team to ensure its maximum impact.

Thirdly, on the issue of training and force
generation, the report prepared by Lieutenant General
Carlos Alberto dos Santos Cruz, entitled Improving
Security of United Nations Peacekeepers, stated that
United Nations mission leadership and contributing
countries must change their mindset. They must be
willing to take risks and show willingness to adapt to
the new realities United Nations peacekeeping faces.
We fully agree. It is essential that missions possess
well-trained and equipped personnel. Missions must
have the right capabilities to implement the tasks
mandated by the Council. The United Nations must
continue to refine and further develop training so that
peacekeepers can perform their tasks with confidence
and decisiveness. The training should include special
leadership modules. The United Nations and its Member
States should do more to better coordinate training
and address specific training needs. There are more
ways to strengthen the impact of peacekeeping, such
as innovative force generation, smart pledging and the
use of annual rotation schemes. We welcome initiatives
from Member States and the Secretariat to identify
good practices and further improve force generation.

The Council has a specific responsibility. We need
to provide more tailor-made solutions for the challenges
faced by the men and women who risk their lives
serving in peacekeeping missions to protect others.
We must do everything in our power to avoid sending
Blue Helmets on impossible missions. As Lieutenant
General Santos Cruz stated, "We need to change the
way we are doing business". That is a key challenge for
us all in order to bring safety and security to civilians
in areas where Blue Helmets are active. We owe it to the
civilians involved, to the Blue Helmets and to the brave
men and women who gave their lives under United
Nations command for a safer world.

