The President (spoke in French): I shall now make a statement in my capacity as representative of Belgium. We note with concern that, despite the military defeat of Da'esh in Iraq and Syria, the group continues to operate clandestinely and carry out attacks - hence, the importance of continuing our efforts within the coalition to completely defeat the group and its ideology. We are also concerned about developments vis-a-vis Da'esh and Al-Qaida affiliates and supporters in other conflict areas, including in the Sahel, Somalia and the Arabian peninsula. The destructive influence of those terrorist groups, their exploitation of local conflicts and their acquisition of capacities normally limited to States is having disastrous consequences for those regions, as our colleague from the Niger underscored. The threat has not disappeared in Europe, either. Last Sunday's attack in London, for which Da'esh claimed responsibility, demonstrates once again that the monitoring, rehabilitation and reintegration of individuals linked to such terrorist groups, including lone actors, remain a challenge that is as complex as it is urgent. How can this ever-evolving threat be countered most effectively? First, it can be countered by continuing the work that we are doing here, including through the development and implementation of appropriate international security measures. Major results have already been achieved. One particular example that comes to mind is the use of Passenger Name Records, Advance Passenger Information and information and communication technologies. Secondly, we must continue to focus on combating the root causes of violent extremism and terrorism. As the representative of Indonesia mentioned earlier, we co-organized, together with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), an Arria Formula meeting on radicalization in prisons. Detention and rehabilitation can succeed only if we devote the attention required for the implementation of appropriate prison standards and individualized follow-up programmes, including following the period of detention. We encourage the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) to pursue its consideration of this issue with the Member States visited and the UNODC to prioritize it in its capacity-building programmes. We must also enable civil society to play its full and unimpeded role in combating the spread of terrorism. We note that Da'esh and Al-Qaida continue to exploit vulnerable groups within our societies, the members of which feel marginalized and passed over. Through the joint efforts of States and civil society organizations, we can help marginalized groups overcome their isolation and vulnerability. Such joint efforts will help strengthen the resilience of communities facedby terrorist narratives and stanch terrorists' ability to recruit new combatants. In that regard, I thank Ms Freij once again for her testimony and commend her on her work within her community. Lastly and above all, such measures would be futile if they were to contravene international standards concerning human rights, fundamental freedoms and international humanitarian law. Violations of those principles would only reinforce the extremist and violent narratives of terrorist organizations and facilitate their recruitment activities. In that regard, we strongly encourage the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism to pursue his engagement with the Security Council and every State Member. We look forward to pursuing constructive cooperation with the member States of the Security Council, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team pursuant to resolutions 1526 (2004) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated individuals and entities, the United Nations United Nations Office of Counter- Terrorism and all our partners in the fight against international terrorism. I now resume my functions as President of the Council. The representative of China has asked for the floor to make a further statement.
