Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): Let me first express my
delegation's appreciation to the United Kingdom for
preparing the resolution, taking the leading role in the
negotiations and providing ample time for our
deliberations. It is indeed very unfortunate that the
resolution did not enjoy consensus.

My delegation fully supports the deployment and
work of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), and therefore fully
endorses the extension of its mandate. As a United
Nations Member State and a police contributor to
UNAMID, and in remembrance of the very regrettable
tragedy visited upon UNAMID personnel recently,
Indonesia welcomes the resolution's appropriate
recognition of the issue of the safety and security of
UNAMID personnel, including in relation to the urgent
contribution to and prompt deployment of critical force
enablers.

As stated in paragraph 9 of resolution 1828
(2008),

"there can be no military solution to the conflict
in Darfur, and an inclusive political settlement
and the successful deployment of UNAMID are
essential to re-establishing peace".

The resolution expresses the Council's insistence on a
political solution and its readiness to take action
against those impeding the peace process.

I wish also to reiterate Indonesia's position on the
need to strike a balance between the promotion of
justice and the pursuit of peace. In that regard, we fully
support the views of the African Union, the League of
Arab States and the Organization of the Islamic
Conference as expressed in their respective letters to
the Council, as well as those of the Non-Aligned
Movement on the need for the Security Council to
assume its responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security and to ensure that the ongoing peace
process in Darfur is notjeopardized.

My delegation therefore supports the call for the
Council to consider requesting the ICC to defer the
investigation in relation to the situation in Darfur, in
line with article 16 of the Rome Statute. Indeed,
resolution 1593 (2005), which referred the situation in
Darfur to the Prosecutor of the ICC, envisaged, in its
second preambular paragraph, the possible deferral of
the case. The Rome Statute itself recognizes the role of
political and security considerations in the pursuit of
justice, as reflected in its article 16.

Now, the Security Council needs to find ways to
respond to any possible obstruction of the peace
process and of the maintenance of international peace
and security. We are hopeful that the Council will
consider positively the request made by those
organizations, in particular the African Union, which is
the partner of the United Nations in the political and
peacekeeping endeavour in Darfur. The Security
Council became involved in Darfur because of the
urgent need of the people of Darfur to be protected.
The persistence of the conflict would definitely not
serve that purpose.

Finally, it is our wish that the resolution we have
just adopted not only will support continuously the
work of UNAMID but will also contribute to the
promotion of the Peace Agreement and to the easing of
the humanitarian situation in Darfur.

