Mrs. Laohaphan (Thailand): Thailand
commends the Security Council for convening today's
open debate, which combines two security issues of
grave concern in our time - proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction (WMD) and the risk that they may
fall into the hands of non-State actors, particularly
terrorists, who will use them indiscriminately to the
detriment of civilians.

As a member of the Non-Aligned Movement
(NAM), Thailand associates itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the Permanent Representative of
Malaysia, and wishes to add additional comments of its
own. In recent years, the world has witnessed a surge
in terrorist attacks, and no State can afford to remain
placid. The possibility of terrorists wreaking havoc
through the indiscriminate use of weapons of mass
destruction is no longer a far-fetched scenario. As the
world continues to wage war against terrorism on all
fronts, it is vital to step up international efforts to
address the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, their delivery means and related materials
and to prevent them from falling into the hands of
terrorists.

The draft resolution on WMD under scrutiny in
the Council will help bridge the gap in international
law pertaining to non-State actors in a timely manner.
However, as long as WMD continue to exist, this draft
resolution can only partially counter the threat posed
by these weapons to international peace and security.
Thailand continues to stress the importance of
reinforced compliance and verification of key
international WMD non-proliferation treaties and
conventions, particularly the Treaty on the Non-
proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, the Chemical Weapons
Convention and the Biological Weapons Convention.

We are also of the view that progress is urgently
needed in the area of disarmament. In order to contain
and completely safeguard the world from the risk
associated with WMD, non-proliferation and
disarmament must go hand-in-hand. With regard to
specific provisions of the draft resolution, Thailand
welcomes the establishment of a committee to report
on the implementation of the draft resolution, as
provided for in operative paragraph nine, and notes
with appreciation that the Council also recognizes
under operative paragraph five that some States may
require assistance in implementing the resolution.
However, we think that the timeframe of
implementation of 90 days is rather an arduous task
and gives rise to difficulties in practice. It would also
be helpful if the draft resolution would spell out in
clear terms and in greater detail the scope of
obligations required of Member States.

