Mr. Toure (Mali) (spoke in French): I should
like, in my turn, to thank the Secretary-General for his
report and Assistant Secretary-General Annabi for his
very instructive briefing.

I also welcome Mr. Svilanovic, the Federal
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, to our meeting.

At the open meeting of 16 November, we
welcomed the successful holding of elections on 28
October in Kosovo and the high level of participation
in them, which did honour to the Kosovars, first and
foremost, and to the entire international community,
which did its utmost to ensure that the elections were
held in a peaceful environment.

My delegation supports the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
in its efforts to expand the membership of the Kosovo
Transitional Council, taking into account the political,
religious and ethnic diversity of the province. We also
welcome the progress made in the establishment of
municipal assemblies. We extend our support to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General with
respect to his appointment of representatives of
minority communities to elected assemblies in areas
where they live.

We note with satisfaction that UNMIK is
pursuing its consideration of reform of the existing
central organs in the context of its efforts to ensure the
establishment of institutions to promote increased self-
government. The first regulations will soon be drafted.

With respect to security, we must acknowledge
that, in the ground safety zone in southern Serbia,
armed clashes intensified in mid-November between
the Serbian security forces and the so-called Liberation
Army of Presevo, Medveda and Bujanovac. My
delegation remains deeply concerned by the situation
in the Presevo Valley, where Albanian separatists are at
work. We condemn the acts of violence perpetrated by
these armed groups and call for the cessation of all
violence in that area. Such acts are intolerable to us,
given their potential to destabilize the entire area and
to negate the sacrifices made by the international
community to ensure a democratic, multi-ethnic
Kosovo. We urge those armed groups to comply with
the provisions of resolution 1244 (1999) and the
Military-Technical Agreement. We also encourage
UNMIK and the Kosovo Force (KFOR) to pursue their
efforts to halt the illegal activities of the armed groups,
not only in Kosovo but throughout the ground safety
zone.

We welcome the dismantling of barriers raised by
Serb demonstrators protesting against activities of
Albanian-speaking separatists in Serbia. This will help
to ease tensions and to optimize opportunities for
negotiation. We regret that minorities have been the
targets of threats, acts of intimidation and violence in
Kosovo. In this respect, we support the special security
measures undertaken by UNMIK and KFOR to
suppress such illegal activity.

With respect to the law, my delegation welcomes
the efforts made by UNMIK and its Department of
Justice to establish a dependable judiciary and to
ensure the rule of law. We are concerned for the fate of
Kosovar detainees in Serb prisons and by the
disappearance of individuals. A solution must urgently
be found to this grievous problem.

At the humanitarian level, we endorse the policy
of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees to protect minorities.
Particular attention must be paid to vulnerable groups.
My country gives its unreserved support to the
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999) and believes
that the essential issue of the status of the province
must be resolved through cooperation and negotiation.

In conclusion, we pay a tribute to Mr. Bernard
Kouchner, the outgoing head of UNMIK, for the work
he has done in Kosovo. I offer his successor, Mr. Hans
Haekkerup, the full support of my delegation.

