Mrs. Schwalger (New Zealand): I, too, welcome
First Deputy Prime Minister Dacic' and Ambassador
Citaku to the Security Council today, and thank Special
Representative Tanin for his briefing.

New Zealand strongly supports dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina aimed at normalizing relations,
and the European Union's support for that process.
We encourage the leaders of Serbia and Kosovo to
engage constructively in that dialogue with sincerity
and determination to achieve concrete results for their
people. We reiterate the Secretary-General's call for
both sides to seek fair and lasting compromises.

While a number of agreements have emerged
from the dialogue, the pace of implementing them
has been relatively slow in some instances. We were
pleased to learn about the recent agreement relating
to telecommunications and we look forward to seeing
progress on Serb majority municipalities in Kosovo.
We encourage both sides to make progress on other
issues identified in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2016/901), including those of internally displaced
persons and of missing persons. Implementation of
agreements reached within the dialogue is in the best
interest of all of Kosovo's communities. Therefore,
we hope that both sides can focus on delivering on
their commitments and refrain from taking actions
which unnecessarily divert energy away from
constructive dialogue.

The previous report of the Secretary-General
(S/2016/666) noted a significant reduction in aggressive
protests and political violence. We are, therefore,
disappointed to see a recurrence of such incidents,
including disruptive tactics in the Kosovo Assembly.
When elected representatives engage in such behaviour,
what example does that set for the communities they
represent? We encourage those parties who oppose
the use of violence to achieve political objectives to
continue to distance themselves from that behaviour, to
send a clear message that concerns must be addressed
through peaceful and normal democratic processes.

Previously, New Zealand has welcomed progress
towards the establishment of a specialized court to try
cases brought forward by the European Union Special
Investigative Task Force. We are therefore pleased
to see another step taken in that direction with the
recent appointment of a specialist prosecutor. We look
forward to the court becoming operational as soon
as possible and contributing to the broader process
of reconciliation.

Finally, and as we have said throughout our
Council term, we believe the Council should take a
more flexible approach as to how and when it considers
this agenda item. The current frequency of meetings is
not justified by the situation on the ground, especially
when contrasted against other pressing issues on the
Council's agenda. We say that not to diminish the range
and strength of views that exist on the question of Kosovo
or to suggest that everything is perfect in Kosovo.
Rather, we believe that the Council has a responsibility
to organize its work in a manner that directs its time
and energy towards the peace and security challenges
that most urgently demand our attention. In that regard,
we would also be open to considering a possible
restructuring of the United Nations Mission in Kosovo
to reflect the improving realities on the ground with the
passage of time.

