Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
listened carefully to High Representative Inzko's
briefing and the statement by Ms. Korjenie, the
representative of civil society.

We welcome the Council's unanimous adoption of
resolution 2496 (2019), on Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is an important country
in the Balkans. China welcomes its successful holding
of general elections in October 2018 and notes that the
Council of Ministers has not been formed. We hope that
all parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina will be able to
arrive at a consensus through dialogue and consultations
to form a Cabinet as soon as possible, actively
consolidate the political process, comprehensively
implement the Dayton Peace Agreement and accord
further attention to, and support for, economic and
social development so that that they can all share the
peace and development dividends.

Maintaining peace, stability and development in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and ensuring harmony among
its various ethnic groups is in the common interests of
the international community and the countries of the
region. China has always respected the sovereignty,
independence, national unity and territorial integrity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, respected the right of its
people to choose the future of the country and supported
its various ethnic communities living in harmony while
seeking common development.

When it comes to the issue of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the international community should
be attentive to the views and concerns of all parties
and adopt a balanced and prudent approach. While
supporting Bosnia and Herzegovina in advance of the
reform process, the international community should
fully consider the specific characteristics ofthe country
and its level of resilience, focus on helping people
overcome their problems independently and step up
support for the country's economic development.

China has noted the efforts of High Representative
Inzko to move the political process forward in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We hope that the High
Representatives will work in strict accordance with
his mandate to play an active role in promoting the
implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement. We
also hope that the multinational stabilization force led
by the European Union in Bosnia and Herzegovina will
continue to strengthen engagement with the parties
concerned to help maintain security and stability in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. China stands ready, together
with the rest of the international community, to do its
part in helping Bosnia and Herzegovina achieve lasting
peace, stability and development.

