Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, I would like to thank the United States for its
initiative to convene today's meeting of the Security
Council, which I hope will help forge international
consensus in order to assist Iraq in confronting the
grave challenges before us.

China has listened attentively to the briefing
by Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Mladenov. We also welcome the presence of Foreign
Minister Al-Jaafari of Iraq and his statement earlier in
the meeting.

The situation in Iraq poses a serious threat to
international peace and security, which is of great
concern to China. We care deeply about the security
and welfare of the people of Iraq and we firmly
support the efforts to safeguard the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Iraq. We also
support Iraq's efforts to restore its security an stability
and to achieve development and prosperity. The
international community should step up its solidarity
and coordination in order to move the Iraqi situation
in a favourable direction. We would like to emphasize
several points.

First, the international community should support
Iraq in continuing to further its process of political
reconciliation. We are heartened by the successful
formation of a new Iraqi Government, an important
milestone in that country's political process that
creates the necessary conditions for the Iraqi people
to focus their energy on responding to the security
challenges they face and on promoting economic and
social development. We hope that the Iraqi factions
will continue to accord priority to the State as a whole
and to the Iraqi people and their stability. We also
hope that they will continue to push ahead with their
political dialogue and reconciliation process, beef up
their military and security capabilities and continue to
advance reform and reconstruction. The international
community should shoulder its responsibility and
provide constructive help to the new Government
in Iraq. In particular, there should be increased
humanitarian assistance, along with greater efforts
to alleviate the suffering of the Iraqi people and help
Iraq break the vicious cycle of poverty, extremism and
violence.

Secondly, the international community should unite
to help Iraq combat terrorism. We are deeply saddened
by the great suffering that terrorism has inflicted on
the Iraqi people. There is no good or bad terrorism.
Wherever and whenever it occurs, and whoever commits
it, terrorism should invariably be firmly opposed. In its
pursuit of international counter-terrorism cooperation,
the international community should respect the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of the countries concerned. It should abide by the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and the basic norms that govern international
relations, while fully observing the leading roles of
the United Nations and the Security Council. At the
same time, it should adhere to consistent standards
with regard to both the symptoms and their remedies.
The international community should closely track the
new features of terrorism against the backdrop of new
means of modern information. It should come up with
new means of thinking and new measures designed
to sever the three channels - namely, the spread of
terror via the Internet, the cross-border movement
of terrorists and the covert financing of terrorism in
order to minimize the breathing space for terrorism.
Meanwhile, terrorism should not be linked to specific
nations or religions.

Thirdly, the international community should
recognize the important interplay between the Iraqi
question and other hotspot issues in West Asia and North
Africa, through strengthened, integrated management.
For some time, hotspot issues in those regions have been
popping up in interwoven upheavals, and the conflicts
among nations, ethnic groups, religious groups and
religious sects have been acute. The international
community should take into full account the unique
historical and cultural traditions of those regions and
should proceed based on the fundamental interests
of the peoples and countries of those areas through
the peaceful resolution of disputes. The international
community should also support the independent search
by the countries of the region for the paths and models
best suited to their national conditions and their people's
aspirations for orderly transformation and development
in order to create the fundamental conditions for lasting
peace and security in those regions. China supports Iraq
and other countries of the region in strengthening their
unity and cooperation and in promoting their common
unity with a view to their common development.

China is a sincere friend of the Iraqi people,
and we have been actively engaged in the peaceful
reconstruction of the country. China will continue its
cooperation with Iraq in various fields in order to bring
more real benefits to the Iraqi people. We will continue
to provide Iraq with additional humanitarian assistance
as needed and to support Iraq in its counter-terrorism
efforts. We stand ready to join the international
community in making unremitting efforts for the early
achievement of peace and security in Iraq and for the
early return of the Iraqi people to a peaceful and better
life.

