Mr. Neil (Jamaica): To begin, I take this
opportunity to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of October. In view of the many
preoccupations of the moment, you obviously have a
difficult task on your hands, but you have our
confidence and our support in guiding the work of the
Council.

It was a little over a year ago that the Council
considered issues relating to small arms and light
weapons, when Jamaica was still a member of the
Council. It was an important initiative and a
recognition that illegal traffic in those weapons plays a
significant role in the continuation and prevalence of
conflicts, which have such disastrous economic, social
and humanitarian consequences. It was rightly
recognized by the Council on that occasion that there
needed to be some practical recommendations on ways
in which to deal with the illicit traffic in small
weapons. Those proposals are now before the Council,
and I wish to commend the Secretary-General for his
report contained in document S/2002/ 1053 and to thank
the Under-Secretary-General for Disarmament Affairs
for the comprehensive briefing he provided this
morning on this issue.

We have reviewed the report of the Secretary-
General and the twelve recommendations contained
therein. In general, they are useful and constructive
proposals, although in some areas action could be taken
further. There is obvious need to lift the profile and
level of attention given to this issue in the United
Nations system. Paragraphs 3 and 4 of the report are
instructive in highlighting the role of small arms and
light weapons in conflicts during the 1990s and
especially in relation to their heavy toll on civilian
lives. When we add their use in criminal and terrorist
activities, the statistics can be even more frightening.
We therefore would have liked to see the
recommendations go further in advancing international
action and in increasing the obligations of Member
States, particularly those engaged in the manufacture
and trade of those weapons. There is need for greater
control and internal regulation of the production and
transfer of small arms and light weapons. Jamaica
supports the early elaboration of an international
agreement that would tighten those controls and
provide mechanisms for the registration, identification
and tracing of small arms. The process, which is
currently in the hands of the Group of Experts, needs to
be speeded up to arrive at an early draft international
agreement for consideration and adoption by the
international community.

The recommendation for increased interaction
between the General Assembly and the Security
Council on ways in which to deal with the illicit traffic
in small arms and light weapons obviously needs to be
pursued. An integrated approach would avoid
duplication of mandates and would also ensure greater
effectiveness, particularly in the provision and sharing
of information and in the development of effective
coordinated strategies.

We have continually emphasized the linkages
between the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons and narco-trafficking, terrorism and
transnational organized crime. Those linkages are now
well recognized. While acknowledging the tremendous
work done on those areas by various expert groups,
there is need for more action by Member States to
tighten controls on the manufacture and transfer of
weapons. That is made even more necessary in these
times as a result of the impact of globalization, which
has facilitated illegal transactions across borders and
has increased the need for regulation and
improvements in detection. There has to be more
accountability and stricter methods of control at the
source and at the points of origin. Additionally, in the
case of the States that are most affected, there is need
for the provision of material and technical assistance
for the development of training and monitoring
mechanisms to control transit of those weapons across
borders.

With regard to punitive measures, we support
more consistent action at both the international and
national levels. Those involved in the illegal arms
trade - suppliers, purchasers, brokers, financiers and
facilitators - should be exposed and punished.
Recommendation 11 refers to the use of coercive
measures. We are not sure of the scope which is
contemplated under this proposal, but it would be
important that these be applied across the board, and
not on a selective basis, wherever and whenever
governmental complicity has been proved.

With regard to the role of the Department for
Disarmament Affairs, significant work is being done in
conjunction with other relevant United Nations
departments and agencies in the implementation of the
Programme of Action. The Coordinating Action on
Small Arms mechanism is playing a useful role in
promoting the implementation of the Programme of
Action, along with other United Nations departments
and agencies, especially the United Nations
International Drug Control Programme. Jamaica is also
of the view that the establishment of a small arms
advisory service would enhance this coordination
through the provision of relevant advice and the
formulation of relevant programmes. We therefore
support this initiative and we encourage the provision
of the necessary resources and assistance required for
such a service.

As the incidence of war and conflict continues to
be a disturbing factor in the international environment,
the challenges posed to international stability and the
humanitarian consequences caused by the problem of
small arms must remain high on the international
agenda. Efforts to eliminate the illegal traffic should
continue at all levels in order to ensure peace and
stability in the world. The Security Council has a
critical part to play and Jamaica can be relied on to
give its support to the Council in taking decisive
action.

