Mr. Insulza (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish):
Thank you, Madam President, for having convened this
timely and necessary debate.

Chile believes in Africa, its culture and its people. A
large part of our participation in the Security Council over
the past two years has been devoted to envisaging ways
to help in solving the conflicts in this region.

Today's ministerial meeting has three major
connotations for us.

First, it highlights the political priority that the rest
of the international community is giving to the situation
in Africa.

Secondly, it acknowledges the progress already
made by the region in recent years - as recalled here by
President Mugabe - and, in particular, the will of many
of its leaders to shoulder their own responsibilities in
resolving tension and instability within and among
African countries.

Thirdly, this meeting symbolizes the commitment to
increase and intensify international cooperation with
African countries on the basis of their own social and
economic needs and their priorities in the area of peace
and security.

Chile certainly has no strategic interests in Africa,
and it is far from Africa geographically. But we are close
together in our belief that world peace requires
development, security and stability in Africa. In the
United Nations we have done our utmost to ensure that

 

this outlook prevails, from the General Assembly and the
Security Council to the World Summit for Social
Development, where Chile promoted and attained a special
commitment in support to African development from the
Heads of State.

In this Council forum, we would like to offer our
Views on future means of tackling the region's existing
conflicts.

First, the international community, in reaching its
decisions, must increasingly be guided by the common
political mechanisms that the African countries have
established for themselves. The Organization of African
Unity's Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management
and Resolution; the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) in Liberia and recently in Sierra Leone;
the Arusha process; and other subregional arrangements:
these did not exist 10 years ago. This tremendous progress
must be reinforced and strengthened in the future.

Secondly, the international community cannot apply
general formulas for the resolution of all of Africa's
conflicts. The rule must be, respect for the specific
characteristics of each situation. This is not easy because
we have noted that many self-styled experts in Africa are
wrong quite regularly. It is the leaders and the peoples of
Africa who must, in the framework of growing democracy,
find solutions to their own problems.

Thirdly, there is no substitute for political leaders'
personal commitment to peace. We who have had to work
hard in our own countries to restore respect for human
rights, democracy and equitable development know how
arduous the path towards national reconciliation is. But, at
the same time, we have learned that there is no peace in
deeds if the idea of peace is not cherished. And it is the
responsibility of the political leaders to act on this principle
and to set this example for their followers.

Fourthly, humanitarian atrocities have been committed
in Africa. We are not making a value judgement, because
on this subject few societies that can cast the first stone,
particularly in Africa, whose history of slavery and
colonialism still causes us pain. Rather, we are appealing to
the conscience of the continent, as well as to individual
consciences, asking that these acts of violence not be
repeated, that the truth be known, that justice prevail, that
the human person be respected and that the United Nations
and the non-govemmental organizations be permitted to
work under the protection of full respect for international
humanitarian law. This is necessary for the very dignity of
the region and the international image of its political
authorities.

Our commitment to Africa looks to the future. N ow,
as never before, the world has before it the capacity to
create wealth and increase well-being. But this new
potential for humanity, which has yet to be realized, will
be possible only if its benefits are shared by all. We do
not want a twenty-first century of partial successes, of
incomplete worlds and of people, countries or regions
abandoned by the tide of history.

Chile does not want a world that includes some and
excludes others. We want peace, security and
development to become a reality for each individual, each
family and each community. Only thus will we have a
world that promotes human security as the true symbol of
peace and international security. In this framework, the
development and stability of Africa is a global priority for
which we must all take responsibility.

