Mr. Rodriguez Parrilla (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): A moment ago, I spoke in this debate as
Acting Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People. But
given the seriousness of the issue that prompted the
convening of this emergency meeting, Cuba cannot fail
to state its national position.

The massacre by Israel of at least 15 innocent
civilians, most of them children, in the Gaza Strip
cannot be justified under any pretext and deserves the
strongest condemnation.

Ariel Sharon's reaction to the tragic events, which
he described as one of his greatest successes, needs no
comment. In spite of everything, while the United

States and Israel are attempting to ignore the President
of the Palestinian Authority, Sharon is still regarded as
a valid partner in dialogue and is called "a man of
peace", as President Bush described him to the
astonishment of the world during the J enin atrocities.

We reiterate that the United States must
immediately suspend financial support for military
purposes and supplies to Israel, which includes tanks,
missiles and aircraft used against civilians, such as the
F-16 that bombed Gaza.

It is a secret to no one that the Government of
Israel's open defiance of the norms of international law
and of the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations is to a large extent a result of the indifference
with which the Security Council continues to regard
the question of Palestine. This is the result of one
permanent member's arbitrary use of its power and
prerogatives. With its vetoes and threats of veto, it
prevents the Council from discharging its mandate.

The Security Council, through its inaction and
passivity before the daily events in the occupied
territories, bears a significant part of the responsibility
for the tragic events in Gaza. If the Council continues
to play this sorry and dangerous role, it will have to
accept the consequences of its acts.

The countries of the Arab Group have prepared
for this occasion a draft resolution which in our
opinion reflects the minimum that the Security Council
should say in the current circumstances. It is simply
unacceptable that the Council should continue to turn
its back on the suffering of the Palestinian people.
Once again, Cuba calls on the Security Council to act
without delay and to live up to its responsibilities.

