Ms. Rice (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Fernandez Amunategui for his
briefing. Before I begin, I would like to congratulate
Guatemala on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for the first time.

In February, the United States led a Security
Council mission to Haiti. The mission witnessed at first
hand the great strides that the Haitian people are making
in rebuilding their country following the devastating
earthquake. However, we also came away with serious
concerns, which we expressed at our debate in March
(see S/PV.6732).

At that time, political gridlock threatened Haiti's
stability and progress. The Prime Minister had resigned
after only four months in office. Relations between
the executive and legislative branches of Government
had deteriorated. The appointment of key officials
and important constitutional amendments were
stalled. Election planning lagged. Both in Haiti and
in the Chamber, the Security Council called on Haiti's
political leaders to set aside their disparate interests
and to come together for the sake of the nation.

Seven months later, Haiti's future looks more
promising. As Secretary Clinton noted at the
ministerial-level meeting of Haiti's partners last week,
the country is starting to move forward. Haiti's political
leaders are showing a willingness to cooperate and to
put the Haitian people first. It is imperative that they
continue to do so.

On 14 May, the Haitian Parliament ratified the
appointment of a new Prime Minister. On 19 June,
President Martelly published a series of constitutional
amendments that strengthen democracy and the rule of
law in Haiti. Those amendments pave the way towards
an independent judiciary under the Superior Council
of the Judiciary and mandate the formation of the
Permanent Electoral Council (CEP). We look forward
to providing support to the Superior Council and to the
final establishment of the CEP so that the long-overdue
elections can proceed.

The Government of Haiti is also tackling gender
inequality with a new constitutional requirement
that women hold at least 30 per cent of Government
positions. We welcome the possibility that many more
Haitian women will now be able to shape the future of
the country.

On security, the Government of Haiti has assumed
greater responsibility for supporting the Haitian
National Police (HNP) with increased financial
resources and a deeper commitment to security and
justice sector reform. The Government hosted a summit
meeting on the police in June and endorsed a five-year
national development plan for the HNP that aims to
boost its size and quality. For the HNP to play its rightful
role in protecting the people of Haiti and in enabling
the country's development, the sustained support of
the Government and the international community for
that development plan is essential. That must include
greater attention to police recruitment and training
and to combating sexual and gender-based violence.
Ensuring that the HNP has sufficient personnel and the
resources to do its critical work remains a top priority.

Improvements in security and the rule of law will
create more economic opportunities for the Haitian
people. The joint aid coordination mechanism, recently
launched by the Prime Minister, can help ensure the
alignment of donor assistance with Haitian priorities, as
well as the transparent and efficient use of international
aid. That mechanism is an important step and deserves
our support. We call on all countries that have pledged
assistance to fulfil their commitments through the joint
aid coordination mechanism.

As the Secretary-General's report of 31 August
(S/2012/678) details, Haiti has made progress, since
the Security Council debate in March, in addressing
the international community's concerns. We should
not forget that the presence and the work of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
have been central to the country's recovery from the
earthquake and to its recent progress. The Mission has
helped to provide a more secure and stable environment
in Haiti; it has strengthened the country's institutions,
protected civilians and safeguarded human rights.

The United States supports renewing the mandate
of MINUSTAH for another year, so that it can continue
assisting the Haitian Government and people in
meeting the challenges ahead and can hasten the day
when United Nations peacekeepers are no longer
needed. The reconfiguration and consolidation of the
MINUSTAH footprint in Haiti is a delicate balancing
act that we cannot afford to get wrong. So as not to
jeopardize overall security, the United States supports
the Secretary-General's recommended consolidation
and partial drawdown of MINUSTAH forces from the
post-earthquake surge to nearly pre-earthquake levels.
Those changes will reflect the progress that Haiti has
made but will also enable MINUSTAH to continue
executing its mandate effectively.

Moving forward, we must remain mindful of the
risk that too quick a drawdown could undermine the
gains achieved thus far. The United Nations must also
ensure that MINUSTAH personnel consistently adhere
to the highest standards in performing their work, that
any allegations of sexual misconduct are thoroughly
investigated and that the perpetrators are held to
account.

With that adjustment, the United States will
consider future changes in the MINUSTAH force level
on the basis of the conditions on the ground. We look
forward to the time in the not-so-distant future when
that force will no longer be needed. However, much
work remains to be done in Haiti. For example, there
are far too fewjobs and insufficient housing to meet the
needs of Haitian families.

The United States recognizes the importance
of socioeconomic development in cementing
stability and catalyzing long-term growth. We have
been working with the Haitian Government, the
Inter-American Development Bank and other partners
on a comprehensive development plan for Haiti's
northern areas that can attract investment to create
jobs and spur economic development. We have just
signed a partnership agreement with Haiti that outlines
America's contribution, under Haitian leadership, to
Haiti's national health plan for the next five years. In
addition, the housing of internally displaced persons
remains a priority. Forthcoming United States housing
developments will shelter thousands.

Haiti is gradually moving beyond crisis management
to a long-term recovery. Its democratic institutions
are becoming stronger. Security has improved in parts
of the country and the lives of the Haitian people are
brightening.

The United States will remain a steadfast friend of
Haiti. We are hopeful that, with the continued support
of MINUSTAH, the contributions of international
partners and the hard work and determination of the
Haitian people, Haiti will indeed reach its full potential.

