Mr. Coulibaly (Mali) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by mentioning the terrible news that came
to us this morning about the plane crash in Algeria, in
which 257 people died. On behalf of Mali and on behalf
of everyone in the Chamber today, I would like to
express our feelings of compassion and condolences to
the People's Democratic Republic of Algeria, a country
that is dear to us and which plays an absolutely central
role in the peace process in Mali.

I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your presidency of the Security Council for this month
of April and express to the delegation of the Netherlands
our appreciation for the remarkable manner in which
it conducted the work of the Council over the past
month. I would also like to convey the message of deep
gratitude of the President of the Republic of Mali to the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, Mr. Antonio
Guterres, for his personal commitment to the well-
being of the people of Mali, the Sahel region and the
world as a whole.

Recent visits by United Nations officials and envoys
illustrate the quality of the cooperation that has existed
between the United Nations and the Government of
Mali since the beginning of this crisis, the settlement
and peace processes of which are under way. We take
note of the report of the Secretary-General on the period
under review (S/2018/273) and thank Mr. Mahamat
Saleh Annadif, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Mali and Head of United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA), for his briefing, which focused
on the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali, the political perspectives and
the actions carried out by MINUSMA.

A little less than three months ago, on 23 January,
during an exercise similar to this morning's meeting (see S/PV.8163), I informed the Security Council of the four
priority objectives that the President ofthe Republic had
assigned to the new Government team, the first of which

was the implementation of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali, which emerged from the
Algiers process. Today Mali welcomes the recognition
in the Secretary-General's report of the new impetus
given to the peace process since the establishment by
the President, on 30 December 2017, of the Government
headed by Prime Minister Soumeylou Boubeye Ma'iga.

The Head of Government's tour from 22 to
26 March in the northern and central regions of Mali,
specifically in Tessalit, Timbuktu, Gao, Kidal, Koro,
Bankass, Bandiagara and Djenne, regions affected by
destabilization and infested by terrorists, is part of
this dynamic. The tour lived up to all its promises. It
embodiedthe hope oftrue peace andreconciliationin our
country. The Prime Minister's visit not only addressed
the legitimate concerns of our people with respect to
the expected peace dividends, but also established the
Government's commitment to continuing its efforts for
the full and complete implementation of the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation.

In Mali, the Government understands and shares
the impatience with the delays in the implementation of
certain provisions of the Agreement, but I would like
to reassure the Security Council and the international
community as a whole, which is assisting Mali, of the
Government's firm determination, under the authority
of the President, to bring the peace process in Mali to
a successful conclusion. But we can already look back
with satisfaction at a number of advances that have
been made in the implementation of the Agreement.

The first appreciable achievements, which are not
often mentioned, are reflected in the total cessation of
all belligerence not only among the signatory parties
but also between the Malian army and the signatory
movements. Council members will recall that at a
one time the clashes among these groups seriously
undermined the implementation of the Agreement.

I would like to point out the progressive
redeployment of the Administration in the northern
and central regions through the recent appointment of
prefects and sub-prefects and the ongoing strengthening
of the interim authorities to respond to an appeal
launched by the international community, for which the
Malian State has allocated very significant budgetary
resources despite the well-known economic situation of
Mali and our limited means. I addition - and this has
been mentioned several times this morning - I would
point to the adoption, on 22 March, of the road map for

the implementation of the timeline that we presented
to the Council in January. This is important because
all parties have reviewed the implementation plan for
this timeline and have signed this new document, which
will soon be presented to those Council members who
have not already seen it.

The timeline not only presents a realistic approach
but it also expresses a commitment by the various
parties. Our position here in January was that the
Security Council should receive this timeline, consider
it as a working document and activate all possible tools,
including the Sanctions Committee, so that all actors
would be moved to respect commitments.

This new road map, which is not in fact an
additional document, but is a version of the actions
to be implemented wisely and perhaps to be sorted
out according to what is absolutely urgent, what can
wait a little bit and perhaps what divides us that needs
internal Malian discussion in order to move forward, is,
in my opinion, a document that will not only allow us
to navigate the presidential elections in July, which will
be partly secured by the signatory movements - this
commitment has been made - but also to lead us to
the legislative elections at the end of the year. This
year's electoral process, once completed, will move us
towards the local and regional elections, which are very
important for the implementation of the Agreement
and in which we will see the emergence of new actors
from the signatory movements who will also be ready
to stand for election, take control of the regions and
restore political balance to the country.

I would also highlight the holding of the high-level
workshop on security reform. The Assistant Secretary-
General for Rule of Law and Security Institutions,
Mr. Zuev, was in Bamako and attended that exercise,
which heralded good news with regard to the reform
process, including the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) process. There were constructive
discussions on the issue of DDR and the registration
of ex-combatants in many regions. We are expecting
that the cantonment sites will soon receive the first ex-
combatants to speed up all those steps.

Clearly, all those gains are fragile. I know that.
We know that. They are all the more fragile because
the implementation of the Agreement is taking place
in a complex and difficult environment, characterized
by the activities of groups linked to terrorism, violent
extremism or trafficking, mixed up with the interests
set by a political agenda of terrorist groups who want
to replace States building democracy, or national
States, by States where the laws of evil and crime
prevail. That manifests itself at the transnational level,
which, as many have said, largely goes beyond Mali's
borders. That project of violence, obscurantism and
enslavement is a cross-border issue. Our approach in
Mali is subject to that dynamic, which looms over the
entire Sahel region.

Those groups seek to establish a sanctuary for
criminal organizations in our region. We have to
fight every day in order for our stabilization and
peace processes for the Sahel region to flourish in a
climate that is endlessly disrupted by those groups. It is
therefore important to consider consistent international
action in support of the initiatives of our countries, such
as the operationalization of the Joint Force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-S Sahel), so that we can move
forwards towards peace and ownership of our process.

An objective set by the President of the Republic for
the Government is to contain the increasing insecurity
in the centre of the country. In that regard, we welcome
the encouraging results of the implementation of the
integrated security strategy for the centre with a view
to ensuring calm and the effective restoration of State
authority to that part of the country. The Government is
increasingly showing its presence and providing basic
social services for our population. We should note that,
during his visit, the Prime Minister highlighted those
central regions so that the population feels the State
presence and its commitment to restoring order there.

As I said early, the regional dimension of the
insecurity is part of the mandate entrusted to the Joint
Force of the G-5 Sahel. The implementation level of
the Force should be commended. Mali continues to
fully support the Niger presidency, which assumed
the leadership of that body a few months ago. In the
context of international solidarity, we would like to
support the appeal of the Secretary-General for the
release of the funds pledged at the Brussels meeting
of 23 February. That is extremely important because
that tool complements the actions led by United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali.

The third priority of our Government is the
successful organization of the elections. I would like to
clearly and categorically affirm that our Government
is determined to hold transparent, inclusive and
credible elections throughout the country, in line with
the constitutional timeline. As I said, the visit of the
Prime Minister to the northern region, provided an
opportunity for the signatory movements to affirm
their support for that process. It is essential that those
movements help to ensure the security of the electoral
process. We will start with the election of the President
of the Republic, which is the most important election,
followed by legislative elections for the new Parliament.
The material and logistical provisions have been made
for the vote to be free, fair and peaceful. The electoral
register will be audited independently so that key tool
for the elections enjoys consensus.

In its electoral practices, Mali has not experienced
post-electoral conflict violence because we have
always respected the principles of inclusivity and
consensus in advance. In the same way, today there
is a framework of consultation among the ministries,
regional administrations and all elements of our
society, including civil society. The concerns expressed
about the inclusion of women and young people in that
process have been taken into account. Since November,
Mali has been registering those who have reached the
age of legal majority in order for the registration to be
complete. That exercise was carried out and, at the time
of the audit, we can be sure that our electoral register
is fully agreed.

I would like to say that there is no place for
impunity in Mali. All acts found to contravene the law
or respect for human rights will be properly dealt with
in the courts. Judicial arrangements are in place and
the prosecutor is engaged. Any person found guilty of
human rights violations will be appropriately dealt with
under the law. We know that is a condition for the sincere
commitment of all to the peace process and for trust to
be restored in our country. However, I would like to
express our reservations with regard to reported events,
in particular the indifference of our army when there
was a series of fires in some villages. In the most polite
way, I would like to refute that. Our army could not
be indifferent to a part of the Malian population being
subjected to events that threaten the lives of their fellow
citizens. For all the rest, we will await the findings of
the judicial authorities so that any procedures provided
for under the law can be implemented, where necessary.

Here in this Chamber, I would like to affirm our
support for the actions of Ambassador Skoog, Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
2374 (2017) concerning Mali, whom we hosted.
Before the Council, we would like to affirm our full
and complete cooperation with all missions - those
of the independent observer and of the International
Commission of Inquiry on Mali - and with everything
that is necessary for the peace process and cooperation
between Mali and the United Nations to be not only
smooth but also marked by the seal of trust.

The humanitarian situation is worrisome. Clearly,
we expect the support of the international community
while we ourselves, in line with our resources, which
are of course limited, do our utmost to support our
fellow citizens who may find themselves in a fragile
humanitarian situation.

With regard to schools, some have already reopened.
The Prime Minister has taken steps to ensure that all
Koranic schools in the centre are integrated into the
national educational system in order to take charge not
only of the material but also of the curriculum taught
in those schools. Those challenges are significant. We
support the appeal of the Secretary-General to the
countries that have pledged to fulfil their commitments
in order to bridge the gap between the available funds, at
approximately $8 million, and the urgent humanitarian
needs, estimated at a total of $263 million.

In conclusion, I would also like to express our
unequivocal support for MINUSMA's work. We
commend the outstanding leadership of the Head
of MINUSMA, Mr. Annadif, who works tirelessly
every day to personally ensure the sound and smooth
functioning of MINUSMA. We also commend his team,
which works so hard in Bamako on a daily basis. That
is essential, particularly at a time when the strategic
review is under way and when, I have no doubt, in
June important decisions will be taken for the future
of MINUSMA.

I align line myselfwith the appeals made to increase
the resources available to MINUSMA and for measures
to be taken to enhance the protection of the troops, as
well as for greater interaction between MINUSMA,
the G-5 Sahel Joint Force and all those involved in
military efforts.

The situation is worrisome, as many here in the
Chamber have said. Nonetheless, Iremain convincedthat
hope springs eternal, and we know that we can achieve
the noble mission set before us. Malians are committed
to the cause, as is the international community. I think
that each step we take is a sure step, albeit a baby
step. All that we have achieved thus far in restoring

trust between the different players is invaluable and that we are all awaiting and that it follows an agenda to
will allow us to build upon the achievements that we continue moving forward rather than sliding backwards.

have made. The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
I would like once again to reassure the members more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
of the Council of my Government's commitment and invite Council members to informal consultations to

determination to leave no stone unturned in order to continue our discussmn 0" the subject.
ensure that this process continues to make the headway The meeting rose at 12.35 pm.
