Mr. Strommen (Norway): Allow me, like others,
to thank the Representative of the Secretary-General,
the representative of the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) and the representative of the
World Bank. Furthermore, my thanks go to the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mauritius for his very
interesting intervention. We look forward to hearing
the Minister of the Central African Republic later this
morning.

The Central African Republic is an example of
the need for a comprehensive approach to post-conflict
peace-building. The situation requires the coordination
and mobilization of resources by the international
community and a clear commitment by the national
authorities dialogue and reconciliation in order to
create a climate conducive to development. There is a
need for a number of different measures in order to
help institution-building, strengthen respect for human
rights and achieve disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration. There is also a need for humanitarian
efforts, in order to assist the growing number of
refugees in the areas bordering the Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo.

Norway supports the efforts of the United Nations
Peace-building Support Office in the Central African
Republic (BONUCA) to strengthen national capacity to
enforce and protect human rights and the rule of law,
for disarmament and for restructuring the defence and
security forces. We welcome the progress that has been
made in these areas.

Despite these efforts and achievements, the
current situation in the Central African Republic, as
reflected in the Secretary-General's report, gives
reason for concern. The negative economic
developments and the social unrest increase the
possibility of instability and conflict and threaten
reconstruction efforts. These negative developments
must be reversed. It is therefore important that the
Security Council give a clear signal to the Government
of the Central African Republic and other political
actors on the need to summon the necessary political
will and work towards national reconciliation, as
pointed out by the Secretary-General.

We are encouraged by the achievements made
towards disarmament described in the report. However,
the influx of new weapons threatens to cancel out the
positive results obtained. The recent influx of illegal
weapons is closely connected to the conflicts in the
countries neighbouring the Central African Republic.
This clearly indicates the need for a regional approach.
Without a peaceful solution to the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Central African
Republic is likely to face a continued influx of refugees
and problems with illegal trafficking of arms.

In connection with the special donors meeting
held in New York in May last year, my Government
has contributed $300,000 to the special programme on
arms collection, demobilization and reintegration. We
are concerned by the information given in paragraph 25
of the Secretary-General's report that it has been
necessary to suspend this programme due to the lack of
financial resources and the delay in acting on the
pledges that were made, and I would like to urge all
donors to follow up on their commitments.

Finally, Norway supports the presidential
statement.

