Ms. Mudallali (Lebanon): Ithankyou, Mr. President,
for holding today's debate and congratulate you on a
successful presidency of the Council this month.

Before I deliver my prepared statement, I would like
to address the accusations that the Israeli Ambassador
directed against Lebanon. Taking into account
Israel's history of invading Lebanon, the Lebanese
see those accusations as direct threats to their peace
and civilian infrastructure. If the Israeli Ambassador
is using those statements to divert attention from the
miserable situation that Israel's occupation has created
for the Palestinians, that is nothing new. But if he is
using them to prepare the ground and the international
community for an attack on Lebanon's civilian port and
airport and its infrastructure, as Israel did in 2006, the
Council should not remain silent but should uphold its
responsibility to prevent Israel from launching another
war on Lebanon. The last thing Lebanon and the region
need now is another war.

I shall now deliver my statement. We are meeting
at a time of heightened tensions in the Middle East.
There is a sense of despair and hopelessness due
to protracted conflicts and decades of occupation.
Nowhere is that hopelessness more vivid than on the
question of Palestine. We are witnessing not only a lack
of progress towards peace, but also the roll-back of
the principles and foundation of real, equitable peace,
namely, United Nations resolutions and the application
of international law:

The situation on the ground for Palestinians
continues to deteriorate, especially in Jerusalem and
Gaza, where international humanitarian organizations
describe it as getting worse by the day. The continued
Israeli occupation and its illegal measures - closures,
arbitrary detentions, the demolition of homes, the
expansion of settlements and depriving Palestinians
of their basic human and political rights - have
rendered the situation unbearable. The international
community should uphold its responsibility not only
to Palestinians, but also, and more importantly, to
ensure that the Council fulfils the principles that the
Organization was founded upon and stop those actions.
The dire humanitarian situation is made worse by the
difficulties that the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East faces
in terms of funding, which puts hundreds of thousands
of Palestinian livelihoods at stake in the occupied
territories and around the region.

At the political level, the much-awaited peace plan
is still promised, but its opening phase, in the form of
an economic conference, was met with disappointment
and condemnation by most of the parties, especially the
Palestinians, because of the lack of a political horizon.
Palestinians and Arabs want the right recipe for just,
comprehensive and lasting peace. They regard the
Arab Peace Initiative and the two-State solution as the
best bases for a political solution to the conflict - a
solution based on international legality, resolutions 242
(1967), 338 (1973) and 2234 (2016), with a Palestinian
State living in peace and security with East Jerusalem
as its capital. That was reiterated at the most recent
meeting of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
Foreign Ministers this month, which condemned Israeli
attempts at "altering Jerusalem's legal character, status
and demographic makeup".

In Syria, Israel continues its policy of entrenching
its occupation and annexation of the Golan Heights
with impunity. Lebanon is concerned and troubled
by that Israeli policy to alter the legal, physical and
demographic status of the occupied Golan Heights.
Lebanon calls on Israel to implement resolutions
242 (1967), 338 (1973), 497 (1981) and the Geneva
Conventions in their entirety.

The Lebanese Government has made progress since
the last quarterly debate in the Council (see S/PV.8517).
Its Cabinet approved the 2019 budget - the first step
in the financial reform programme of the Government
to fulfil its obligations under the CEDRE conference
on economic development and reform. The electricity
plan was also approved by the Cabinet and Parliament.
Discussions on our capital investment programme for
the rehabilitation of infrastructure have begun as well.
The Government demonstrated its firm commitment to
the human rights agenda by appointing the members of
our national preventive mechanism against torture.

Lebanon is grateful for the continuous support
of its long-standing international partners, whether
economically or in relation to its peace and security
agenda. The Security Council held consultations
yesterday on resolution 1701 (2006), one of the pillars
of its peace and security agenda in the south, where the
Council heard from the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon (UNIFIL) and the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2019/574) that the situation in the area of
operations is calm. Calm is exactly what is needed in
the region. This would not have been possible without
the help of the United Nations and UNIFIL forces.

During a Visit to the UNIFIL Maritime Task Force
last week, the Lebanese Prime Minister Saad Hariri
reaffirmed both his and the Government's commitment
to resolutions 1701 (2006) and 2433 (2018). The
Prime Minister stressed that he was fully dedicated
to further developing the capacities of the Lebanese
navy in fulfilment of Lebanon's obligations under these
resolutions. He announced that he was fully briefed
on the plan to increase Lebanese naval capabilities
and vowed to do his utmost to have it endorsed by the
Cabinet. The strengthening of the Lebanese Armed
Forces' capability and building a naval force will enable
them, as the Prime Minister said, to slowly assume their
responsibility in support of UNIFIL.

The United States used its good offices to reach an
agreement on starting talks on the delineation of the
maritime and land borders between Lebanon and Israel.
Although these negotiations have not yet produced the
desired outcome, which could lead to the start of these
talks, the Prime Minister has vowed to work relentlessly
to initiate these negotiations.

Unfortunately, the Lebanese commitment to
resolution 1701 (2006) and to respecting its obligations
under other relevant resolutions is met with daily Israeli
violations of Lebanese territory by land, air and sea.
This month has already witnessed tens of violations,
especially by warplanes and military boats, terrifying
the population. On the border, Israel continues to build
on Lebanese occupied territories in what are called
reservation points. These violations are a source of
tension and instability and lead to increased fragility
along the border. They must end.

The situation in the Middle East will remain
a source of conflict as long as Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions are ignored and human
and political rights are denied. The Council can and
must change that reality ifthe region is to live in peace.

