Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): Ithank you, Sir, for
this opportunity to update the Council on the situation
in Darfur. Council members have before them the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2013/225) on the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), dated 10 April 2013. I would like to focus
on the most recent developments in the peace process
and in the security and humanitarian situations.

With respect to the political situation, during the
days leading up to the donor conference held in Doha
on 7 and 8 April, several hundred displaced people held
peaceful protests in the Kalma and Hassa Hissa camps,
in Southern and Central Darfur, respectively. The
protesters raised the issues of insecurity, unresolved
land disputes and the predominance of armed militias
as reasons for their opposition to the Doha conference.
N0 arrests were reported.

At the conference, most participants expressed
strong political support for the Darfur Development
Strategy, which is the framework serving as the basis
for economic reconstruction, development and poverty
eradication. The total amount pledged for implementing
the Strategy was $3.7 billion, including $2.65 billion
previously committed by the Government of the Sudan
and $500 million from Qatar. We must take note of
the fact that the total amount fell short of the target
of $7.2 billion set by the Development Strategy for the
next six years.

Concerning the adoption of the Doha Document for
Peace in Darfur by the faction ofthe Justice and Equality
Movement (J EM) led by Mohamed Bashar, hostilities
broke out between that group and IBM. forces loyal to
Gibril Ibrahim, near Darma, 220 kilometres north-east
of El Geneina in Northern Darfur, on 18 April. Two
soldiers from Mohamed Bashar's forces were killed
and nine were wounded in the clashes. UNAMID is
currently investigating the exact cause of the clashes.
In addition, the Mission has called on the factions to
stop the hostilities and to resolve their differences
through dialogue.

On April 24, the Liberation and Justice Movement
informed the authorities of its intention to immediately
withdraw from the Government. The reasons cited
by the Movement for that decision were the delays
in the implementation of the Doha Document and
the expulsion from the Sudan of members of the
International Republican Institute by the authorities
earlier that day. The Institute, which is an international
non-governmental organization, was involved in
capacity-building for the Movement and provided
technical assistance to support the transformation
of the Movement into a political party. The high-
level negotiations between representatives of the
National Congress Party and the Liberation and Justice
Movement with regard to the ongoing participation of
the Movement in the Government are underway.

With regard to the security situation, the escalation
of the conflict in Darfur due to military confrontations
and intercommunal clashes is the source of serious
concern. Humanitarian agencies estimate that this year
the clashes have resulted in the displacement of214,000
people, including 24,000 to Chad. That is much more
than the total for last year.

Following the military hostilities described in the
report of the Secretary-General, the Government and
the Sudan Liberation Army (SLA)-Minni Minawi
clashed on several occasions this month in Eastern and
Southern Darfur. On 6 April, SLA forces seized control
of Labado and Muhajeria in Eastern Darfur. The next
day, they took control of Ishma village, 30 kilometres
east of Nyala in Southern Darfur. Following those
clashes, about 33,000 people are still concentrated
around the UNAMID bases in Muhajeria and Labado.

Between 6 and 13 April, Sudanese military
aircraft conducted intermittent offensive operations
in and around those two villages. On 16 April, the
Government army, supported by air operations,
regained control Muhajeria and Labado. UNAMID is
currently reviewing reports of casualties resulting from
the fighting, which, it should be noted, diverge widely.

The authorities have prevented the Mission and
humanitarian actors from providing the necessary
assistance and supplies to the area while the villages
were under the control of SLA-Minni Minawi. UNAMID
finally gained access to provide reinforcements and
provisions to the bases on 18 and 19 April. On those
dates, humanitarian actors were able to begin preparing
to provide the necessary assistance, which was provided
on April 23. At the same time, sporadic Clashes between
the Government and SLA-Minni Minawi elements
continued in Southern Darfur, for example in Marla
to the south-east of Nyala, and, on April 22, near the
Nyala airport.

(spoke in English)

Three days after Government forces regained
control of Muhajeria, unidentified armed assailants
attacked the nearby UNAMID base. The assault took
place in the early hours of 19 April and lasted for
40 minutes. Tragically, one UNAMID peacekeeper was
killed and two were injured in the exchange of fire. At
least one of the attackers was also killed. The base was
reinforced with a company of peacekeepers from Nyala
later the same day.

I would like to take this opportunity to condemn
unreservedly those responsible for that deeply troubling
incident. I express my deepest condolences to the family
and colleagues of the fallen peacekeeper, as well as to
the Government of Nigeria. I call on the Government of
the Sudan to swiftly bring those responsible to justice.

Intercommunal violence in Darfur involving well-
armed militias has also caused significant suffering
among the civilian population. On 3 April, an attempted
armed robbery triggered clashes between militias drawn
mainly from the Misseriya and Salamat tribes in Um
Dukhun, in Central Darfur. Sporadic fighting between
the groups continued and spread eastwards, between
6 and 17 April, to Rehed al Bardi, 245 kilometres south-
west of Nyala, and northwards to Darlay, 130 kilometres
south of Zalingei, in Central Darfur.

Community sources estimate that upwards of
68 people were killed and 60 injured in the clashes.
Officials from the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees in Chad registered the
arrival of 16,000 people displaced by those precise
hostilities. Government security forces prevented
UNAMID from accessing the affected area until
17 April, when a patrol reached Um Dukhun and
observed that several surrounding villages had been
abandoned and damaged by fire.

The authorities deployed security forces to defuse
tensions and formed a committee comprising State
Government officials and traditional community
leaders to mediate between the parties. Those efforts
led to the signing on 10 April of an agreement to cease
hostilities. However, intermittent fighting continued
after the signing and now a second reconciliation
conference is scheduled for tomorrow, Tuesday.

Further to the heavy intercommunal fighting
between the Aballa and Beni Hussein militias described
in the report before the Council, a reconciliation
conference scheduled for 15 April was postponed by
the authorities for one month to allow the parties more
time to prepare. UNAMID is supporting the process
through workshops on conflict resolution and the
provision of logistical assistance. An isolated clash
between the communities near Um Dafog, which is
north of El Geneina in Western Darfur, allegedly in
response to the harassment of Beni Hussein farmers by
Aballa herders, highlighted that relations between the
communities remain tense.

Against that backdrop of insecurity, the Government
replaced, through presidential decree, the incumbent
governors of Southern and Eastern Darfur with retired
Sudanese Armed Forces Lieutenant General Adam
Mahmoud Jar al-Nabi and Mr. Abdul Hamid Musa
Kasha, respectively. While the outgoing Governor
of Eastern Darfur was said to be in poor health, no
explanation was provided for the decision to replace the
Governor of Southern Darfur.

Movement restrictions and other obstructions
imposed by the belligerent parties have continued
to hamper UNAMID operations. On 2 and
6 April, Government security forces forcibly prevented
UNAMID helicopters from departing from Shangil
Tobaya and Saraf Umra after the crews refused to
transport local officials who did not appear on the flight
manifest. Eventually, the flights did depart without the
officials on board, but not without several hours of
negotiations.

On 3 April, the authorities issued 401 new entry
visas for UNAMID civilian police, but as of 25 April,
a total of 858 visas remained outstanding, including
533 for civilian police. In an effort to address those
and other issues impeding UNAMID operations, the
tripartite coordination mechanism between the African
Union, the United Nations and the Government of the
Sudan met in Addis Ababa on 15 April. The Government
representatives present urged UNAMID to coordinate
more closely with security officials in Darfur to improve
access. In addition, participants agreed to review the
validity of outstanding visa requests submitted in 2011
and 2012.

In closing, the situation in Darfur is very troubling.
While there have indeed been mildly encouraging
developments in the peace process, in the meantime a
fully inclusive political settlement has yet to be reached.
UNAMID is working hard to implement its mandate in
these circumstances, which remain very challenging.
It is clear that better cooperation on the part of the
Sudanese authorities and improvements in troop and
police contingent equipment levels are needed to enable
the mission to operate more closely to its full potential.

Furthermore, resolving the conflict continues to
require a combined effort on the part of the Council, the
African Union and the wider international community to
persuade the belligerent parties that there is no military
solution to the crisis. In that connection, it is clear that
maintaining attention to the situation in Darfur amid
a series of newer crises remains as important as ever.

For too long, the people of Darfur have known
conflict and suffering. I urge the Council to do all that
it can to help relieve their suffering and bring about
an end to the fighting by supporting UNAMID and by
applying additional pressure on the belligerent parties
to reach a negotiated settlement.

