Mr. Ettalhi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): We would like at the outset to welcome
Mr. Hoshyar Zebari, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Iraq. We highly appreciate his presence and we thank
him for his comprehensive statement. We express our
pleasure at the optimism that he has expressed.

In addition, we would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for the briefing you presented in your
national capacity. We also thank Mr. Ibrahim Gambari
and Mr. Warren Sach for their briefings.

We express our satisfaction with the content of
the letter from the Iraqi Foreign Minister to the
President of the Council (S/2008/380, annex) as well as
what the Minister said in his statement before the
Council today regarding the progress Iraq has achieved
on various fronts, including in the security, political
and economic spheres. We are also pleased with the
situation regarding Iraq's relations with other States,
especially its neighbours. This progress was reaffirmed
by all the other speakers who briefed us this morning.
As the Foreign Minister said, there is no doubt
that the Iraqis still face many challenges, but as we
said in a statement delivered before the Council on
28 April (see S/PV.5878), the history of Iraq has taught
us that the Iraqis have always been able to put their
country's interests first and to rise from the ashes
stronger and with deeper faith and greater
determination.

We had hoped that Iraq would not need the
mandate of the MNF to be extended before the end of
the year. But it appears that, in the view of the Iraqi
Government, security conditions are not yet propitious,
despite the great improvement in the security situation
that previous speakers have noted this morning. The
most prominent element of this is the fact that it has
been possible to impose the rule of law in Basra and to
confront and disarm armed militias throughout Iraq,
along with a drop in violence and sectarian bloodshed
to unprecedentedly low levels.

We are confident that Iraq is eager to preserve its
sovereignty, and we hope that conditions will quickly
improve and stabilize. Continued improvements in
security and stability are linked with national
reconciliation and with the need to convince all Iraqi
parties that they have an opportunity for equal power-
and resource-sharing in the context of setting aside
ethnic and sectarian differences. Here, we welcome the
efforts of the Iraqi authorities and the substantial
progress that has been achieved. We hope that the
provincial elections planned for October will reflect
national reconciliation, a renunciation of sectarianism
and a reaffirmation of Iraq's unity and territorial
integrity.

We are gravely concerned over the legal and
humanitarian situation of Iraqi detainees, especially
those held by coalition forces, among whom are large
numbers of children. We remind all those concerned
that they have legal obligations they must respect. We
also recall reports issued by international organizations
on the harsh conditions endured by Iraqi refugees and
internally displaced persons (IDPs). Easing their
suffering and working to ensure conditions under
which they can return must be a priority for the Iraqi
authorities, as Iraqi Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki
stated today. The main indicator of stability in Iraq is
the return of refugees and IDPs to their homes. We
believe that this is indispensable for continued
stability, security and development in Iraq.
My country strongly supports all efforts and
arrangements aimed at stabilizing the security situation
in Iraq, in a manner that does not run counter to Iraq's

sovereignty, in particular efforts to rebuild the armed
forces and security institutions, to put an end to the
dissemination of weapons, to impose the rule of law
and to reactivate development on the basis of genuine
national reconciliation, with a view to safeguarding
Iraq's unity, territorial integrity and identity.

My delegation attaches high value to the activities
of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI) in all fields, and it supports a continued -
and increased - presence by the United Nations and its
specialized agencies.

Iraq requires huge investment if it is to rebuild
what was destroyed in the invasion and to kick-start
development efforts. We believe that the international
community must shoulder its responsibilities in that
regard. Here, we welcome the 29 May Stockholm
Conference. We hope that all parties will understand
the burden Iraq bears as a result of prior obligations
and its impact on reconstruction and development. In
our region, we all realize that Iraq's stability - with
everything that this concept implies - is the
cornerstone of the stability and indeed the prosperity of
the entire region.

In conclusion, we express our appreciation for the
draft statement proposed by the delegation of the
United States.

