Mr. Gertze (Namibia): I congratulate you,
Madam President, on your country's assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October. I also thank you for organizing this open debate
on the important topic of the situation in the Middle
East, including the question of Palestine. I would also
like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Miroslav
Jencafor his comprehensive and detailed briefing.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, as well as with the statement to be delivered
by representative of Nicaragua on behalf of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People.

Since our previous meeting, in July (see S/PV.8011),
Israel has continued to increase its settlement activity
at a faster rate than last year. Settlement activity during
this reporting period was centred on East Jerusalem,
where plans were made for over 2,300 housing units
in July. According to resolution 2334 (2016), Israel
has not ceased all settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, or fully
respected all of its legal obligations in that regard. The
settlements are illegal under international law. They
are a serious impediment to the peace process and the
realization of the two-State solution.

The destruction of Palestinian homes and
infrastructure in the West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, has also continued, albeit at a slower rate,
with 344 structures having been demolished since
January 2017, thereby displacing approximately 500
people. Another sad fact is that, on 3 August, educational
facilities attended by 175 children were demolished or
damaged. The Government of Israel said that those
facilities were constructed illegally, despite the fact
that building permits for new Palestinian homes and
infrastructure in the occupied West Bank are almost
impossible to obtain.

On 26 July, an amendment to the Basic Law:
Jerusalem the Capital of Israel passed a first reading in
the Knesset Law Committee. Were the amendment to
be adopted, it would further cement Israeli control over
East Jerusalem.

The issue of violence continues to be one of
the main factors preventing the resolution of this
conflict. As our Constitution clearly states, Namibia
"encourages the settlement of international disputes by
peaceful means". We note the deaths on both sides due
to attacks - Palestinians and Israelis - with sadness
and concern. We take this opportunity once again
to condemn terrorism in all its forms and to call for
dialogue between all parties.

Despite the ongoing challenges, we are encouraged
by the visit of Palestinian Prime Minister Rami
Hamdallah to Gaza at the beginning ofOctober, his first
in two years. On 12 October, Hamas and the Palestinian
Authority signed a reconciliation agreement that aims
to mend the decade-long rift. It places Gaza and the
West Bank under one Government for the first time
since 2007. Those are all positive steps, which we hope
indicate forward movement.

As the conflict in Syria continues, we are
encouraged by recent efforts to de-escalate the crisis
following talks. However, much more work needs to be
done, and we hope that the eighth round of intra-Syrian
talks convened by Mr. Staffan de Mistura in Geneva
will provide further positive steps.

As the conflict in Yemen continues, the lives of
20.7 million people have been severely impacted.
They require humanitarian protection and support,
with 9.8 million people in acute need of assistance. An
estimated 17 million people are food insecure. Cholera
is also rife in the country. This humanitarian crisis is
man-made and must be brought to an end without delay.

As those conflicts continue in the Middle East
region, the Arab-Israeli conflict stretches back over
many decades. Namibia firmly believes that ending
the Arab-Israeli conflict will help curtail other violent
conflicts in the region. We call on the Israeli Government
to end all construction of settlements and the destruction
of Palestinian homes and infrastructure. We once
again call for Israel's complete and unconditional
withdrawal from the occupied Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem, and urge all parties to return
to the negotiating table to ensure that the Palestinian
people are able to exercise their inalienable rights in
an independent State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, and as a rightful Member of the United
Nations and its specialized agencies.

