Mr. Seifi Pargou (Islamic Republic of Iran): In
fact, since we are discussing the issue of Syria, we did
not intend to raise such matters in today's meeting, but
it is the representative of Saudi Arabia who took us in
this direction.

It is very unfortunate that, not just in this meeting
but in each and every meeting, the Saudis are trying to
divert people's attention from the realities in our region.
It is a fact that Saudi Arabia is the major problem; it
is the main source of instability in our region. Look
at the seminaries from Central Asia to Libya. Who is
nourishing them? Who provides financial assistance to
the seminaries who train the takfiri and other extremists
who have spread throughout the region and elsewhere,
destabilizing them entirely?

I do not want to go into our history with Saudi
Arabia, but it is well known that its hostility
towards Iran is boundless. Think of its support for
Saddam - $100 billion dollars during the course of the
war to kill and maim around 1 million Iranians - or for
terrorism in Afghanistan, Syria and Iraq. Who provides
those terrorists with arms?

And it is continuing, unfortunately. Whenever we
introduce a peace plan, they say, "This is the Arab
world, so it is not your business". Ifit is not our business,
why are they always and everywhere blaming us? They
make accusations against us with regard to human
rights, inter alia, while their dark human rights record
is so well known. Eleven out fifteen of the perpetrators
of the crimes on 11 September 2001 here in the United
States were Saudi citizens.

They are blaming us for terrorism. Every week we
arrest groups of terrorists that are trying to infiltrate
our borders from the west and the east parts. These
groups are equipped and armed and financed by Saudi
Arabia. We can provide evidence of this and we have
told them about it. They know it very well.

A regime that has a very dark human rights record
should not preach to others. Its behaviour with respect
to minorities, in particular the Shia people, is appalling.
Just ask what happened in the town of Al-Awamiyah,
in eastern Saudi Arabia. It is not good to raise such
matters in this Chamber, but it is their policy. We do not
want to go into such matters.

We have proposed a peace plan for Yemen, and at
the outset we also suggested a peace plan for Syria, Iraq
and elsewhere, but the Saudis were the impediment;
they were the main obstacle. They are always saying
that it is none of our business. We are always making
offers to them, including, even now, the Hormuz peace
plan proposed by our President. We are always inviting
all countries of the region, including Saudi Arabia, to
come together, sit and discuss the issues of the region,
but to no avail.

The representative of Saudi Arabia has proposed
a peace plan for the region. We all can work on that
and hopefully bring stability back to the region. First,
support for terrorism must be stopped. Secondly, the
war in Yemen must be stopped. And all of that is in the
hands of Saudi Arabia.

