Mr. Suarez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome the
participation of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon at this
meeting. We also wish to thank Ms. Federica Mogherini,
High Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, for her briefing.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela attaches
special importance to the role of regional organizations
in promoting international peace and security, including
through the negotiated settlement of conflicts. We
welcome the efforts of the European Union (EU) and
other regional forums in that regard. We are convinced
of the role that regional and subregional organizations
can play in the prevention and resolution of conflicts
and in the peacebuilding process through the recovery,
reconstruction and development of societies emerging
from conflict situations. We believe that close
cooperation should be maintained between the United
Nations and regional organizations, including the
European Union, taking into account Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations. In the area of crisis
management, we believe that the European Union and
its members must act in accord with the principles of
the Charter.

We value the role played by the the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo under the auspices of
the Organization.

We welcome the prospects for a political solution
in Ukraine, which have recently moved in a positive
direction with the decision adopted by the leaders of
Ukraine, Russia, France and Germany on 12 February
in Minsk and endorsed by the Council in resolution
2202 (2015). We commend the ongoing work of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
to support the effective implementation of the Minsk
agreements, including the withdrawal of heavy weapons
by those involved. We reiterate that the parties must
strictly observe the Minsk agreement of 12 February
on the protection of civilians and support a process to
address the humanitarian situation.

In the Middle East, the intensification of armed
conflicts and the maintenance of colonial situations
and foreign occupation have had a negative impact
on international peace and security, the facts and
the gravity of which we cannot remain indifferent.
We are convinced that the European Union and the
Security Council are called upon to play an important
role in the promotion of a definitive solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, including putting an end
to the occupation of Palestinian territories and the
establishment of a free, sovereign and independent
Palestinian State within the secure and internationally
recognized pre-l967 borders.

We reiterate our conviction that there can be no
military solution to the current crisis in Libya. We
urge that efforts be redoubled to facilitate dialogue,
reduce tensions and refrain from taking any decision
that may worsen those tensions. To that end, we
welcome the resumption of negotiations in Morocco,
facilitated by Mr. Bernardino Leon's efforts, in order
to reach a political solution that leads to the formation
of a Government of national unity. In that regard, we
must continue to encourage the parties to continue the
inclusive dialogue to achieve a strong and lasting peace
that leads to national reconciliation. We also appeal to
external actors with influence on the parties to refrain
from adopting measures contrary to peace, security and
the development of Libya.

We continue to nurture the hope that peace and
political stability in Burundi will be consolidated
and that all the necessary support will be given to the
people and the Government of that country, so that
the upcoming elections can be conducted successfully
under the sovereign right of the people of Burundi to
self-determination. We also call for strengthening
international cooperation to assist that country, without
any preconditions, with a view to eradicating poverty,
which is one ofthe root causes of conflicts affecting the
States of the region.

Peace efforts promoted by the United Nations in the
Central African Republic must be accompanied by the
simultaneous and sustained efforts by the international
community to provide cooperation and economic
assistance aimed at reducing poverty and inequality
in order to achieve a long and enduring peace. The
support of the Organization to the upcoming elections
serves to underscore the multidimensional nature of
peacekeeping operations in the search for lasting peace.

Finally, we hope that those channels of cooperation
between the United Nations and the European Union
will contribute to international peace and security.

