Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): It was a
great pleasure for us to see His Highness Crown Prince
Al-Hussein bin Abdullah preside over this extremely
important meeting. There can be no doubt the fact
that he was keen to attend this debate underscores
the vital nature of this issue and how important it is
to reach practical recommendations to help facing
the challenges hampering youth empowerment and to
strengthen their role in building peace. Allow me also
me to congratulate Jordan on its great efforts during its
presidency of the Security Council this month.

The international community has been unanimous
in all of its resolutions: it is determined to fight
terrorism and extremism. All Member States agreed
under the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy that dealing with the root causes of terrorism
is the only way to eradicate it. Therefore, in the light of
that international consensus, to achieve that objective
will require a longer-term, far-reaching strategy that
takes into account the factors leading to terrorism.
Indeed, confronting this scourge, which threatens our
communities and undermines stability and unity, is a
shared responsibility.

Experience has confirmed that terrorism did not
arise in a vacuum, but grew and developed in fragile
environments where extremism also thrived as a result
of policies that do not take into account the problems of
communities, including issues related to young people.
The state of despair experienced by youth is one of
the most important factors being exploited by terrorist
organizations as they pursue their evil ends. These
groups use this despair as the fuel for their recruitment
of young people. Responding to the aspirations of
young people, creating educational programmes that
would enable them to contribute to the development
of their communities, and addressing unemployment
and social justice with a View to eliminating the sense
of insecurity and unfairness and enabling them to
participate in decision-making is the only sure way
to eradicate extremism and refute the arguments put
forward by terrorists.

The impact of extremism on young people - and
the severity of the consequences at the national and
international levels should the appropriate steps to
address this issue with the requisite urgency not be
taken - require us to consider all the reasons that
have led young people to be attracted to terrorism
and violence. The international community has a joint
responsibility in this respect. In the light of the various
dimensions of this problem, addressing the question of
extremism through the fight against terrorism alone
would be a mistake. Rather, we must take a holistic
view and consider the causes of extremism and why
young people sometimes join terrorist organizations
and see Violence as a way of expressing their positions.

When we call for a comprehensive approach to
rooting out extremism and terrorism, we do not mean
to diminish the importance of the immediate military
response to the imminent threat posed by terrorist
groups that recruit young people. In that regard, we
stress the importance of addressing the root causes of
extremism and terrorism and, in the context of finding
comprehensive solutions, of changing circumstances
and motivations in order to improve the prospects for
a better future for communities and particularly for
young people.

Attending to the needs of our youth and supporting
their aspirations for the future are important components
of the State of Qatar's policies at the national and
international levels, conscious as we are of the terrible
consequences ifthe ongoing conflicts in many countries
in our region, particularly in Palestine and Syria, were
to reach them. These conflicts have festered because
the international community has not been able to
reach solutions pursuant to decisions of international
legitimacy and the provisions of international law.

Syrian children constitute more than half the number
of Syrian refugees and displaced persons, which has
led to some 2 million Syrian children being deprived of
educational opportunities. That means that Syria is in
danger of losing an entire generation. Further, if Syrian
children are deprived of the right to education, they will
be vulnerable to recruitment by extremist groups. For
that reason, the State of Qatar announced at the recent
donor conference held in Kuwait the establishment
of a fund for education and skills training for Syrian
refugees and displaced persons.

In recognition of the role of youth in addressing
the world's challenges, my country took the initiative to
hold the Youth Forum on Crime Prevention and Criminal
Justice from 7 to 9 April, on the eve of the thirteenth
United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and
Criminal Justice, recently held in Doha, with a View
to enabling young people to express their opinions and
participate in the drafting of resolutions and policies
on crime in its various forms and in the fight against
terrorism.

Finally, young people have always been the real
engine of change. Failure to recognize their role would
be tantamount to ignoring logic and the lessons of
history. Therefore, unless we provide an environment
in which youth are engaged and involved in all aspects
of community life, the price to be paid will be very high
and have a negative impact on international peace and
security.

