Mr. Shobokshi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): I
wish to join other speakers in congratulating you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of July. We are confident that
you will guide the work of the Council with great
wisdom. We wish also to thank your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of France, for his wise
conduct of the Council's work last month.
Harsh - indeed unbearable - social and
economic conditions continue to prevail in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem. That is a result of the escalation of violence
and Israel's illegal policies and practices of oppression.
Israel continues to set up checkpoints and turn them
into border crossings and to expand its construction of
illegal settlements.

Israel has always defied the decisions of
international legitimacy, and one year after the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice,
it has continued that defiance by deciding to accelerate
the construction of the separation wall around
Jerusalem with the purpose of completing the wall that
Israel has been building for the past two years. The
wall will annex more than 8 per cent of the West Bank
and will isolate cities and villages. In the full view of
the Security Council and on the pretext of security and
self-defence considerations, Israel is continuing
construction of the separation wall in total disregard
for the Court's advisory opinion and in contempt of
General Assembly resolution ES-10/15 of 20 July
2004.

The wall's purpose is to eject the largest possible
number of Palestinians. They will have to leave their
jobs, their lands and their property because of the
humiliating constraints that Israel imposes upon them.
The Government of Israel is confiscating those lands
and other property and is building new Israeli
settlements, some of them very populous, in order to
completely Judaize the land and strip Palestinians of all
their rights, including basic human rights.

The international community and all peace-loving
people welcomed the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice and accepted its
recommendations and conclusions. The separation wall
has given a new dimension to the problem: it
jeopardizes efforts to secure peace in the region; it
could undermine the road map; and it is a major
obstacle to the establishment of a viable Palestinian
State living side by side with Israel in accordance with
Security Council resolution 1397 (2002).

The international community cannot shut its eyes
or turn a deaf ear to the suffering of the Palestinian
people. It must reaffirm its solidarity with the
Palestinian people, which is sorely suffering under
ugly colonization and unjust occupation. The
international community, represented by the United
Nations - and in particular by the Security Council -
must endeavour to put pressure on Israel and oblige it
to abide by the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice by halting the construction of the wall
and dismantling the parts that have already been built.

Israel's actions are contrary not only to
international law and international humanitarian law,
but also to the very spirit of our times, the principles of
the Charter and humanitarian values that reject racism
in all its forms, for Israel's building of the separation
wall is a clear act of racism.

We reaffirm that the Israeli withdrawal from Gaza
must be comprehensive and complete. It must be
followed by Israeli withdrawal from all the occupied
Arab territories, including East Jerusalem. Unilateral
disengagement from Gaza must not be a mere cloak for
continued Israeli occupation of the other Palestinian
lands, including East Jerusalem. Israeli withdrawal
from Gaza must be followed by the start of final-status
negotiations.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia is greatly
concerned at the suffering of the Palestinian people and
at the fact that Palestinians and their cities are
undergoing Israeli violence, aggression, human rights
violations, violations of international resolutions and
destruction of infrastructure. We call upon the
international community to sound the alarm about
these oppressive Israeli practices and to shoulder its
political, moral and humanitarian responsibility in that
regard. We call upon the Security Council to continue
to work towards a comprehensive, just and lasting
solution to the question of Palestine in all its
dimensions, in accordance with the Charter, the
relevant United Nations resolutions, international
humanitarian law, the road map and the Arab peace
initiative.

