Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): I would like to thank all the participants
in today's briefing, in particular the representatives of
Eco-Peace Middle East.

Belgium supports dialogue with civil society and
the invaluable input of women and young people in
that regard. We wish to emphasize how much their
work contributes to creating an environment that is
conducive to peace and respect for human rights. The
dynamism and plurality of civil society are part of an
open and democratic society, and it must be allowed to
do its work without hindrance. We are concerned about
actions and policies that are hostile to civil society.

I would like to begin my statement by reaffirming
our commitment to the two-State solution, despite the
developments on the ground that are taking us further
away from such a solution every day. Belgium remains
convinced that there is no option other than a negotiated
solution based on the coexistence of two States, with the
city of Jerusalem as their future capital, in accordance
with agreed international parameters.

Any credible initiative to relaunch the peace
process must be based on international law, put an
end to settlement activities and allow Palestinians full
and free access to their resources and the enjoyment
of their rights, while ensuring Israel's security. A just,
comprehensive and lasting solution that is supported
by the international community, in particular by the
Security Council, is in the interests of Israel and its
security and the stability of the entire region.

With those objectives and principles in mind, we
are obliged to observe that the settlement policy in
the West Bank and East Jerusalem is continuing and
is being accompanied by measures such as forced
displacement, evictions and demolitions. In accordance
with resolution 2334 (2016), we strongly condemn
that policy, which is contrary to international law,
undermines the viability of the two-State solution and
serves only to exacerbate tensions, as demonstrated
by the increased violence between Israeli settlers and
Palestinians. Any use of violence, whoever may be
responsible, is unacceptable and its perpetrators must
be prosecuted.

We are also concerned about the situation in Hebron.
The April 2019 report of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs on the subject paints a bleak
picture. We recall the responsibility of the parties to
respect international law and the responsibility of
Israel, as the occupying Power, to ensure the protection
of Palestinians in Hebron and throughout the occupied
Palestinian territory.

With regard to the situation in Gaza, I stress that
all leaders must respect the fundamental right to
demonstrate peacefully. By establishing the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry, the Human
Rights Council has demonstrated its responsibility in
assessing the situation. The conclusions of its report are
serious and significant.

While recognizing Israel's right to ensure its
security, we recall that Israel must respect the principles
of proportionality and necessity in the use of force.
We urge the Israeli authorities to conduct independent
investigations into the alleged illegal use of lethal force
so that the perpetrators are held accountable.

It is also not acceptable for demonstrations in
Gaza to be hijacked by extremist elements. We call on
all those responsible not to use or encourage children
to participate in demonstrations in Gaza that may
become violent.

We call on all parties to respect human rights
and international humanitarian law and to ensure
unhindered access for humanitarian actors. The
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East has an indispensable role
as a humanitarian actor, and Belgium will continue to
support its efforts on the ground.

The resolution of the Gaza crisis requires a
fundamental change, which includes the lifting of
the blockade and the full opening of crossing points,
while taking into account Israel's legitimate security
concerns. A political solution to the crisis also
requires that control of the territory be returned to the
Palestinian Authority.

We call on all parties to constructively engage
in intra-Palestinian reconciliation talks. Elections
conducted in accordance with international democratic
standards can contribute to reconciliation. Unity is
in the interest of the Palestinian people and peace in
the region.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that, in line
with the relevant Council resolutions, in particular
resolutions 242 (1967) and 497 (1981), we do not
recognize Israel's sovereignty over the territories
occupied since June 1967, including the Golan Heights,
and we do not consider them a part of the territory of the
State oflsrael. We will not accept that the occupation of

the Golan Heights serve as a precedent to justify similar
possible actions in the occupied Palestinian territory.

