Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to you, Mr. President, for
the prompt response to our delegation's proposal to
convene a special meeting on the situation in eastern
Ghouta, in Syria. That certainly does not mean that
other problematic areas require any less attention. In
particular, not long ago, at our initiative, the Security
Council discussed the dire situation in Raqqa in detail.
And in general, over the past month we have revisited
Syria's humanitarian issues more than once. I would
like to ask Council members to listen carefully to what
I have to say.

It is past time to discuss frankly what is going
on in this Damascus suburb. The mass psychosis in
global media outlets of the past few days, working
in coordination to circulate all the same rumours,
is certainly not contributing to an understanding of
the situation. When eastern Aleppo was in the news,
propagandistic disaster scenarios were put forward
for it - a city where, after it was liberated from the
terrorists, warehouses full of medicines and medical
equipment were discovered. At the time we demanded
that the Secretariat conduct an investigation, but
the report presented to the Security Council was
blatantly superficial.

We are constantly seeing images of the activities of
the White Helmets, who pass themselves off as rescuers.
They were long ago shown to be supported by generous
foreign assistance, and they work closely with terrorist
groups. As a general rule, they serve as the original
sources of well-rewarded disinformation. We are given
the impression that the whole of eastern Ghouta consists
of nothing but hospitals and that it is the hospitals that
the Syrian army is attacking. That is a well-known
tactic in information warfare. It is a very well-known
fact, however, that the militants everywhere make a
habit of locating their military facilities in medical
and educational institutions, but for some reason that
inconvenient truth is not advertised.

It would be a good idea to begin with the fact that
there are still several thousand defiant militants in
eastern Ghouta, including some affiliated with terrorist
organizations, mainly Jabhat Al-Nusra. Some time
ago, they breached the agreement on a cessation of
hostilities with an attack on an armoured tank unit of
the Syrian armed forces in Harasta. They are shelling
Damascus, and the intensity of the attacks increases
daily. Dozens of missiles are launched every day, and
not a single area of the capital has been spared. For
some reason, those statistics are not being taken into
account by United Nations representatives, although the
Permanent Mission of Syria distributes them regularly.
We have pointed out that in a 20 February statement,
an official representative of the Secretary-General
described factual information as "reported" (see S/PV.8183). And today the Under-Secretary-General
talked about reported shelling. But those reports could
easily have been verified by United Nations staff if
they had inspected the areas of destruction and visited
the victims.

The Russian Embassy facilities have been repeatedly
shelled, and each time the same delegations in the
Security Council have made up excuses to lay off
the blame for these terrorist acts. One is compelled
to conclude that someone is purposely helping the
criminals avoid accountability. Incidentally, we are
disturbed by the fact that not so long ago, representatives
of some delegations who View themselves as leaders
in the protection of human rights and international
humanitarian law quite seriously said that the damage
resulting from the shelling in Damascus did not reach a
level deserving of the attention given to eastern Ghouta.
Our immediate response was to ask how many people
have to die to attain, as it were, the gold standard of
sympathy? There has been no answer. Is it appropriate
to pass over the tragedies in Ramadi, Fallujah, Mosul
and Raqqa in silence while drumming up hysteria about
Madaya, Daraya, eastern Aleppo and eastern Ghouta,
encouraging militants to to further humiliate civilians?

Incidentally, the coalition forces' methodical
destruction of Raqqa is extremely recent. The memory
of it is hardly likely to have faded so quickly. For some
reason, when the Coalition bombing flattened Raqqa,
no one sounded the alarm, demanded compliance
with international humanitarian law or proposed an
immediate ceasefire. Yes, the Coalition smoked the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) out of Raqqa.
We know that. But with that done, the United States
has forgotten about the city. No one is clearing any
mines there. Who is aware of the fact that as many as
50 returning civilians are blown up by mines in Raqqa
every day? Nor do we see much enthusiasm from these
famous activists about the worst humanitarian crisis of
our time, which happens to be unfolding against the
backdrop of the armed conflict in Yemen.

The militants have turned the people Who are
left in eastern Ghouta into hostages who are not
allowed to leave the area under rebel control through
the A1-Wafideen checkpoint. The Russian Centre
for Reconciliation of Opposing Sides has urged the
illegal groups to lay down their arms and resolve their
status, but they broke off negotiations yesterday, on
21 February. It is quite obvious that they do not care
about the life and safety of the residents of eastern
Ghouta, whom they use as human shields to hide
behind. Their aim consists of continuing to negotiate
tactical and logistical advantages for themselves. That
does not seem to particularly worry these groups'
foreign sponsors, who might be able to exert crucial
influence on them. But no, they would rather maintain
the status quo and organize loud campaigns blackening
Syria and Russia.

Energy is also being wasted on fragmenting the
international efforts regarding a settlement in Syria.
Instead ofgiving due backing to the Astana de-escalation
process and the Syrian National Dialogue Congress in
Sochi, which have become an important support to
the inter-Syrian negotiations under the auspices of the
United Nations in Geneva, we see ongoing backroom
efforts designed to openly undermine the work
being done through those platforms. On top of that,
exclusive clubs are being created, one striking example
of which is the so-called International Partnership
against Impunity for the Use of Chemical Weapons,
which undermines the established frameworks for
international cooperation on non-proliferation. We
know that preparations are being made for an unofficial
presentation of that initiative in Geneva. We would like
to reaffirm our position in that regard, which is that
in view of the neutral status of respected international
organizations such as the United Nations and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons,
representatives of their secretariats should not be
associated with narrow initiatives such as these, which
do not enjoy universal support.

Many are now asking the logical question of how
de-escalation in eastern Ghouta and other problematic
areas of Syria can be achieved as soon as possible. The
delegations of Sweden and Kuwait have come up with
their recipe for this, in their role as informal monitors
of the humanitarian dimension of the Syrian conflict in
the Security Council. Their draft resolution - which
has now been officially prepared for a vote, despite the
fact that the authors know perfectly well that there is no
agreement on it - proposes an apparently simple idea,
which is the establishment of a ceasefire throughout
Syria for not less than 30 days. We would very much
like to know how such a truce will be guaranteed, but
we have had no intelligible answers. The important
thing, they say, is adopting the decision, and we can
come up with the details later. An issue as complex as
the Syrian conflict does not respond to such logic. We
have been through this before, including, once again, in
the case of eastern Aleppo.

In principle, a ceasefire would be extremely
significant, and not just for ensuring the delivery of

humanitarian aid. The challenge is in how to achieve
it. What we need here is not resolutions for the sake
of resolutions, but measures that correspond to the
realities on the ground. We are constantly talking about
ensuring that the Security Council agrees on feasible
decisions that are not divorced from reality or that cater
to populist demands. This is about the credibility of the
principal organ of the United Nations, responsible for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
in accordance with the Charter, whose purposes
and principles we were discussing only yesterday.
If we could stop the violence in crisis zones with
resolutions, we would already be living in a completely
different world.

It will take long and hard work with the sides
to the conflict to stabilize the situation so that the
parties can sit down at the negotiating table and
come up with the parameters for a ceasefire. There is
no other way. It will also be impossible to ensure on
paper that in 48 hours, or any other amount of time,
humanitarian convoys can get going and mass medical
evacuations begin. By the way, specific parameters for
normalizing a number of complex issues are currently
being formulated in Geneva, including by using the
potential of the specialist International Syria Support
Group. They include the Rukban camp for displaced
persons - where, we understand, the United States
military presence occupying the area has finally given
the United Nations written guarantees - the Yarmouk
camp, where the ISIL terrorists still have a presence,
and the Fua and Kefraya enclaves.

In that connection, I would like to know if the
authors of today's initiative genuinely do not understand
its utopian nature or if there is some other purpose at
work here that has nothing to do with a desire to help
struggling Syrians. Unfortunately, the story of eastern
Aleppo in 2016 suggests that the second is true, and that
the aim is to start a fight so as to strengthen international
pressure on the Syrian authorities and slander Russia.
Besides that, it shifts the focus from the importance of
reviving the Geneva process as quickly as possible on
the basis of the agreements that the Syrians arrived at in
Sochi to indiscriminate accusations against the Syrian
Government. Will that improve Geneva's chances
of success?

I will say it again to make sure that everyone hears
it one more time. Russia will continue to do everything
possible to achieve peace in Syria and restore stability
to the Middle East. We call on our partners to do
the same in a spirit of constructive cooperation and
in cooperation with the United Nations, rather than
continuing to sow confusion, ramp up support for
jihadists and tear the region apart. For this draft
resolution to be meaningful and realistic, the Russian
delegation has prepared some amendments to it that we
will now circulated to Council members.

