Mrs. Morgan Sotomayor (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Ambassador Antonio de Aguiar
Patriota, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Brazil, and his
delegation for the initiative of organizing this debate,
which seems to us extremely timely.

The change in the nature of conflicts and the
increase in threats to international peace and security
have compelled the Organization, especially the
Security Council, to adapt to those new challenges that
transcend borders and affect the security both of people
and of States.

We are convinced that development, security and
human rights go hand in hand and are mutually
strengthened. While it cannot be stated that lack of
development and the denial of human rights are the
only cause of conflicts and instability, those factors
significantly increase the tendency for violence.

That is why it is important to keep strengthening
the Organization's capacity not only for establishing
and maintaining peace but also for preventive
diplomacy and peacebuilding, in which development
plays a key role. The Security Council should bear in
mind the need to attend to the security of the people,
and not just of the nation, and the importance of
emphasizing security based on human development
rather than on weaponry.

International peace and security must be
approached with a comprehensive focus that addresses
the structural causes of conflicts, such as the lack of
development opportunities. The increasing number of
peacekeeping operations with multidimensional
mandates, which include such diverse areas as
humanitarian assistance, strengthening the rule of law,
security sector reform and promoting development,
confirms the importance that this comprehensive vision
has acquired in Security Council decisions.

As a member of the Security Council in 2002-
2003 and 2009-2010, Mexico sought to strengthen the
effectiveness of the Council's decisions and
capabilities, with the aim of addressing the structural
causes of conflicts through the growing inclusion of
the link between security, development and human

rights in its mandates and resolutions. My delegation is
convinced that the Security Council should continue to
work on the prevention of conflicts and to facilitate
timely responses to emerging crises - areas in which
development plays a determining role. To that end, the
Council should continue to promote measures to tackle
the structural causes of conflicts, which would include
the promotion of development, the protection of human
rights, disarmament and strengthening the rule of law,
as well as encouraging more effective partnerships
among the various relevant actors internationally,
including regional and subregional organizations, civil
society and financial institutions.

Cooperation between the Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission, and the inclusion of their
input into peacekeeping operations mandates are
essential to the success of that strategy, bearing in mind
the fact that development depends fundamentally on
the national decisions of each State. For this reason, we
have stressed the importance of closely tying
peacebuilding to the national priorities of each country.

We have witnessed on many occasions the impact
that a lack of development opportunities can have on
the stability of a country or a region. This confirms
once again the fact that development, respect for
human rights and security are mutually reinforcing.
The Security Council cannot distance itself from that
fact.

