Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): I would like to start by
commending the delegation of Spain for convening this
meeting and for its excellent leadership in facilitating
the work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) and the preparation of the
comprehensive review report. We also welcome the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2325 (2016).

Ethiopia has been taking all the necessary measures
to implement resolution 1540 (2004), including by
strengthening the legal and administrative framework
to prohibit the manufacture, acquisition, possession,
development, transport, transfer or use of weapons of
mass destruction by non-State actors. However, we note
with great concern the threat posed by the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction to international peace
and security and to humankind. No doubt advances
in science and technology and innovation increase
the possibility of weapons of mass destruction falling
into the hands of non-State actors, as indicated in the
comprehensive review report.

Ethiopia views the issue of the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction under the agenda of the
1540 Committee from the broader aspect of the total
ban and elimination of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons of mass destruction and their means of delivery.
The objectives of resolution 1540 (2004) could be best
achieved through gradual control and the reduction
of nuclear, biological or chemical weapons, leading
towards a total elimination and ban of weapons of mass
destruction. It is to be recalled that the first resolution
adopted by the General Assembly (resolution 1 (I)) had
the objective of eliminating national armaments, atomic
weapons and all other major weapons adaptable to mass
destruction. Seventy years after the establishment of
the United Nations, nuclear weapons remain one of the
weapons of mass destruction for which there exists no
customary or conventional international law prohibiting
their use.

It is imperative for the international community,
including the Security Council, to work towards the
adoption of a comprehensive and universal legal
framework on the prohibition of the production and
use or the total ban of nuclear weapons and their means
of delivery. Much more needs to be done to ensure
the universal accession to and full implementation of
the Biological Weapons Convention and the Chemical
Weapons Convention. Such measures will significantly
decrease and eliminate the risk of their proliferation
into the hands of non-State actors and terrorist groups.

Ethiopia welcomes the progress registered in
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) since
the last comprehensive review in 2011. Ethiopia
also welcomes the convening of the first regional
assistance conference in Addis Ababa in April.
The use of such regional meetings as a platform for
matchmaking between States and assistance providers
could be further strengthened to establish an effective
international cooperation framework. In this regard,
Ethiopia welcomes the identification of a set of
recommendations in the comprehensive review report,
including recommendations for the Committee to adopt
a regional assistance approach, including through
the holding of regional and subregional assistance
conferences. We further encourage members of the
Security Council and relevant actors to work toward the
full implementation of those recommendations. In our
view, this would contribute to the achievement of the
objectives set out in resolution 1540 (2004).

I wish to conclude by reiterating Ethiopia's
continued commitment to contribute our share for
the full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), the
recommendations outlined in the comprehensive review
report and the broader objective of the maintenance of
international peace and security.

