Mr. Cordeiro (Brazil): Mr. President, we thank you
for having called this meeting and we express our deep
appreciation to President Chiluba for his courtesy in coming
to share his views with the members of the Security
Council and for briefing the Council on this very important
issue. We consider it appropriate that this is an open
meeting of the Security Council, so that the information
provided can be shared with the entire membership of the
United Nations.
We thank President Chiluba for the role he has played,
together with the leadership of the region, in the efforts to
bring peace to the Great Lakes region, particularly to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

We consider and envisage that the Lusaka accords are
the starting point of a process of bringing peace to the
region, of reconstruction and rehabilitation and
development, in which the entire international community
will have to take a part and will have to play an effective
role.

The Security Council has attentively followed the
process thus far and has already responded with the
dispatch of the liaison officers and the decision that a
technical survey mission will be sent to the region.

As to the further steps to be taken, the six elements
outlined by His Excellency are a source of inspiration that
will be taken into consideration by the Security Council
at every moment.

We share entirely the view expressed by
His Excellency that the Security Council has no reason to
be less effective in dealing with and trying to bring
resolution to a conflict in Africa than it is with respect to
other regions of the globe.

We have two specific questions for the President,
which in fact, to a large extent, overlap with the questions
already put by other representatives.

We would like to know what are the immediate
points on the agendas of the Political Committee and the
Joint Military Commission. We would also like to learn
from the President how he envisages the first steps that
would necessarily need to be taken in order for the
international conference on the Great Lakes to take place
in the immediate future.

