Mr. Zaayman (South Africa): My delegation wishes
to express its appreciation to Senegal for convening
this important and timely debate on the important role
played by water in the maintenance of international
peace and security.

Conflict has cascading effects and far-reaching
implications for water security, which lead to negative
impacts on political situations and on the social,
economic, and environmental aspects of sustainable
development. The impact of water on conflict can be
seen in Africa, particularly in those countries along
the River Nile, as well as in the water-scarce parts
of the Middle East. We therefore believe that water
security must be one of the primary concerns that
should be addressed in the aftermath of conflicts in
order to restore livelihoods and revive economic and
social development.

In global terms, indications suggest that, at the
current rate, the overuse of fresh water relative to its
supply will severely slow economic development. The
lack of clean water will be the cause of massive food
shortages and compromise energy output within the
next 15 to 20 years.

Potential conflicts over water resources can pose
an imminent threat to security, both globally and on
the African continent, especially as people continue
to seek better standards of living in the face of
increasingly limited resources. That in turn will result
in consequences such as greater flows of economic
migrants seeking sustenance elsewhere.

That scenario is confirmed in the World Bank's
recent report entitled High and Dry: Climate Change,
Water and the Economy, which concludes that

"in the next 35 years, water insecurity - made
worse by climate change - could force migration,
spark conflict and be a significant financial drag
on regional governments".

Coming from a continent where water security
remains such a high priority, I wish to stress the strong
relevance of this issue to Africa. There is no doubt
that the international community must strengthen
its focus on the preservation of water, including by
combating climate change. President Jacob Zuma is a
member of the United Nations and World Bank High-
Level Panel on Water in support of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Developmen and the attainment of
Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 6, on clean water
and sanitation.

The Panel, convened at the initiative of the
Secretary-General and the President of the World
Bank, recently called for a fundamental shift in the
way the world looks at water and issued an action plan
for a new approach to water management that will help
the world to achieve the SDGs. Furthermore, the World
Economic Forum, in its Global Risks Report in January,
has identified the scarcity of water as the number-one
long-term risk globally.

We should also work towards making the increase
in competition for water become a catalyst for more
intense cooperation and innovation rather than a
source of conflict. Indeed, the challenges surrounding
water can also be a path for dialogue, mediation and
confidence-building between States. The work of
the Department of Political Affairs in that regard
is commended.

South Africa shares transboundary river basins
with three other African countries. In that regard,
achieving transboundary water security has assisted us
and our neighbours in stimulating regional cooperation.
Shared waters provide opportunities for cooperation
and support political development on wider issues such
as sustainable development and economic integration.

The Southern African Development Community
remains a prime example of such an approach, whereby
the organization coordinates transboundary water
cooperation on 15 basins across Southern Africa. We
should also mention our strong belief that a country's
water security is intrinsically linked to that of its
neighbouring countries, and is the very cornerstone of
regional integration and development.

For South Africa, as a constitutional, democratic
State, inclusiveness and gender sensitivity have always
been core principles of our national policy. Accelerating
the empowerment of women in regional water
management should therefore be viewed as critical,
because women play an important part in the provision,
management and safeguarding of water. The pivotal
role of women as providers and users of water and as
guardians of the living environment is seldom reflected
in institutional arrangements for the development and
management of water resources.

Water scarcity is a major threat to economic growth
and stability around the world. Water is and will
remain at the heart of international peace and security,
the defence of human rights and the imperative for
sustainable development paths. The African Union's
Agenda 2063 development goals best articulate the
demand that Africa has for water, as it states that,

"Africa shall have equitable and sustainable use and
management of water resources for socioeconomic
development, regional cooperation and the
environment."

