Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): Malaysia has repeatedly
called for the Security Council to act more decisively
on Syria. We therefore view this latest effort by Egypt,
New Zealand and Spain as an attempt to assert the
Council's authority and discharge its responsibility to
effectively address the deteriorating situation in Syria,
particularly in Aleppo.

The fulfilment ofthe draft resolution's (S/2016/1026)
main objective, which was to achieve a ceasefire in
Aleppo to allow for the delivery of much-needed
humanitarian assistance, is absolutely critical for
reducing death and destruction and for saving thousands
of lives in the besieged city, especially women and
children. Also of utmost importance to my delegation
is the fate of thousands who are facing the great risk
of mass starvation. An urgent need for the activation
of the United Nations four-point humanitarian plan to
resupply medical and food assistance needs no further
elaboration, and the presence of medical personnel to
treat the many sick and wounded is urgently needed.

Given the compelling humanitarian reasons
behind it, my delegation voted in favour of the draft
resolution. We have consistently pressed for alleviating
the appalling humanitarian situation being faced by
innocent civilians in Syria. We are therefore gravely
disappointed that this draft humanitarian resolution
failed to be adopted. It is a betrayal of all hopes pinned
on the Council to alleviate the dreadful suffering
caused by a brutal conflict.

We have spent hours listening to the heart-
wrenching accounts of a humanitarian catastrophe, and
with the Security Council's inability to act, do we have
the heart to listen to more graphic briefings? What is
required is actions to halt the fighting in order to pave
the way for the delivery of the humanitarian assistance
that the people of Syria are so desperately missing.

For the sake of these innocent lives we will not
give up hope. We cannot despair. We will continue to
support any initiative, be it in the Security Council or
outside the Council, to see an end to the brutal conflict
and destruction in eastern Aleppo.

