Mr. Hachani (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to address you, Mr. President, and other members
of the Security Council in order to express our
appreciation for your quick response in holding this
urgent meeting on behalf of the Arab States, the
Organization of the Islamic Conference and the Non-
Aligned Movement to consider the serious
developments that are taking place in the occupied
Palestinian territories.

Let me also congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I would also like to thank your
predecessor, the Ambassador of Japan, for his
presidency last month.

The Security Council is meeting today in light of
the serious Israeli military escalation in the occupied
Palestinian territories. Tunisia has followed with
concern this brutal Israeli aggression against the
northern Gaza Strip, which has caused many victims
among the Palestinian people - women, children and
the elderly. The most recent were victims of the
bombing yesterday in Beit Hanoun, which also
destroyed infrastructure.

This escalation clearly is a serious threat to the
security and stability of the Middle East region. In a
communication from the Foreign Ministry issued on
4 November 2006, Tunisia condemned repeated Israeli
acts of aggression. They are a grave violation of all
laws, norms and international legality. This Israeli
aggression against Palestinian territories is being
pursued at a time when the Palestinian people and
international public opinion are seeking to resume talks
between Israelis and Palestinians in order to
reinvigorate the peace process, with a view to bringing
about a comprehensive settlement to this conflict, and
to spare the region and its peoples further war and
suffering.

Violence begets violence. It fuels feelings of
hatred and despair. There is no other choice for the
parties than the choice of peace and a return to
negotiations. We reiterate the invitation to Israel to end
its acts of oppression and aggression. We believe that it
is high time for the Security Council to shoulder its
responsibilities in order to put an end to the violations
that the Palestinian people are subjected to. The
Council must take the necessary measures to create an
international force to protect Palestinian civilians, in
keeping with the call from President Ben Ali of the
Republic of Tunisia. In this regard, we hope the
Council will adopt the Arab draft resolution on this
matter in order to end this bloodshed and the dangers
that still threaten the future of the region.

