Mr. Hannesson (Iceland): In support of the
statement made on behalf of the European Union, I
have the honour to address the Security Council on
behalf of the five Nordic countries: Denmark, Finland,
Norway, Sweden and my own country, Iceland.

The five Nordic countries engage in extensive
cooperation in Afghanistan and are, by virtue of their
coordinated efforts, among the major contributors to
the stabilization and reconstruction of the country. We
support the emerging consensus that the United
Nations must take on a stronger role in the
coordination of international efforts and that it must
give a much-needed boost to the stabilization and
development of Afghanistan, and we welcome this
opportunity to reaffirm the central role of the United
Nations. We also welcome the Secretary-General's
appointment of Mr. Kai Eide of Norway as his new
Special Representative and hope that the discussions in
3
the Security Council will serve to give him and the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) the support and mandate that they need in
order to take on the challenging tasks ahead.

UNAMA's role in coordination and in providing
support to the Afghan authorities must be strengthened
with a view to reinforcing Afghan leadership and
enhancing international cohesion. That includes
coordination with the International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF), which plays a key role, under a Security
Council mandate, in establishing a secure environment
for reconstruction and development. The provisions of
the Afghanistan Compact and national strategies such
as the upcoming Afghan National Development
Strategy should be the foundations of our engagement.

In order to enable UNAMA and the new Special
Representative to meet expectations in leading the
coordination of international efforts in Afghanistan, the
Security Council and United Nations Member States
must give them the political backing and authority
needed. It is also essential that expectations are
matched by resources and the United Nations be given
full support to exert its leading role and more fully
accomplish all aspects of the UNAMA mandate.

We welcome the focus of the Secretary-General
on sub-national governance, call for a further increase
in the United Nations presence at the provincial level
and would welcome an update on the efforts made to
fill vacant posts in UNAMA to strengthen geographical
coverage. Increased coverage would enable the United
Nations to better focus on capacity-building for Afghan
authorities at all levels and we note the efforts of the
national Government in strengthening governance
throughout Afghanistan, in particular through the
creation of the Independent Directorate for Local
Governance.

Humanitarian challenges remain extensive, and
we are concerned that large areas of the country remain
inaccessible to assistance due to insecurity. We look
forward to the adoption of the Security Council
resolution renewing the mandate of UNAMA.

The human rights situation in Afghanistan is
precarious at best and human rights abuses are
widespread. We encourage the Afghan Government to
clearly demonstrate its commitment towards improving
and protecting the human rights of all Afghans and to
show leadership in championing core human rights
issues such as freedom of speech and the rule of law.
An independent human rights commission and a
strong, pluralistic civil society are important
achievements and imperative for introducing
internationally recognized human rights standards into
Afghanistan.

We support the observation of the Secretary-
General on the need for a common approach that
integrates security, governance, rule of law, human
rights and social and economic development. An
integrated approach should not only focus on the
immediate security challenges, but combine the
political, development and security efforts, so that they
better mutually support each other. An integrated
approach should also be based on a gender perspective
and acknowledge the need for efforts to fight
discrimination and strengthen the participation of
Afghan women in all those areas and in society at
large.

Efforts to establish security, including through
training the Afghan National Security Forces, are
essential. In recognition of the link between security
and development, the efforts of the United Nations, the
European Union and the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) should be as coherent and
coordinated as possible. Measures to that end will be
discussed at the NATO/International Security
Assistance Force summit in Bucharest next month. The
role of UNAMA is key in creating a more coherent and
unified approach by the international community and
vis-a-vis the Afghan Government.

Finally, a strengthened role for the United
Nations in Afghanistan needs to make use of the
capacities and efforts of the entire United Nations
system. The activities of the United Nations Country
Team should effectively support the implementation of
the mandate and overall objectives of UNAMA.

We believe the report of the Secretary-General
and the comments provided will contribute positively
to improved results for the Afghan people through our
continued engagement in Afghanistan. We reaffirm our
long-term commitment to contribute to that effect.

