Mr. Lucas (Angola): At the outset, Mr. President,
let me express our congratulations to your delegation,
Malaysia, on presiding over the Security Council for the
month of June. I also commend the work performed by
the Lithuanian presidency during the previous month
of May.

We thank the Presidents and Prosecutors of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY), the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR) and the International Residual Mechanism for
the briefings they have provided the Council, and we
assure them of Angola's full support.
By establishing the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, the Security Council responded
to the universal plea for the global strengthening of
the rule of the law and the end of impunity. Over the
past 20 years, the ICTY and the ICTR have played a
crucial role in promoting the rule of law by making a
meaningful contribution to ending impunity for those
responsible for committing war crimes, genocide and
crimes against humanity. On the eve of their closure,
we recognize the remarkable achievements of the
International Criminal Tribunals and their contribution
to international justice and the rule of law.

The ICTY has now concluded proceedings against
147 out of 161 indicted individuals, including two
important appeals cases. Seven trials and appeals,
involving the last 14 of the 161 indicted, remain
outstanding. The Tribunal is making efforts to meet
the targets for its completion strategy and to ensure a
smooth transition to the Mechanism in compliance with
resolution 1966 (2010). We welcome the non-existence
of ICTY fugitives and the Tribunal's commitment to
the expeditious completion of its work while ensuring
that the trials and appeals are conducted in a manner
consistent with the fundamental principles of due
process and equity.

Despite the continued challenges, such as delays in
trials and appeals, we are reassured that steps are being
taken for the completion of all judicial proceedings
by 2017. We note with satisfaction that the Office of
the Prosecutor remains focused on completing the
remaining trials and appeals while reducing costs
and downsizing staff. With respect to the regional
prosecution of war crimes, we support the efforts of the
Office of the Prosecutor to encourage the improvement
of regional cooperation concerning war crimes.

In regard to the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda, while the formal closure of the Tribunal is
planned to occur by the end of 2015, we commend the
work it has accomplished by concluding the trials of
all 93 indicted individuals. We are concerned that nine
of those indicted by the ICTR for their participation
in the genocide in Rwanda remain at large with three
of the fugitives being underthe jurisdiction of the
Mechanism and the remaining six referred to the
Rwandan authorities. Thus, pursuant to resolution 1966
(2010), the responsibility for tracking and trying them
remains with the Republic of Rwanda and the Residual
Mechanism, which will require the cooperation of all
States to ensure that there will be no impunity for the
perpetrators of the genocide in Rwanda.
We note with satisfaction that the transition to the
Residual Mechanism is close to completion, mostjudicial
and prosecutorial functions have already been handed
over and administrative arrangements have been put in
place. We value the sharing of lessons learned by the
Tribunals in the management of judicial, administrative
and prosecutorial functions with other international
and national jurisdictions as well as with the public.
Important challenges remain, including reparations
for victims and the relocation of the acquitted and the
convicted by the Tribunal. Those are tasks that must
be carefully addressed so that the work of the Tribunal
fully impacts on peace and reconciliation in Rwanda.

Concerning the Residual Mechanism, we would
like to underscore the relevance of working closely
with the Tribunal principals and staff members to
ensure a smooth transition of the remaining functions
and services and the examination and adoption of
best practices. The communication and cooperation
with the States of the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda
by keeping them updated on the activities of the
Mechanism and the transition of responsibilities, as
well as the assistance to national jurisdictions, are
most welcome. We greatly value the support afforded
to the Mechanism by the ICTR, the ICTY, the Office
of Legal Affairs, the Department of Management of the
Secretariat, and concerned States, which will be crucial
to ensuring the success of the Mechanism. We are
encouraged by the fact that the arrests and surrender
of the remaining fugitives have been set as priorities by
the Residual Mechanism, taking into account that the
ongoing operations on tracking renegades, conducted
by the Prosecutor, require the full cooperation of the
States.

Finally, we would like to highlight that the
principles of international criminal justice embodied in
the Criminal Tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and
for Rwanda have been crucial in the recovery processes
of those countries, following the horrific events that
took place in their territories. It is expected that the
international community will continue supporting
the Tribunals in their remaining work, including by
ensuring adequate resources to permit their achievement
of the goals set by the Security Council with a view to
securing lasting peace and the Tribunals' legacy.

At a time of widespread atrocities, the international
community is challenged to take stock of the legacy of
the ICTY, the ICTR, the Residual Mechanism and the
other international tribunals, as a concrete expression
of its commitment to end impunity and its pledge to a
world where the rule of law prevails.
