Mr. Khalid (Pakistan): First, we are grateful for
the briefings given by the United States and United
Kingdom Ambassadors. The briefings have helped us
to broaden our understanding of the complexity of the
situation as it exists in Iraq and the efforts being made
by the Coalition Provisional Authority (CPA) to
mitigate it.

At this stage, our comments will be preliminary.
We will be able to comment more substantively on the
ongoing developments after receiving the Governing
Council's formal response to resolution 1511 (2003).

We have heard with interest the briefings today
on the political process in Iraq. We share the concern
that any new development in Iraq should lead to
consensus-building and the healing of wounds. We
have always advocated an approach whereby all
developments on the political and security fronts
should be supported and welcomed by Iraqis. The
Iraqis should be allowed to control and steer such
developments and there should be a broad-based
agreement in the region and beyond on the
implementation of the process currently under way.

We have noted various procedures to elect the
Constitutional Convention and the Transitional
National Assembly. The conclusion of the agreement
between CPA and the Governing Council is indeed an
important development with respect to these
procedures. The Security Council is still awaiting a
formal indication from the Governing Council,
pursuant to its obligation under resolution 1511 (2003),
of the procedure and time-line for the drafting of the
constitution. The Council's continued engagement with
the evolving situation and its views on the agreement
will be important for the purposes of legitimacy.

Sll'V.4869

 

We have also noted the provision for the drafting
by the Governing Council, in close consultation with
CPA, of the fundamental law. It would be desirable for
the law to be drafted by the Iraqi people as
independently as possible, taking into account their
national, cultural, ethnic and religious sensitivities.

The agreement on the political process speaks of
the agreement with CPA on security. We would
appreciate comments from CPA on bilateral agreements
contemplated by the end of March 2004. The question
is: What will be the status of these agreements? Will
they expire with the end of CPA and the Governing
Council?

Lastly, the involvement of the international
community, through the United Nations, in supporting
the reconstruction process in Iraq and assisting the
Iraqi people to stabilize the situation in their country
will remain critical. There is a need to create an
enabling environment to allow the United Nations to
play its due role in Iraq.

