We thank the Estonian presidency for having included this open debate in its programme of work, and the briefers for their presentations. El Salvador welcomes the efforts made to improve the transparency, efficiency and effectiveness of all Security Council proceedings and supports the Council's greater interaction with the General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and other United Nations bodies. El Salvador deems it urgent to ensure the transparency of the Security Council's proceedings primarily because of the binding nature of its resolutions, which help to give legitimacy to its work. Threats to the legitimacy and efficiency of the Council's working methods must be continually and carefully considered. As noted by the Secretary-General in the Council last month, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) represents the greatest global threat we have faced since the creation of the Organization. Furthermore, the pandemic has the potential to lead to unprecedented and disastrous consequences. However, we believe that it could also represent an opportunity to rethink what has been taken for granted for years. In that respect, we wish to highlight the manner in which the Organization's procedures have been adapted as well as the flexibility of its working methods, with a view to enabling it to continue with its scheduled activities and respond to the great common challenges that we face. While much can be achieved by adapting the working methods of the Council, even more can be achieved by making it transparent. In these difficult times, the challenge is to use the available tools in a creative manner, thus contributing to a culture in which better decisions are made, in a democratic environment and as a result of consultations with all interested parties. We therefore commend and welcome the efforts made to keep the open-debate mechanism active despite the current challenges. We hope that this participation can be extended in the short term, beyond the inclusion of our statements as official documents, and that we can count on having the space and time for our statements to be heard in each of the official languages. El Salvador will continue to participate actively in these open debates in accordance with Article 31 of the Charter of the United Nations. We believe also that this practice could be carried over to other Council meetings that take place ina more private environment through the holding of informal interactive dialogues. In such cases, regional organizations that follow or have close links with the activities of the Council could also participate. We also wish to highlight the efforts of monthly Council presidencies to strengthen the inclusion and participation of, and accountability vis-a-vis, States that are not members of this body by issuing a programme of work for the month of their presidency and through monthly wrap-up sessions. El Salvador believes that those efforts could be strengthened through the inclusion of analytical and interactive presentations and discussions. In addition, we call for the continued issuance, in a timely manner, of activity reports by each presidency. These should include, above all and in addition to a summary of events, a situational analysis that includes current and future threats to international peace and security. We consider field visits to be valuable, as they give Council members a broader view of the local situation, enabling them to make sound decisions and to more effectively discharge their mandate. We deem it important to consider the participation of other relevant parties in the proceedings, including members of the General Assembly that contribute military, police and civilian contingents to peace operations. While we acknowledge the fact that such missions can be very costly, we believe that with a view to coordinating efforts and strengthening the dynamics of the Organization, they could be carried out among the various subsidiary bodies of the Council, including the Peacebuilding Commission and the Economic and Social Council. Better coordination would give these missions greater strategic effectiveness while reducing overall costs. With regard to the work directly related to the negotiation and renewal of the mandates of the various Security Council peace missions, we recognize that a political strategy is a central element in the formation of peace operations. Nevertheless, we believe it is critical to achieve a more democratic environment that includes the visions and objectives of all stakeholders. We are all aware of the value of having a resolution mandate with solid and effective language that is backed by the entire Council. That is why it is so critical to update its working methods - to bring closer together the positions of all parties to conflicts, particularly those on the ground. El Salvador believes that the best mandate is the product of an appropriate working method reached through interactive and direct debates focused on political strategy and the best interests of all. Members will reach additional practical proposals by including the vision of each of the parties. Under the obligations set out in the Charter of the United Nations, with particular attention to Article 24, paragraph 3, the Security Council is required to submit an annual activity report to the General Assembly. Let us also recall that, in accordance with presidential note S/2017/507 of 30 August 2017, the Council has undertaken to submit such a report in the second quarter of the following year. For El Salvador, a substantive increase in the participation of the entire United Nations membership in the work of the Security Council means greater interaction with regard to the annual report that this organ submits to the General Assembly. In that connection, we regret that, despite repeated calls, the Council has not fulfilled its commitment, thus undermining the ability of General Assembly members to participate in that process. That, in turn, could undermine long-term progress in increasing the transparency and effectiveness of the process. We urge the Council to make the necessary arrangements to expedite the adoption and subsequent submission of its annual report and to take the necessary measures to enable it to meet the deadline set for its submission, as set out in note 507. My country appreciates the fact that the Security Council is holding Arria Formula meetings, as they provide a space for dialogue with actors directly involved in various situations that threaten international peace, security and _ stability. However, these cannot replace formal Council meetings. Whenever possible, the Council should promote the use of informal formats that enable discussions on conflict prevention. El Salvador believes that the working methods of the Security Council should support and strengthen its capacity to prevent conflict. That includes improving our understanding of the situations and of threats in the medium and long term. In that regard, consultations with national experts, civil society and other actors can play an important role by providing information and highlighting new threats that could put global stability at risk. We believe that improving the Council's working methods and adapting them to the evolving realities of the Council and the international context is vital to fulfilling the mandate of the United Nations Charter and to taking decisions that will ensure rapid and effective action for the maintenance of international peace and security. Finally, we wish to express our full awareness that there are discussions and situations that need to be addressed behind closed doors. However, we continue to encourage the members of the Council to provide further details and more transparent explanations of the decisions taken and of the dynamics of this organ to the entire membership of the United Nations. We also encourage the members of the Council to hold public meetings whenever possible and to seek interaction with the rest of the membership, as well as with other United Nations organs, regional organizations and civil society, particularly representatives of sectors affected by conflict, such as women and young people.
