Mr. Ouane (Mali) (spoke in French): Allow me at the
outset to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened this
important briefing. I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General for his report of 7 March and Mr. Annabi for his
supplementary briefing and for the kind words that he, as
well as the delegations of China and Jamaica, addressed to
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and its Chairman.

We have studied the Secretary-Generals report and
have listened attentively to Mr. Annabi's briefing. We share
their appraisal of the situation and of the outlook in Sierra
Leone. As indicated by the Secretary-General's report and
Mr. Annabi's briefing, the situation in Sierra Leone is
precarious, even though modest progress has been made in
implementing the Lome Agreement. In this regard, I would
like to reaffirm the determination of the ECOWAS
countries to support the efforts to consolidate the peace
process.

I would also like to recall the outcome of the meeting
of the Joint Implementation Committee, which took place
at Bamako on 2 March. That meeting reaffirmed above all
that the achievement of genuine and lasting peace in Sierra
Leone remained fundamentally the responsibility of Sierra
Leoneans themselves. The meeting particularly stressed the
following points. First was the misinterpretation of the
Lome Agreement, particularly with regard to the creation
and the mandate of a United Nations peacekeeping force.
Secondly, the meeting stressed the slowness of the
disarmament process, related to a large extent to the slow
deployment of the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL) and the difficulties of access for humanitarian
agencies throughout the country. Finally the meeting
especially stressed the need for the re-establishment of
government institutions, including judicial, police and
revenue-collection institutions.

The Bamako meeting also decided upon the following
urgent actions. First, the immediate lifting by the
Revolutionary United Front (RUF) of the obstacles it has
placed in the way of UNAMSIL's deployment. In this
regard, we welcome the measures announced at the follow-
up meeting of 9 March to which Ambassador Greenstock
referred. Secondly, the meeting also called for the
immediate return by the RUF of the large quantities of
weapons and equipment seized from the Guinean troops
and the immediate return by RUF and the Armed Forces
Revolutionary Council (AFRC) of the weapons taken
from the Kenyan forces. The meeting also called for the
simultaneous dismantling by all combatants of all
roadblocks throughout the country before the next follow-
up meeting, which is to be held in Freetown on 20 March
2000. It emphasized that no party has the right to reign
over any part of the territory of Sierra Leone as if it were
its private kingdom. The meeting also stressed the need
to accelerate the establishment of additional disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration centres once UNAMSIL
is deployed.

Other questions considered at that meeting were
related, among other things, to the restructuring of Sierra
Leonean armed forces and the implementation of the
political provisions of the Lome Peace Agreement. It was
agreed that efforts needed to be made to implement those
provisions, on the understanding that the capacity of the
Government of National Unity to implement such
provisions will be facilitated by its power to mobilize
additional financial resources.

Lastly, the meeting recommended that regular
consultations should be scheduled between the
Government, the Revolutionary United Front Party, the
AFRC and all other parties.

In conclusion, my delegation endorses the
observations and recommendations made by the
Secretary-General in his report of 7 March. We also take
the view that political and financial support of the
international community in the current stage of the Sierra
Leone peace process are essential. My delegation fully
supports the proposals to extend the reporting period and
for a statement to be made to the press, as proposed by
Ambassador Greenstock. We would also like to thank him
for the very useful information provided at the beginning
of this meeting.

The meeting was suspended at 1.25 pm.
