Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing today's important open
debate on the protection of critical infrastructure
against terrorist attacks.

The Netherlands aligns itself with the statement
made earlier by the observer of the European Union.
We also support the statement made by His Excellency
Mr. Vincenzo Amendola, Undersecretary of State of
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of Italy,
in the context of the split term in the Security Council
for the period 2017-2018.

I will focus on our national approach to protect our
own critical infrastructure, on some lessons derived
from it and on the need for international cooperation.
My full text will be available via Twitter.

In our national approach, we believe that it is
important to have a comprehensive framework to
determine the threats that pose a danger to our national
security, including to our critical infrastructure. We
should have a comprehensive framework to address
those threats. The protection ofa critical infrastructure is
part of the national security strategy in the Netherlands.
It is based on the answer to three questions. First, what
threatens us and how bad is it? Secondly, what are we
already doing to address the threats and what more can
and must we do? Thirdly, how do we implement the
necessary policies and strengthen our capacities?

The answer to the last question in particular is key,
and of course it is complicated. Eighty per cent of the
critical processes that make up our vital infrastructure
are owned by private actors. Engaging them is not a
choice, but a necessity. But many other actors, such as
semi-government bodies, play an important role as well.
In our approach, those critical providers, as we call them,
are themselves first and foremost responsible for the
continuity and resilience of the critical infrastructure
they own. The national Government provides legal and
policy frameworks and oversight and inspection.

There are some lessons that we drew from our
own national experiences in our own context. In the
Netherlands, we follow a general approach to the
protection of our critical infrastructure. This includes
the threat of terrorist attacks. By assessing the risks
of different types of threats in the same way, the risks
become comparable, and that makes it easier to prioritize.
With the help of the public and the private sectors, we
have compiled a complete list of critical infrastructure,
containing two categories of vital processes, A and B.
Disruption of A processes has greater consequences
than the disruption of B processes. That allows for
more effective and efficient allocation of means.

We also work with a counter-terrorism alert
system. If our intelligence services detect a serious
terrorist threat to a particular vital process, providers
and other stakeholders are immediately informed. At
that moment, predetermined, heightened security plans
are triggered to reduce the threat and limit the potential
effects of a terrorist attack.

That brings me to my third point, the need
for international cooperation. National efforts are
important, but a response to terrorist threats against
critical infrastructure can never be only national.
Critical infrastructure, such as airports, energy systems
and the Internet, are international by their very nature,
and therefore our response to threats in that regard
should be equally international.

In that spirit, last week my Government approved
our first international cyberstrategy. It outlines where
and how to cooperate with international partners
to ensure a free and open cyberdomain, safe from
terrorists. According to our Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Mr. Koenders, by cooperating in coalitions
with other countries, we can better counter the threats
we face. Security Council resolution 2341 (2017),
which the Netherlands co-sponsored, was drafted in
the same spirit. I commend Ukraine for facilitating the
unanimous adoption of resolution today.

As mentioned in the resolution, the first important
step towards an international response is greater sharing
of information and know-how. We have to be creative
and think outside of the box to get the right people
around the table. The Netherlands currently co-chairs
the Global Counter Terrorism Forum together with
Morocco, and we are very supportive of the initiative
launched in that Forum by the United States and Turkey
on the protection of soft targets. Its focus is broader than
only critical infrastructure, with a set of non-binding
good practices that will be produced and be relevant for
the United Nations and its Member States in our future
work on today's topic.

We must learn from our experiences to prevent
terrorist attacks against critical infrastructure as
much as possible. We must be well prepared in case an
unfortunate incident does occur. And, most important,
we must do all of that together. Terrorism knows no
boundaries; neither should our cooperation to fight
it. We should be better prepared. We should be better
protected. We should have stronger partnerships. We
should work better together.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands stands ready to
continue its cooperation with the United Nations and
its States Members in protecting our way of life from
terrorists. We will continue to be the Council's partner
in making the world a safer place.

