Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. James Swan, Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and Mr. Madeira for their informative briefings and for their work on the ground at this very challenging time. I warmly welcome Ambassador Osman, Permanent Representative of Somalia, to our meeting today. I join others in extending our deepest condolences to those who lost family members in Sunday's attack in Mogadishu or in other incidents in the country since our last meeting on Somalia (see S/2020/573). Somalia is now at a historical turning point thanks to positive developments in the dialogue and collaboration between the Federal Government and federal member states, improved security and economic conditions, and the preparations for upcoming elections. However, the country is still facing substantial insecurity and challenges resulting from the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and weather-related crises.On the matters under discussion today, I would like to share the following points. First, on the election process, we welcome the communique issued at the July meeting between the leaders of the Federal Government of Somalia and the federal member states. It calls for timely and credible elections acceptable to all Somali stakeholders. We also welcome the adoption of the amendments to the political parties law by the House of the People. Nevertheless, the threat of attacks and the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic have delayed preparations for the election and have made them more difficult. We support the election process and the implementation plan set out by the Government of Somalia and other stakeholders to ensure the participation of all people and political parties in elections. In that connection, we urge the Federal Government, federal member states and political parties to make further efforts to engage in inclusive dialogue to reach political consensus on the modalities and timing of the elections, including the political representation of women and minorities. We call on the United Nations and the international community to provide further technical assistance and necessary measures to protect Somali citizens and political parties on the road ahead. Secondly, we would like to stress the importance of national unity and reconciliation in Somalia as it moves forward. Given the recent positive developments, this is a precious time for the Federal Government of Somalia and the federal member states, especially Somaliland state, to work together in mutual trust and for the benefit of the Somali people. In that connection, we support the efforts of the Government and political leaders of Somalia to maintain a stable environment for dialogue. We therefore commend the recent consultative meeting in Djibouti between President Farmajo and the Somaliland President, Mr. Muse Bihi Abdi, and look forward to seeing their continued confidence-building efforts and specific follow-up actions, under the mediation of Djibouti and facilitation of the United States of America and the European Union. Thirdly, on the fight against the triple shock, Somalia continues facing a number of long-standing threats and challenges. The triple shock of desert locusts, floods and the COVID-19 pandemic has severely impacted socioeconomic gains, livelihoods, food security and the humanitarian footprint in the country. The consequences of the desert locusts and floods remain widespread and have affected at least 1.3. million people, of whom nearly a million are displaced and in need of humanitarian assistance. The risk of exponential COVID-19 infection also remains high across the country. Somalis need continued support to overcome these difficulties. We call on international partners to assist the Federal Government of Somalia in alleviating the socioeconomic impact of this triple threat. Fourthly, on resilience for security, we condemn the attacks by Al-Shabaab against Somali civilians, local security forces, as well as the United Nations and personnel and facilities of the African Union Mission in Somalia. The suicide car-bombing attack on the Elite Hotel in Mogadishu on Sunday killed 15 people and injured more than 20. In that connection, we call upon international partners to continue to support Somali security forces through training, equipment provision and capacity-building. It is also incumbent upon international partners and relevant parties to uphold their responsibilities to strengthen cooperation measures and to take all necessary security measures against Al-Shabaab in order to protect civilians, especially women and children. To that end, we commend the unceasing work and untiring efforts of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia. We reiterate our support for its mandate and are committed to working constructively with the United Nations, regional and international organizations and relevant parties to promote peace, stability and development in Somalia.
