Mr. Mukasa-Ssali (Uganda): We welcome the
opportunity to participate in the debate on the situation in
Burundi, a sister country torn by conflict and civil strife.

As the Council is well aware, the leaders of the
Great Lakes subregion have met on several occasions to
work out an acceptable and peaceful resolution to the
conflict in Burundi.

Throughout all these meetings, the leaders have
reiterated their opposition to resorting to unconstitutional
means to resolve the problems of Burundi and warned
that they would not accept any government that comes to
power through such means. Sadly, subsequent events in
Burundi did not occur in accordance with our
recommendations and advice, but instead the army moved
in to grab power from democratically elected leaders.

Uganda, as well as its sister States in the subregion,
unequivocally condemned the putschists in Burundi and
demanded a speedy return to constitutional governance.

The Security Council is also aware that we have
imposed sanctions on Burundi as a result of the coup. The
sanctions, however, are not meant to punish but rather to
encourage the leadership in Bujumbura to undertake
urgently measures aimed at restoring constitutional order

 

in the country. The sanctions are also aimed at encouraging
all parties to the conflict in Burundi to hold unconditional
negotiations within the framework of the Mwanza peace
process, reinforced by the Arusha peace initiative under the
auspices of Mwalimu Julius N yerere, as a first step towards
guaranteeing security and democracy for all the people of
Burundi. In this regard, the leadership in Burundi must,
first, restore and work with the national Parliament and,
secondly, lift the ban on and work with the various political
parties.

The unfortunate victims of the conflict in Burundi
have often times been innocent civilians caught in the
middle of this situation. Uganda condemns, therefore, in the
strongest terms the killing of innocent and unarmed
civilians. This, to us, is unacceptable. We demand that both
parties to the conflict halt immediately the killings and
massacres of innocent civilians.

The regional leaders have declared their readiness and
preparedness to cooperate fully with the United Nations to
make appropriate contributions towards the adoption of
measures aimed at avoiding a catastrophe in Burundi in the
event of further deterioration of the situation and to redress
tendencies that would aggravate the conflict in Burundi. In
this context, we would like to underscore the importance of
closer cooperation and better coordination between the
United Nations and the Organization of African Unity
(OAU), as well as with the countries of the region.

Finally, Uganda believes that the people of Burundi
must realize that they have to learn to be tolerant of each
other and to live together in harmony, as they all have a
right to live in Burundi and to fully participate in its
economic, social and political life as equal citizens. A
political, rather than military formula, will bring them
closer to that goal.

