Mr. Holliday (United States of America): We too
would like to extend our condolences and our thoughts
and prayers for the victims of the terrorist action in
Grozny, which killed President Kadyrov and others.
We look forward to working on a presidential
statement on that matter.

I would like to welcome Senior Minister Ana
Pessoa to New York. We would also like to thank
Ambassador Sharma for his presentation today and for
his outstanding work as the Secretary-General's
Special Representative at the head of the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET). His untiring efforts to promote political
and economic development in East Timor will have a
lasting effect on that new country.

As we stated in February, we agree with the
Secretary-General that UNMISET should be extended
to consolidate gains made during the past two years of
the Mission, and we thank the Secretary-General for
his revision of the components of the extended
Mission. Although we recognize that at this time an
UNMISET extension will increase stability in Timor-
Leste, we believe the peacekeeping mission should end
no later than May 2005, at which time the Government
should resume full responsibility for its own security
while continuing to receive support from elsewhere in
the United Nations system and from other members of
the international community.

The Government and the people of Timor-Leste
have made considerable strides towards self-
sufficiency. With further assistance from the
international donor community, United Nations
agencies and UNMISET, we hope that the Timorese
can increase public administrative capacity, develop
strong security institutions and establish a strong
judicial tradition with emphasis on human rights and
the rule of law. Given the current limited capacity of
Timor-Leste's public administration, we agree that
further support from UNMISET in the form of civilian
advisers will be necessary for the development of an
independent, functioning civil administration. We
expect that any assistance in that regard past May 2005
would be provided through normal bilateral and
multilateral donor support.

We were encouraged to learn that since the
Secretary-General's latest report (S/2004/333) was
published, the Government of Timor-Leste acted to
promulgate an organic law and disciplinary code for
the Timorese police and an organic law for the
Timorese defence forces. As we stated in February, the
Government of Timor-Leste should do its part to
nurture respect for the rule of law, and this action
moves the Government closer to that goal. We look
forward to hearing updates on the development of the
Timor-Leste police and defence forces, and we ask that
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
keep us informed of any new legislative and regulatory
governmental actions in defining the respective roles
and responsibilities of the Timorese security forces.

We commend bilateral donors that are providing
considerable assistance to Timor-Leste in the form of
police training. After UNMISET ends in May 2005, we
hope that those and other bilateral donors will continue
to provide any training and assistance that may be
required.

We commend the work of the Serious Crimes
Unit and underscore the usefulness of its role in
addressing the issue of accountability regarding the
human rights violations and atrocities committed in
East Timor in 1999. As with other elements within
UNMISET, we believe the Serious Crimes Unit should
maintain close adherence to its completion strategy,
ending investigations no later than November 2004 so
that it can conclude all its trials by no later than May
2005. The Secretary-General stated in his report that
the Serious Crimes Unit should focus resources in
order to complete trial and appellate litigation in a
timely manner. We urge all countries to cooperate fully
with the Serious Crimes Unit. In order to achieve
justice for all the victims of human rights abuses, the
international community and the United Nations should
consider an international truth commission as a means of
achieving accountability and, ultimately, reconciliation
in Timor-Leste by resolving outstanding cases.

We look forward to working with our Council
colleagues on a draft resolution to extend UNMISET.
We hope a mandate extension can be adopted later this
week.

