Mr. Petrella (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to state publicly my appreciation for the
professional, able and effective way in which you, Sir,
have presided this month over the work of the Council,
which has been so intensive and so fruitful.

I should like to offer a warm welcome to the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Georgia and thank him for
the important statement that he has just made to the
Security Council. I should also like to take this
opportunity to refer to the excellent bilateral relations of
friendship and cooperation between Argentina and
Georgia, which we are rightly proud of and pleased about.

We should like to pay tribute to the efforts made by
the Secretary-General and his Special Representative,
Mr. Liviu Bota, as well as to those of the Group of
Friends of the Secretary-General and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, in promoting the
stabilization of the situation in Abkhazia, Georgia, and
giving new impetus to the peace process led by the
United Nations.

We are pleased to note that the situation along the
ceasefire line has improved and that the parties are now
showing greater restraint. However, insecurity prevails in
the lower Gali region. The activity of terrorist groups is
intolerable, and in this atmosphere of insecurity, the
refugees and displaced persons hardly feel encouraged to
return home. Furthermore, the security of the mission is
still a serious cause for concern. As for the peace process,
the confidence-building measures, bilateral contacts at all
levels and cooperation between the parties should be
encouraged. In this connection, it is important that the
draft resolution encourage positive developments in
connection with the agreements arrived at in Athens and
Istanbul in October 1998 and June 1999 respectively, with

 

a View to enhancing confidence, improving security and
promoting cooperation.

However, in order to arrive at a settlement of the
conflict, political will is also needed so that a constructive
dialogue can begin and be maintained in the sprit of the
1994 Moscow Agreement. In this context, the forthcoming
elections in Abkhazia should be regarded as illegitimate, as
the draft resolution makes clear. We agree with the
Secretary-General's recommendation that the mandate of
the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia
(UNOMIG) be extended for a further six months.

In conclusion, we should like to extend our
congratulations to Mr. Bota and the UNOMIG personnel for
their important work, carried out under difficult and
dangerous circumstances. Recognition goes in particular to
Russia for its efforts as the facilitator.

