Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like first to welcome
Mr. David Shearer, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for South Sudan, and thank him for
providing a vivid picture of the situation on the ground.
Japan appreciates and supports his efforts to bring
peace to the people of South Sudan in a very difficult
environment. I would also like to thank Ambassador
Ciss for his updates and Ambassador Seck for his very
active chairmanship of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning
South Sudan.

Regrettably, we have been witnessing very
concerning incidents in South Sudan. These include
the ongoing violence across the country, attacks on
civilians - by the Sudan People's Liberation Army, for
example - continued access restrictions and famine.
A staggering 3.5 million people, nearly a third of the
population, have been displaced. Many of them are
women and children. We are also appalled by the killing
of humanitarian workers, with 14 deaths in 2017 alone.
Those brave humanitarian workers sought only to help
the South Sudanese people. The Government must
fulfil its primary responsibility to protect civilians.

On 23 March, the Security Council was united in
adopting presidential statement S/PRST/2017/4, calling
for five steps to be taken, including a permanent
ceasefire, humanitarian access and the removal of
obstacles to the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS) operations. It is very disappointing
that there has been no concrete action so far. Despite
having personally participated in the 25 March
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
summit, President Kiir has not yet announced a
unilateral ceasefire as agreed upon in its communique.
Japan urges all parties, including the Government,
to respond immediately and fully to the Presidential
Statement. In that connection, we take note of the South
Sudanese Government's recognition that an inclusive
national dialogue is necessary to improve the country's
security. Japan reiterates the importance of a genuinely
inclusive national dialogue and is ready to support the
efforts of the Government to that end.

Regional engagement is increasingly important in
sending a clear message to South Sudan. In addition
to bilateral efforts, last month saw visits by the
African Union (AU) High Representative and the AU
Commission Chairperson to South Sudan, the AU
Peace and Security Council communique, the IGAD
summit meeting, and President Mogae's meeting with
Riek Machar. We welcome those efforts and encourage
the region to strengthen them. We also appreciate and
support the neighbouring countries that are hosting
nearly 1.7 million South Sudanese refugees.

Japan welcomes the follow-up report of the
special investigation on the Juba violence last July
(S/2017/328). We are encouraged that UNMISS has
enhanced its capabilities to protect civilians, including
through more robust patrols, and that it has bolstered
contingency planning and staff safety, as we heard
from Mr. Shearer today. There is progress, but it is still
not sufficient. It must be accompanied by meaningful
efforts by the Government. Japan reiterates its call for
the Government's full cooperation with UNMISS on
the implementation of its mandate, including on the
early deployment of the regional protection force.

In conclusion, the Council remains united in
backing commitments of the AU, IGAD and the
Secretary-General to collectively support the peace
process. We believe the Secretary-General's continued
involvement is particularly important if we are to
build on the 29 January joint press statement. Japan
remains firm in its commitment to peace and stability
in South Sudan.

