Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): It is an especially
great honour for me, Mr. Minister, that you are
presiding over this meeting today, because I know how
much Belgium has been assisting us on the African
continent.

My task today is to very briefly and informally
recall the mission that I had the honour to lead,
together with the Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom. There will be a report that will give
2
all the necessary details about what happened. But I
thought that I could perhaps take a few minutes to give
the Council my own impressions of what took place.

One of the most useful things - something that
is always useful when it happens - was the fact that
we had significant time with the African Union (AU) in
Addis Ababa. We had meetings with Commissioner
Djinnit, and an even longer meeting with President
Konare, Chairman of the Commission, and exchanged
views in detail on issues that are before the Council.
Speaking on behalf of my colleagues, I must say that
we found their advice very useful in determining how
they viewed some of the issues that they deal with on a
day-by-day basis.

We also had a formal working meeting between
the Security Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council. That in itself was also very
significant, because we were able to exchange views
on a variety of issues that come before the Security
Council and that also come before the African Union
Council in Addis Ababa. At the end of that meeting, we
agreed on an outcome. We will very soon write to you,
Mr. President, to ask that that outcome be reproduced
as an official document of the Security Council so that
it can be referred to in the future.

Two things stand out in that agreement. One was
the desire of both Councils to see the exchange of
views between the Security Council and the African
Union Peace and Security Council happen every year,
because of the issues that come before the Security
Council that most of the time, originate from Addis
Ababa. We therefore felt that it would be very useful if
we could have a meeting together once a year.

The other thing that was important for those of us
in Africa was an understanding that on peace and
security matters the African Union always acts on
behalf of the international community. It is therefore
important that there should be an exchange of views
between the two Councils to make sure that whatever
Africa is engaging in is to the benefit and within the
intentions of the international community, in particular
the Security Council.

The other issue that we discussed was one that
arose during the South African presidency in March,
namely, a way to explore how the United Nations
could, on a case-by-case basis, which was the phrase
that was used, be able to assist with resources, in
particular in cases where the African Union is acting on
07-39489
behalf of the Security Council. That is a very difficult
issue because it involves rules that are not set in the
Security Council, but rather next door in the General
Assembly, about how assessed contributions can be
handled or used. But we thought that the fact that we
have begun to engage on this issue was extremely
important.

There were a few things that we wanted to follow
up concerning that issue. One thing which I must
mention is that there was talk during our visit to Addis
Ababa about the fact that the mandate of the Africa
Union Mission in the Sudan would expire at the end of
this week. I saw yesterday that in fact, as promised by
the African Union Peace and Security Council, the
Union's mandate in the Sudan has been extended for
another six months. That shows that some of the issues
that we discussed and thought should be followed up
have indeed been taken up.

We then proceeded to Khartoum, where we of
course met with the Foreign Minister and senior
officials, including the three governors of the Darfur
province. Again, in my personal view, I found the
senior officials in the Sudan to be very forthcoming
and unambiguous in their acceptance of the hybrid
force. They were also willing to engage and exchange
views. We felt that was a very important positive step
with regard to the situation in Darfur. Indeed, President
Al-Bashir himself confirmed the same thing to us when
we met with him later in our visit. We therefore felt
that this was at least a major breakthrough, in that the
issue that is now left as a challenge for us is
implementation.

I would like to raise an idea that we informally
talked about on the plane, namely, that we now need a
timeline about who is going to do what. As I said, the
AU has already followed up on one of their
responsibilities. But we need a timeline that spells out
what the Security Council will do, what the AU will do
and what the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
will do. I hope that this issue will be visited at an
appropriate time.

Finally, we also visited Accra, where we met with
President Kufuor of Ghana, Chairman of the African
Union. We were very honoured that the Foreign
Minister of Ghana spent a long time with us engaging
on the details of the issues and offering the views of
the African Union. They also affirmed to us that they
viewed the agreement on the hybrid mission in the
07-39489

Sudan to be a very positive thing for the African Union
as a whole. They hope to take up that issue this
weekend when the African Union Summit meets again
in Ghana. The President of Ghana was also pleased to
meet with us. We also got his views on the issues.

All in all, I must say two things. For me as the
representative of South Africa, it was a tremendous
honour to work with my colleague the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom as co-leader. I
will always value this experience, especially as
someone who is in the Council temporarily. This is one
of those things that I will take away when I leave here.

The other thing is that I also want to pay tribute
to our Secretariat friends who accompanied us. I am in
awe of what they did. They woke up long before I did,
and they interpreted for me where the language was
very difficult. I just want to be on the record to say that
we are in awe of the help that they gave us. We thank
them very much. It made our trip very nice.

