Miss Durrant (Jamaica): My delegation wishes to
thank you, Sir, for having convened this meeting on
Burundi as part of the Council's focus on Africa under your
presidency. We also wish to thank the Secretary-General for
his important introductory statement.

I wish to take this opportunity to express Jamaica's
appreciation to former President Mandela for his decision
to take on the onerous task of Facilitator for the Arusha
peace process. We wish to thank him for his insightful
analysis, in which he emphasized the reasons why the
situation in Burundi must be of concern to us all. At the
same time, I would be remiss if I did not pay tribute to the
late Mwalimu Julius Nyerere for the tremendous efforts he
made to bring peace to Burundi.
As the draft resolution on which the Council will take
action at this meeting reflects the sentiments of my
delegation, I wish simply to highlight some points. First,
this meeting sends a positive signal from the Security
Council of our support for former President Mandela and
of our willingness to embrace his initiatives to move the
Arusha peace process forward. As we have heard from
him, there have been some positive developments which
could lay the groundwork for a peaceful solution.
Secondly, it recognizes the important role in Burundi of
the Secretary-General, his representatives for the Great
Lakes region and the United Nations in general. Thirdly,
it stresses the importance of national dialogue leading to
national reconciliation, and emphasizes the need for the
immediate cessation of hostilities.

Against that background, my delegation welcomes
the internal consultations which have already begun in
earnest. We support President Mandela's determination
that the process should be made as inclusive as possible,
and we are pleased to learn of his offer to visit Burundi.

The reports of renewed violence, including attacks
on civilians, must compel us to act decisively and quickly
in resolving the conflict. We must emphasize that there
can be no viable military solution. We therefore urge all
parties to work towards a peaceful settlement.

The appalling humanitarian situation prevailing in
Burundi must be the focus of immediate attention. Only
last week, the Council was reminded by the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees of the plight of
refugees and internally displaced persons in the Great
Lakes region, largely fuelled by the ongoing conflicts in
Burundi, Rwanda and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. And, as the Secretary-General reminded us, some
500,000 persons from Burundi have been affected in this
manner.

In this regard, the international community owes a
debt of gratitude to the Governments of the region,
particularly that of the United Republic of Tanzania,
which have had to bear the socio-economic burden of
hosting refugees from the conflict in Burundi.

The status and protection of humanitarian workers in
conflict situations must be given equal attention. It must
be made clear to all parties that it is in their interest that
humanitarian assistance reaches vulnerable civilians,
particularly women and children, who are the real victims
of the conflict.

We are deeply concerned about the recent murders
of members of the staffs of the United Nations Children's
 

Fund and of the World Food Programme, and we urge that
the perpetrators be speedily brought to justice.

Due recognition must be given to the fact that the
crisis in Burundi is deeply intertwined with the general
situation in the Great Lakes region. My delegation believes
that what is really needed is a strategy that will address the
crisis in the Great Lakes region in a comprehensive and
holistic manner. We hope that the upcoming plenary
meeting of heads of State or Government within the
framework of the Arusha peace talks will yield positive
results.

My delegation is keenly aware that, for a durable
peace to take hold, it is essential that the root causes of
insecurity be addressed. We therefore support the call for
the long-term economic needs of Burundi and its
neighbours to be tackled with the support of the
international community, as a part of the peace process.

Finally, it is our sincere hope that, under the inspired
and wise leadership of President Mandela, the parties to the
conflict will demonstrate their commitment to bring peace,
security and democracy to the people of Burundi.

