Mr. Baja (Philippines): Madam President, I wish
to thank you for convening this public meeting on
Timor-Leste, a neighbour in the region, at a time when
that country is once again at an important juncture in
its process of establishing a democratic, secure and
viable State. I also wish to thank Assistant Secretary-
General Annabi for his briefing today on the drawdown
process of the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor (UNMISET), and on how the mandate
given to the follow-on mission, the United Nations
Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL), will be
implemented.

While appreciating the significant gains that have
been achieved through the determination and resolve of
the Timorese people with the support and contribution
of the international community in the nation-building
process of Timor-Leste, we share the Secretary-
General's conclusion that more remains to be done, and
that further generous support will be indispensable if
the remarkable gains achieved so far are to be
sustained and built upon in the future.

On 28 April 2005, the Security Council adopted
by consensus resolution 1599 (2005) authorizing
UNOTIL as the successor mission to UNMISET. That
change in the character of the United Nations presence
in Timor-Leste, from peacekeeping to a transitional
special political mission, is a recognition of the
significant strides that have been made in establishing
a generally calm, stable and peaceful security
environment in Timor-Leste and of the important
political achievements in that country.

Those political achievements include the
successful holding of local elections in three eastern
districts, progress in institution-building - particularly
the endorsement of Timor-Leste's ombudsman for
human rights and justice - and further improvement
in the relations between Timor-Leste and Indonesia -
such as the signing of the Provisional Agreement on
the Borderline and the establishment of the Truth and
Friendship Commission. In that connection, my
delegation believes there is ample opportunity for
complementarity between the work of the Truth and
Friendship Commission and the Commission of
Experts appointed by the Secretary-General to
effectively address the need for justice in connection
with the serious human rights violations committed in
Timor-Leste in 1999.

As one of the contributors of personnel to
UNMISET, my country stands ready to continue to
provide the support necessary for the implementation
of the mandate of UNOTIL. We welcome the
Secretary-General's comprehensive identification of
the areas where UNOTIL resources will be applied to
build the capacity of the public institutions of Timor-
Leste in the areas of justice, human rights, national
police and other aspects of public administration. My
delegation also welcomes the significant role of the
various agencies of the United Nations system that are
now providing support to Timor-Leste, and that will
continue to do so in the transition period, alongside
UNOTIL, for an even greater role as Timor-Leste
moves on to its sustainable development framework.
However, my delegation notes two of the Secretary-
General's observations, which have also been pointed
out by Assistant Secretary-General Annabi.

First, it will be necessary for the international
community to seek alternative ways to meet a number
of important requirements in implementing the
mandate of UNOTIL. In that regard, my delegation
welcomes the steps that the Secretary-General has
proposed in his report to ensure that continuity is
preserved in important and critical tasks whose
conclusion will occur after the end of UNMISET's
mandate.

Secondly, beyond the support provided through
UNOTIL, further international assistance will be
essential to ensure sustainable progress. In particular,
my delegation notes the Secretary-General's concern
regarding the need for assistance to promote the
stability of the country and for contingency
arrangements to secure the safety of United Nations
personnel.

In that regard, my delegation would like to
request that, in its reports to the Council, UNOTIL
point to developments in the consultations to be
undertaken to secure bilateral and multilateral
assistance with regard to the two concerns of the
Secretary-General that I have just mentioned.

Finally, my delegation also wishes to
acknowledge and commend the tireless efforts of
Special Representative Hasegawa, together with his
staff at UNMISET, as well as the support they have
given to the leaders and the people of Timor-Leste as
they overcome the daunting challenges of Timor-
Leste's nation-building.

