Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): Mr. President,
at the outset, I would like to extend to you my most
heartfelt congratulations on your appointment as the
new head of the Libyan delegation. I thank the Libyan
presidency for convening this important debate of the
Security Council. I welcome the participation of
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon; the Chairman of the
African Union-United Nations panel, Mr. Romano
Prodi; the Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union, Mr. Ramtane Lamamra; the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of South Africa, Ms. Nkosazana
Dlamini Zuma; and other distinguished individuals
from the African Union. I thank them for their
contributions. We align ourselves with the statement to
be delivered by Ambassador Abelardo Moreno
Fernandez of Cuba on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

09-2716]

As the highest body of the United Nations
entrusted with the primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security, the
Security Council has, for the past 60 years, played an
indispensable role in resolving international conflicts
and disputes, especially on the African continent. The
fact that half of the 63 United Nations peacekeeping
missions have been deployed in Africa since 1948 may
reflect the unique relationship between the United
Nations and Africa in the area of peacekeeping.
Endowed with their distinct knowledge of and
experience in tackling issues of their own region, the
African Union and African subregional organizations
have many comparative advantages in dealing with
conflict situations in Africa, while, as defined by the
Charter of the United Nations, the Security Council
plays a leading role in maintaining international peace
and security. In the face of the prevalence of threats to
peace and security in Africa, enhancing the partnership
and cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union has been and continues to be
imperative.

The transition from the Economic Community of
West African States Mission in Liberia to the United
Nations Mission in Liberia, the deployment of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur, and the upcoming establishment of a United
Nations peacekeeping mission in Somalia as the
follow-on force to the African Union Mission in
Somalia, the Security Council's adoption of resolution
1809 (2008), the meeting with the AU Peace and
Security Council last April (see S/PV.5868) and the
prompt establishment of the African Union-United
Nations panel last September all testify not only to the
necessity but also to the viability of this cooperation.

By unanimously adopting resolution 1809 (2008),
the Council demonstrated a strong determination to
elevate its partnership with the African Union to a
higher level. We strongly support the Council's and the
African Union's shared objective of enhancing the
predictability, sustainability and flexibility of financing
regional organizations operating under a United
Nations mandate. We also support the ongoing effort to
search for modalities to strengthen the relationship
between the Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council as well as between the United Nations
Secretariat and the African Union Commission.

Recent developments in conflict areas in Africa
have shown that much remains to be decided if lasting

peace and stability are to be achieved on the continent.
Both the successes and failures of United Nations-led
peacekeeping operations in Africa have highlighted the
importance of enhancing the ability of the African
Union to carry out United Nations-mandated
peacekeeping operations. It is noteworthy that, while
peacekeepers in Africa account for 75 per cent of the
total number of United Nations peacekeepers deployed
worldwide, only 40 per cent are drawn from African
troop contributors. As the African Union-United
Nations panel report indicates, the principle of African
ownership should be further enhanced. To that end,
implementation of the lO-Year Capacity-Building
Programme for the African Union approved at the 2005
World Summit should be expedited.

We commend the United Nations panel for its
report issued last December, which contains many
useful recommendations, especially those relating to
capacity-building, logistical capacity funding,
financing and division of responsibility. While
awaiting further assessment, we support the widely
shared opinion that, in defining the division of
responsibility, the creation of the perception that the
United Nations is subcontracting peacekeeping to the
African Union should be avoided. That is imperative in
order to bring into full play the African Union's
comparative strategies, enhance its capacities, avoid
overlapping and ensure the sustainability of the
partnership between our two organizations.

Finally, as on any other continent, but more so,
the root causes of conflict in Africa are political and
social antitheses, violations of human rights, absolute
poverty and, very often, foreign interference and
aggression, which must be addressed in a coherent and
comprehensive manner.

It is the view of my delegation that the division of
responsibility among United Nations bodies in
cooperation with the African Union in order to
eliminate those root causes could also be clarified.

