Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America): First
of all, I would like to express our solidarity, sympathy
and support to the people of China and Burma on their
losses and suffering as a result of recent natural
disasters. Secondly, I would like to thank you,
Mr. Foreign Secretary, for your leadership in
organizing this Security Council debate on the
important topic of post-conflict peacebuilding.

A good metaphor for the immediate post-conflict
period is the so-called golden hour - the period
immediately after a person suffers a severe trauma and
during which, if he or she receives treatment, the
chances of recovery are much greater than if help
comes later. If we can find better ways to improve
people's lives in the golden hour after a conflict ends
or as territory begins to be stabilized in a conflict, we
can dramatically improve the efficiency and success of
later stabilization and reconstruction efforts.

We believe that the Peacebuilding Commission,
which is less than 2 years old, could ultimately play an
important role in United Nations peacebuilding, by
helping to marshal the necessary resources during this
golden hour and subsequently ensuring that
peacebuilding is sustainable. As the representative of
France stated, the working methods of the
Peacebuilding Commission need to be strengthened to
make it as effective as possible.

I would like to say a few words about the three
key gaps identified in the United Kingdom's concept
note as hampering international efforts for stabilization
and building sustainable peace.

The first is the need for strong leadership on the
ground. It has frequently been noted that successful
implementation of Council mandates must involve a
huge number of United Nations, regional and other
international-community actors. Leadership on the
ground requires excellent coordination. The role of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, who
must have a clear mandate with the necessary
authorities and resources, is critical.

We support ongoing work to ensure proper
integration of United Nations missions. The Special
Representative will need training and support in
promoting an integrated and coordinated approach to
promoting stability that draws upon all the resources of
the United Nations system. The United Nations
leadership should take advantage of the Peacebuilding
Commission's ability to convene all stakeholders and
promote an integrated strategic vision in tackling
threats to stability.

The second gap is an inability to rapidly deploy
sufficient civilian capacity. We agree that skilled
civilians, such as police officers, judges, relief
workers, administrators and other civilian experts, are
as important as troops during the golden hour. We
therefore urge Member States to build up capacity for
deployment of civilians with the relevant areas of
expertise necessary for sustainable peacebuilding. We

have been working on this effort in the Office of the
Coordinator for Reconstruction and Stabilization
through ongoing work to prepare for post-conflict work
more than 4,000 deployable civilians, who would be
available to join international efforts as appropriate.
Just as critically, we need to devise ways rapidly to
train local personnel and build host-nation State
institutions to carry out those functions as soon as
possible.

Third is the need for rapid and flexible funding.
Simply attracting adequate financial resources is often
an enormous challenge for the international community
in this field. We must recognize that to intervene
without sufficient resources is to court failure. We
stand ready to explore various ways of streamlining
and improving these mechanisms, including the
Peacebuilding Fund. Also, we must fully utilize the
surge of resources during an international civilian/
military operation to ensure that reconstruction,
stabilization and development can later be sustained
with more modest levels of donor assistance.

In addition to the three key gaps identified in the
concept paper, I would like to highlight several
additional issues that need to be taken into account in
order to produce success.

As the international community engages in a
post-conflict situation, a compact should exist between
local leaders and the international community, but for
those compacts to be productive, they should consist of
a clear articulation of goals, priorities and benchmarks
for both sides, and a review process. The international
community must do better in building institutions for
security and the rule of law, particularly police forces
that can be trusted by all local communities and
factions, and in carrying out the decommissioning,
demobilization and reintegration programmes with a
more robust process for reintegrating former
combatants.

Peacebuilding strategies should build capacity in
other local institutions, and priority should be placed
on creating the ability of local leaders to manage
public finance. Additional focus should be given to
energizing the private sector, especially removing
obstacles to the creation of local businesses that can
produce goods and services to meet local needs - that
is, to jump-start the private economy, not just engage
in reconstruction contracting.
We must take into account the regional
dimensions of conflicts, which often require
engagement to preclude local parties from receiving
support from neighbouring countries or creating
sanctuaries in their territories, and to leverage an
environment conducive to the success of the
stabilization effort.

Peacebuilding requires the international
community to engage as long as needed but to act in
ways that encourage increasing shifts to self-reliance
by building and using local capacity, and, as
Mr. Brahimi said, by getting itself out of a job as soon
as possible.

The international community can do better in
addressing peacebuilding challenges. We must resolve
to develop the kind of peacebuilding capacities that are
required to fulfil our mandate to advance international
peace and security and to improve the prospects for
success in post-conflict situations.

