The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of the following
countries to participate in this meeting: Armenia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Canada, Colombia, Croatia, Cyprus,
the Czech Republic, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Germany, Greece,
Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Malaysia, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro,
Morocco, Myanmar, the Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Pakistan, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sri Lanka,
the Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, Turkey, Uganda and Uruguay.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict; Mr. Anthony
Lake, Executive Director of UNICEF; and Mr. Alhaji
Babah Sawaneh.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2014/l49, which contains the text ofa draft resolution
submitted by Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Canada, Chad, Chile, Croatia, the Czech
Republic, Cyprus, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Italy, Jordan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,

Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Poland,
the Republic of Korea, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America.

I also wish to draw the attention ofCouncil members
to document S/2014/l44, which contains a letter dated
1 March 2014 from the Permanent Representative of
Luxembourg to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.

I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and I now give him
the floor.

