Mr. Bermudez Alvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me at the outset to express our
gratitude to the presidency of Peru for having organized
this debate on triangular cooperation in the context of
peacekeeping operations, as well as for having invited
Uruguay to participate in it.

We wish you and your delegation every success,
Mr. President, in leading the Council during this month
of July.

I also thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Peace Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix; the Force
Commander of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, Lieutenant
General Dennis Gyllensporre; and the Senior Fellow
at the Brian Urquhart Center for Peace Operations
of the International Peace Institute, Ms. Alexandra
Novosseloff, for their briefings. We have also taken
careful note of the statements delivered by members of
the Council and those troop- and police-contributing
countries (TCCs/PCCs) that have spoken before us.

I wish to reaffirm Uruguay's commitment to the
United Nations peacekeeping system and peacekeeping
operations. Our country has already deployed more
than 50,000 troops to more than 20 operations
around the world in our long history as a troop- and
police-contributing country. As of today, Uruguay's
contribution of troops places our country as the main
contributor from the Americas and very close to being
among the top 20 in the world. That effort, which has
been sustained for decades, has afforded our country a
very rich experience in this field.

Cooperation among the Security Council, the
Secretariat and troop- and police-contributing
countries - known as triangular cooperation - is not
a new concept. On the contrary, it has been a regular
element of the deliberations of the United Nations since
at least 1990, almost 30 years ago. It is not my intention
to reiterate concepts that have already been mentioned
by delegations that have spoken before me, but I do
wish to at least emphasize that there are a number of
precedents on this topic - documents and initiatives
emanating from the Security Council itself and from
the General Assembly. Among those precedents, I
should like to mention the Brahimi report of the Panel
on United Nations Peace Operations (S/2000/809)
of 2000; the Capstone Doctrine report of 2001; the
report of the High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations (see S/2015/446) of 2015; the New Horizon
initiative of 2009; and the Secretary-General's Action
for Peacekeeping (A4P) initiative of 2018.

At the Security Council level, we note the creation
of the Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations
in 2001, the adoption of resolution 1353 (2001) in the
same year, presidential statement S/PRST/2015/26 of
31 December 2015 and the update to note 507 on the
Council's working methods (S/2017/507, annex). At
the General Assembly level, since 2010 the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations has dedicated
a section of its reports to triangular cooperation.
Moreover, those broad efforts, based on theoretical
discussions, have been accompanied by the creation
of various mechanisms to bring triangular cooperation
into practice.

However, in spite of all those precedents, there
remains a shared perception among the Security Council,
the Secretariat and troop- and police-contributing
countries that the current consultations fall short of
expectations and are yet to reach their full potential.
As we said earlier, although the topic of triangular
cooperation has regularly formed part of our debates
for several years, we wish to underscore the greater
importance today more than ever of improving those
mechanisms, given the particular challenges faced by
peacekeeping missions today.

We have reached the point at which peacekeeping
operations are working in increasingly complex and
changing operational environments and facing threats
of all kinds. Peacekeepers require a high level of
preparation and training for the various mandated tasks
and in the use ofmore sophisticated equipment and new
technologies. Greater efficiency and effectiveness are
also being demanded of peacekeeping operations while
the budgets allocated to finance those operations are
being reduced year after year and the Organization faces
serious problems in making timely reimbursements to
troop- and police-contributing countries.

In Uruguay's view, addressing these challenges
in the current context requires strong triangular
cooperation among the Council, the Secretariat and
troop- and police-contributing countries. In that
regard, we believe that first-hand information and
experience, as well as the perspectives of countries
whose personnel are deployed in conflict zones, are of
great use to the Security Council in its process to better
understand the situation and consider the opportunities
and threats arising on the ground. Furthermore, we
should not underestimate the importance of having a
broad base of support for the mandates approved by
the Security Council, particularly taking into account
the characteristics of the new tasks that have been
incorporated into those mandates, which are more
complex and involve more robust rules of engagement,
such as in the case of the protection of civilians.

Allow me to very briefly share some ideas that
my country believes could contribute to improving the
quality of triangular cooperation.

During our participation as a non-permanent
member of the Security Council in 2016 and 2017, we
had the opportunity to develop an initiative proposed
by New Zealand that consisted of convening, on the
part of the penholder, an informal meeting among
troop- and police- contributing countries, members of
the Council and the Secretariat well in advance of the
renewal of a mandate. That informal format, with the
combined presence of diplomatic delegates and military
and police advisers, has been proven to foster a more
fluid exchange among stakeholders and is a suitable
complement to the formal meetings with TCCs/PCCs
organized by the Security Council. We believe that this
practice, which we understand continues to be used,
albeit sporadically, should be more systematized in the
work of the Security Council, for example through an
update to note 507 working methods, which contains a
section dedicated to this topic.

The Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations
is also a viable platform for strengthening triangular
cooperation through discussions on specific issues,
such as the protection of civilians, the security
of peacekeeping personnel, the use of technology
or environmental management in peacekeeping
operations, among others. The Secretariat, particularly
through its Department of Peace Operations, also has a
key role to play in convening meetings with members
of the Security Council and TCCs/PCCs as and when
needed, for example in the context of strategic reviews
of missions or when there are abrupt changes in an
operational environment.

Finally, within the scope of the General Assembly,
the Special Committee for Peacekeeping Operations
constitutes a useful body that brings together the
three actors of triangular cooperation and from which
recommendations and political directives can be issued
on the topic.

In short, and with this I will conclude my speech,
the strengthening of triangular cooperation should be
in the interest of the three parties given that they will
benefit from enhanced dialogue, which in turn will have
a positive impact on the efficiency and effectiveness of
peacekeeping operations.

The meeting rose at 5.40 pm.
