Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me to thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, Mr. Ivan Simonovic,
Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights and
Mr. John Ging, Director of the Coordination and
Response Division of the United Nations Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, for their
comprehensive briefings.

The crisis in Ukraine has created an extremely
difficult humanitarian situation for Ukrainians.
Thousands have been forced from their homes and into
exile in other areas. Furthermore, more than 1 million
people in Ukraine are in dire need of humanitarian
assistance. We are therefore compelled to achieve a
positive, peaceful settlement that takes into account the
interests of all parties puts an end to military actions.
Those actions, in addition to other security challenges,
continue to hamper the work of humanitarian
organizations and stability in Ukraine.

Jordan is increasingly concerned about the
deteriorating humanitarian situation in Ukraine,
including the effects of the random shelling of civilian
areas. In the current situation, the first priority must
be the protection of civilians, mitigating their suffering
through urgent measures to assist displaced persons
and Ukrainian refugees and supporting basic services,
particularly in the health sector, which has suffered
enormously as a result of the crisis in Ukraine.

Furthermore, pressure must be brought to bear on
the parties to the conflict, particularly the separatists,
to compel them to respect the rules of international
humanitarian law and human rights law and to cease
all violations thereof. The current divisions among
Ukrainians as a result of such violations and breaches
may lead to a point of no return in the matter of Ukraine.
That serves the interest of no party whatsoever and
would have long-term negative effects on security and
stability in the region.

Jordan appreciates the limited improvement in the
security situation in eastern Ukraine and the ceasefire
being respected in some regions. We stress the need
for an end to all confrontation in eastern Ukraine.
In that regard, we emphasize the need for all parties
must uphold their responsibilities under the Minsk
agreements and translate those agreements into facts
on the ground.

My country underscores the importance of the
ongoing meetings under the Normandy format in
order to implement the agreements, including a full
ceasefire, the withdrawal of heavy weaponry and the
completion of prisoner exchanges, through cooperation
with the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe and the working groups to be set up by the
Trilateral Contact Group. We consider it necessary to
to make additional efforts at this crucial stage aimed at
resolving the crisis in Ukraine, especially in the light
of the building blocks available to make progress on a

political solution.

Jordan supports the efforts of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) and other international humanitarian
organizations, including the International Committee of
the Red Cross. We call on all parties to lift all obstacles
in order to ensure access by those organizations to the
areas requiring assistance.

Furthermore, we urge support for the strategic
response plan for 2015 set forth by OCHA to ensure
humanitarian assistance to the people in need. We stress
that such organizations will be unable to carry out their
humanitarian work without proper political support
from all of the parties to the conflict, in addition to
the necessary international financial support for such
assistance. We call on the Government of Ukraine to
continue implementing the human rights strategy it
has developed and to continue drafting the legislation
necessary to protect all of its citizens.

In conclusion, Jordan believes that the current
positive environment must be used to advantage,
following last month's Minsk meeting. We must ensure
the space for a comprehensive political solution in
Ukraine that serve to preserve its sovereignty and
territorial integrity and bring together all parts of
Ukrainian society.

