Mr. Mikser (Estonia): I would like to start by
thanking Ukraine for organizing this very timely
discussion today.

Estonia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
We are also a sponsor of resolution 2341 (2017),
on the protection of critical infrastructure from
terrorist attacks.

Our common goal is to make sure that security
is not a luxury item; it must rather be a commodity
available to everyone. Even though the terrorist threat
in Estonia has remained low, we have been and will be
deeply affected by acts of terrorism both in our region
and further afield. Estonia therefore remains committed
to our common efforts in the fight against terrorism.

Terrorism is an alarmingly increasing phenomenon,
both in scope and in geography. Over the past year,
we have seen a series of horrific acts of terror all over
the world, including in our region, Europe. Several
of these attacks have been committed against critical
infrastructure. We all remember the heinous attacks
on the Brussels and Istanbul airports, where many
innocent lives were lost. Indeed, objects of critical
infrastructure - such as banks, telecommunications,
water and energy supply, transport and emergency
services - are attractive targets for terrorists. The
vulnerability of critical infrastructure is exacerbated
by its increasing dependence on information and
communication technologies in an increasingly
interlinked world. Attacks against those objects,
including cyberattacks, could therefore result in serious
damage and loss of life.

Estonia knows what it means to be the target of
a large-scale cyberattack. In 2007, our preparedness
and swift action prevented major damage to our
infrastructure. However, the cyberattacks against
Estonia that year clearly highlighted the importance
of tackling cybersecurity as part of our national
security architecture.

One key word in addressing this threat is resilience.
In terms of critical infrastructure, resilience requires
the close involvement of the private sector, which often
owns and operates these vital services. In some areas,
such as banking, cybersecurity has become an integral
part of operations, but a similar degree of attention to
cybersecurity should be given to other sectors. It should
also be understood that, as Governments, we cannot
expect information-sharing to be a one-way street from
companies to Governments. To build trust, enhance
security and share best practices as well as information
about possible threat vectors, Governments must also
share information with the private sector.

In addition to public-private cooperation, civil
society plays an extremely important role in building
resilience. In order to effectively strengthen our
societies, Governments have to communicate potential
threats to critical infrastructure to their citizens and to
ensure their readiness to cope with the consequences
of possible attacks. One major contributor to our
successful handling of the 2007 cyberattacks was
horizontal cooperation between information security
experts. This led to the establishment of the Cyber
Defense Unit of the Estonian Defence League - an
innovative model for the involvement of volunteers in
national cyberdefence.

It is crucial for countries to map out their critical
infrastructure and cross-border dependencies in
order to strengthen their national cybersecurity and
resilience. No country can face the full spectrum of
cyberthreats alone, and international cooperation is
crucial to preventing worst-case scenarios. We therefore
encourage countries further to share knowledge
and contribute to capacity-building across borders,
supporting wider acknowledgement of cybersecurity
threats and their mitigation.

Estonia has extensive experience in leading and
contributing to various cybersecurity and digital
development capacity-building efforts globally. We
will continue to share our best practices and lessons
learned. Here at the United Nations, we are proud to
contribute to cybersecurity through the United Nations
Group of Governmental Experts on Developments in
the Field of Information and Telecommunications in the
Context of International Security.

Cooperation that is all-inclusive is the foundation
of resilience. This ensures that the critical players in
cybersecurity - Governments, militaries, intelligence,
critical infrastructure operators and key private-sector
players - are fully informed, prepared and sufficiently
capable of handling large-scale cyberattacks.

I would like to reiterate the importance of the
Budapest Convention on Cybercrime. The Budapest
Convention is the only binding international instrument
dealing with cybercrime, and it also covers the use
of the Internet for terrorist purposes. The effective
implementation of the Cybercrime Convention would
ensure that national legislations provide appropriate
sanctions for cases involving serious attacks, including
terrorist ones, on information-technology-based or
general information-technology infrastructure.

Estonia calls on every country to adopt policies,
strategies and regulations that help to achieve and
maintain an open, resilient, secure and peaceful
cyberspace. We must meet the highest standards of due
diligence in the development and use of information
and communications technology.

Prevention is the only means of preventing
radicalization and recruitment into terrorist
organizations altogether, as well as of eliminating the
terrorist threat to critical infrastructure. We support the
Secretary-General's Plan of Action to Prevent Violent
Extremism. The prevention of future threats should be
given the highest priority in every country.

In line with this, I would like to commend the
Secretary-General's initiative to consolidate and
streamline United Nations counter-terrorism structures
while improving their transparency. We hope that the
new structure will also focus on the prevention of
violent extremism as its main objective.

