Mr. Park In-kook (Republic of Korea): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing today's
debate on the third annual report of the Peacebuilding
Commission (S/2009/444) and giving us this
opportunity to address the Security Council.

As was articulated by many voices during the
General Assembly debate on this subject last week, the
third session of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
was a rewarding period. During its session, the
Commission focused on, and showed notable progress
in, the areas of enhancing global awareness of
peacebuilding activities, mobilizing resources and
developing strategies to coordinate the rule of law in
post-conflict countries. However, we also faced a
series of challenges during this period, most notably
the global financial crisis, food security issues and
political turmoil in certain agenda countries. How to
harness the progress we made and how to tackle those
challenges will be subjects that require our close
attention during the upcoming 2010 review process.

The Peacebuilding Commission is a subsidiary
body of the General Assembly and the Security
Council. For the Commission to function and carry out
its mandate effectively, close linkage with, and strong
political support from, the Security Council is
fundamental. In turn, the lessons learned and the
experiences that the Commission has accumulated in
the field will provide valuable advisory inputs for the
Security Council's discussions. I appreciate the support
that the Security Council has shown to the Commission
to date, but at the same time I would also like to echo
the view expressed during the General Assembly
debate last week that the Commission is still
underutilized considering the potential it has shown. I
would like to share my observations as Vice-Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission regarding enhancing
the linkage between the Peacebuilding Commission
and the Security Council.

First, peacekeeping missions need to further
embody early peacebuilding elements in their mandates
and operations, considering that one of key elements of
success in peacekeeping activities is to deliver peace
dividends and bring about immediate and tangible
impacts on the ground.

On early peacebuilding, the PBC has its own
unique added value to contribute, and it would be
advisable to arrange for the Commission to provide its
input to discussions on peacekeeping missions from the
earliest stages. I understand that this issue has been
raised in the Secretary-General's report on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict
(S/2009/304) and by the Secretariat non-paper on the
New Horizon project, and I look forward to more
detailed and concrete proposals and discussions on this
subject.

Secondly, a systematic way for the Security
Council to utilize the assets of the four country-
specific meetings of the PBC could be developed. The
accumulated lessons learned and experience of each
country-specific meeting will bring a valuable
perspective to the discussion in the Security Council of
a concerned country on the agenda of the PBC.
However, as was stated by Member States during the
General Assembly debate, country-specific meetings,
which are the main vehicles of the PBC, are
underutilized. I see possible areas where synergy could
be created when the assets of the country-specific
meetings are efficiently incorporated into the
discussions of the Security Council, and hope that
more modalities are developed to enhance the
interactivity of the country-specific meetings and the
Security Council.

Thirdly, it is time to think of increasing the
number of countries on the agenda of the PBC so that
the lessons learned and experience of the Commission
can be shared more broadly and applied more
comprehensively. The country-specific meetings are an
instrumental and effective mechanism allowing the
PBC to reach out to and intensely engage with
countries emerging from conflict. I believe that the
value of the country-specific meetings has been quite
well proven over the past three years. At the same time,
we should also consider the Commission's limited
capacity to engage multiple countries simultaneously,
and develop new and innovative working methods.

Fourthly, as various players participate in
peacebuilding activities, the importance of an
integrated approach cannot be emphasized enough. An
increasing number of integrated peacebuilding offices
in the field represents a compelling reason to deliver as
one in the field. The catalytic role of the PBC can be
instrumental in this process, and in this regard, I hope
that the Commission can more actively participate in
discussions on the operations of integrated
peacebuilding offices.
Finally, peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
sustainable development should be pursued seamlessly
and with a holistic approach. Overarching strategies
integrating all of these dimensions need to be
developed from the first stage of peacekeeping, and
thus the linkage between the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission is again emphasized here.
Separately developed strategies will not work as
efficiently to harness synergy and increase the
possibility of success on the ground as those developed
holistically. In the same vein, I believe that entry and
exit strategies are no exception to this.

Close linkage between the Security Council and
the Peacebuilding Commission is crucial in carrying
out our peacebuilding mandates and helping countries
to meet the dramatically increasing number of post-
conflict demands in the field. The challenges identified
over the Commission's past three years of operation
only reinforce the importance and critical value of this
linkage. When the relationship between the two bodies
is further strengthened, we will be better poised to
meet the challenges on the ground.

