Mr. Toyberg-Frandzen: My briefing today will
focus on two specific issues: political developments
in Ukraine and the latest developments related to the
conflict in the east of the country. I will also provide a
brief update on the United Nations activities in relation
to Ukraine.

On 26 October, Ukraine held its early parliamentary
elections. Although there was no voting in Crimea and
the parts of Donbas under rebel control, elections were
held throughout the rest of Ukraine in a manner that
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) observers welcomed as largely upholding
democratic commitments. Yesterday, 11 November, the
Central Electoral Commission announced the official
results of the elections.

Discussions are under way for the formation of
a Government, and we are hopeful that the leading
coalition will be committed to the rapid implementation
of the comprehensive political, legal and economic
reforms to which the Ukrainian authorities have
committed themselves. Clearly, the ability of the
leading coalition to work constructively alongside
the opposition bloc will also be key for the unity and
stability of Ukraine. We also hope to see an urgent
start of a comprehensive national dialogue to rebuild
cohesion and address all outstanding critical national
issues.

On 2 November, rebels in Donetsk and Luhansk
held their own elections, in defiance of the Ukrainian
Government, which were deplored by many in the
international community, including the Secretary-
General. These elections have been condemned by the
Ukrainian authorities as being outside the framework
of the Ukrainian Constitution and law. Following the
elections, the rebels have engaged in inflammatory
rhetoric, declaring themselves as de facto independent
from Ukraine and threatening to expand the territory
under their control. A full mobilization, including the
creation of local armies and security forces, was also
announced. In response, President Poroshenko has
proposed that Parliament revoke the law providing
for three years of greater autonomy or special status
for the rebel-controlled areas that had been offered as
fulfilment ofa key tenet ofthe Minsk protocol. Also, on
5 November, Prime Minister Yatsenyuk announced that
pensions and subsidies would be halted to areas under
rebel control.

On 3 November, hostilities in the east reignited,
with the potential to further undermine the Minsk
agreement. Currently, the security situation in Donetsk
and Luhansk almost rivals the period immediately
preceding the ceasefire agreement of 5 September.
Citing credible threats from the rebel leadership that
it would launch a new offensive, on 4 November,
President Poroshenko ordered army reinforcements to
key cities in southern and eastern Ukraine. Reaffirming
that Kyiv sees no military solution to the conflict and
that it would not attempt to retake rebel areas held by
rebel force, the President's stated objective is to protect
Ukraine's territory from any further incursions.

This past weekend, particularly on the night of
9 November, hostilities were reported to be at their
worst in months, with a heavy exchange of artillery
and shelling in and around Donetsk. A similar level of
fighting was reported today. Lives continue to be lost
daily, including those of two schoolchildren as a result
of shelling in Donetsk on 5 November.

The upsurge in fighting comes amidst regular
reports from the OSCE of an influx oflarge convoys of
heavy weapons, tanks and troops flowing into rebel-held
areas. In that connection, there is no doubt that a failure
to secure the Russian-Ukrainian border is a factor that
continues to impede the path to peace. Meanwhile, the
humanitarian situation continues to deteriorate in parts
of Donbas. With the onset of harsh winter conditions,
the number of internally displaced persons is expected
to increase. Ifthere is a return to full-scale fighting, the
numbers could grow exponentially.

While Ambassador Apakan will brief members
in more detail as to the situation on the ground, one
thing is clear f the ceasefire of 5 September is
under continuous and serious strain. If the prevailing
hostilities continue, the Minsk agreements could
undoubtedly be in jeopardy. Further consultations of
the Trilateral Contact Group with rebel representatives
have not been scheduled, while the self-proclaimed
leaders of the Donetsk and Luhansk people's republics
have reportedly signalled that they would not participate
in future consultations, appointing persons of lesser
authority in their place. Ambassador Tagliavini will be
providing further details on that issue.

Yet, while these agreements have been breached in
various respects and are fragile, it is critical to note that
no side has unilaterally abrogated them. In recent days,
there have been some small, albeit positive steps toward
implementation, such as a meeting between the general
staff of the Russian and Ukrainian military on a line
of delimitation. Although no agreement was reached
at that time, subsequent meetings are reported to soon
take place. What my predecessor, Assistant Secretary-
General Fernandez-Taranco, said in his most recent
briefing to this Council on 24 October (see S/PV.7287)
remains valid today. It is incumbent on all actors to
fulfil their responsibilities and refocus their efforts
towards full implementation of the Minsk agreements,
and it is incumbent on all of us to assist them.

The human rights monitoring mission in Ukraine
has continued its work providing objective and regular
reporting on the human rights situation throughout
the country and on factors that could negatively affect
the social, political and security situation and efforts
towards the solution of a crisis. The mission's seventh
monthly report will be published on 20 November. In
the meantime, the mission is seeking an extension of its
presence in the country beyond 15 December.

With nearly 1 million people now displaced by
this conflict, both within Ukraine and to neighbouring
countries, humanitarian agencies continue to scale
up their presence and respond to the growing needs.
The United Nations is also leading a comprehensive
recovery and peacebuilding assessment to conflict-
affected, Government-held areas in eastern Ukraine
that also includes participation by the European Union
and the World Bank. Finally, in continuation of the
Secretary-General's good offices, Under-Secretary-
General Feltman is slated to travel to Ukraine again
in the near future, pending the formation of the new
Government.

In conclusion, the promise of renewal and of renewed
energy towards solving Ukraine's problems embodied
in the recent parliamentary elections threatens to be
overshadowed by the worsening security situation in
the east of the country. Nonetheless, the prospect that
a new, reform-oriented ruling coalition will be formed,
empowering it to move the country closer to a path
of peace and stability, provides the avenue for all to
support Ukraine out of this debilitating conflict.

With the Minsk agreements in question and
uncertainty over how much strain the ceasefire can
withstand, we are deeply concerned by the possibility
of a return to full-scale fighting. Alternatively, the
conflict may simmer this way for months, with sporadic,
low-level battles marked by periods of increased
hostilities and further casualties. While either scenario
would be a catastrophe for Ukraine, a third prospect of
concern is that of a frozen or protracted conflict that
would entrench the current status quo in south-eastern
Ukraine for years or several decades to come.

It is our collective responsibility to ensure that none
of those scenarios take hold. The only alternative is for
the fighting to end so that all Ukrainians can rebuild
their lives in a stable and secure country, with Ukraine's
sovereignty and territorial integrity preserved. The
road to that solution is renewed commitment by all
concerned parties to the Minsk agreements and shared
responsibility for their full and urgent implementation.
The United Nations also stands ready to support that
process in any way deemed appropriate.

