The Blue Nile, which contributes approximately 85 per cent of the main Nile volume when it merges with the White Nile in Khartoum, is an important transboundary water resource critical for the livelihoods and development of the people of the Arab Republic of Egypt, the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and the Republic of the Sudan. The construction of the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam, a major hydropower project located on the Blue Nile in Ethiopia's Benishangul-Gumuz region, began in April 2011. Through the generation of hydroelectricity, the Renaissance Dam will significantly boost Ethiopia's energy sources, allowing it to increase electrification, accelerate industrialization and export excess electricity to the region. Recognizing the need for cooperation on the Renaissance Dam to fully realize its benefits and mitigate its potential negative effects on the downstream countries, the Blue Nile riparian countries have undertaken several commendable initiatives over the past decade. Those include the establishment of an international panel of experts in 2012 to examine the Dam's design and construction plans, a follow-up Tripartite National Committee in 2014 and the 2015 Declaration of Principles on the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam. The Declaration takes note of the rising demand on the transboundary water resources of Egypt, Ethiopia and Sudan. These three countries committed to several principles, including cooperation, equitable and reasonable utilization, security and the peaceful settlement of disputes. In 2018, the three countries formed a National Independent Scientific Research Study Group to discuss the filling and operation of the Renaissance Dam. Since 2019, trilateral discussions have been held at the ministerial level, as well as among the Heads of State, with the assistance of the United States and the World Bank. A draft text was discussed, but the three riparian States were not able to reach an agreement on the text presented in February 2020. Under the leadership of Prime Minister Abdalla Hamdok, the Sudan therefore took the initiative earlier this month to seek to narrow differences on this issue. We understand that 90 per cent of the technical issues have already been settled. Following the inconclusive negotiations in February, the three countries agreed to appoint observers to the talks, including the Republic of South Africa, the United States and the European Union, whose representatives have been observers to the recent meetings. On 26 June, South Africa, as Chair of the African Union (AU), convened the Bureau of the African Union Heads of State. President Al Sisi, Prime Minister Ahmed and Prime Minister Hamdok attended the session and agreed to an AU-led process aimed at resolving outstanding issues. The parties will meet over the next two weeks for that purpose. I commend the parties for their determination to negotiate an agreement, and I applaud the African Union's efforts to facilitate a process to that end. The remaining differences are technical and legal in nature. They include the binding nature of an agreement, the dispute-resolution mechanism and the management of water flow during droughts. While the United Nations has not participated in the negotiations on the Renaissance Dam, the Secretary-General is fully seized of the matter. I reiterate the Secretary-General's call, on 19 May, for the parties to peacefully resolve all outstanding differences with urgency. Those differences can be overcome and an agreement reached if all parties show the necessary political will to compromise, in line with the spirit of cooperation highlighted in the 2015 Declaration of Principles on the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam. The United Nations stands ready to assist, through technical and expert support, as appropriate and as requested by the three countries. That includes any support required by the AU-led process. Transboundary water cooperation is a key element in the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals. I would like to emphasize that climate change, combined with projected demographic growth and socioeconomic changes, will increase water management challenges - not only for Blue Nile riparian countries but worldwide. Cooperation is not a zero-sum game. It is the key to a successful collective effort to reduce poverty and increase growth, thus delivering on the development potential of the region. We firmly hope that Egypt, Ethiopia and the Sudan will persevere in their efforts to achieve an agreement on the Renaissance Dam that is beneficial to all.
