Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): I thank the members of
the Security Council for the opportunity to participate
in this briefing. Armenia aligns itself with the
statement made on behalf of the European Union.
However, we would also like to make some remarks in
our national capacity.

We appreciate the efforts of the Chairs of the
Committees aimed at strengthening dialogue and
mutual understanding among States, the United
Nations and civil society in combating the scourge of
terrorism. Armenia is fully committed to working with
the Committees established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001), 1267 (1999) and 1989, and 1540 (2004), and
we are determined to contribute to all actions
undertaken by the United Nations in their support.

In particular, we are continuing our close
cooperation with the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC). At the national level, the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate has prepared a list of
recommendations and updated its preliminary
implementation assessment of Armenia. Armenia has
already submitted five detailed, comprehensive reports,
and we will continue our constructive dialogue aimed
at the full implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).

Armenia has already demonstrated its
commitment to combating terrorism and has lent its
support to the international efforts against it. We are a
State party to United Nations, Council of Europe and
Commonwealth of Independent States counter-
terrorism instruments, and have enacted the national
legislation necessary to their timely implementation,
while effectively observing the rule of law and human
rights, which are fundamental to the fight against
terrorism. As noted in the report of the most recent
CTC visit to my country, Armenia has enacted
legislation in conjunction with the requirements of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime; moreover,
the Armenian Government has introduced further
amendments in connection with counter-terrorism
financing legislation.

Looking at the issue of counter-terrorism from a
regional perspective, and given the geographic position
of the countries in our region, we believe that those
countries could benefit from the establishment of
common mechanisms for developing a more coordinated
approach to combating terrorism. Unilaterally, we have
adopted practical and effective border-control measures,
and have demonstrated a strong interest in acquiring
more technology and equipment of the kind necessary
to further enhance the existing border security regime.
However, the fact that borders with some of our
neighbours are closed has discouraged regional border
security cooperation in that very sensitive geostrategic
area.

In that context, I would like to express our
concern, noting that a number of recent reports by
international and regional organizations clearly reflect
the fact that the territory of our neighbour Azerbaijan is
actively used by various terrorist and religious
extremist groups and structures, and serves as a safe
haven for their criminal activities. Those groups have
sought to move people, money and weapons through
the Caucasus, and international organizations have
issued alarming assessments of Azerbaijan's counter-
terrorism efforts. The close links between the
Azerbaijan authorities and the terrorist groups
affiliated with Al-Qaida who fought in the war against
Nagorno Karabakh in the early 1990s are also widely
known and documented. Because of the transnational
nature of the crime of terrorism and the lack of
regional cooperation, we have to be vigilant and not
allow this situation to continue to be exploited by
radical elements for the purpose of recruitment for
terrorism and provocations.

Lastly, addressing the fight against terrorism from
an international standpoint, Armenia firmly believes
that international and regional organizations must
strengthen their cooperation, including by assisting
with know-how and other related help. In that context,
we would welcome cooperation between NATO and
States members of the Collective Security Treaty
Organization through bilateral means in areas of
mutual interest relating to the fight against terrorism.

Today, the international community is united in
condemning terrorist acts, providing unique momentum
for a comprehensive approach to cooperating in the
adoption of effective tools and mechanisms for
eliminating terrorism. I assure the members of the
Council of Armenia's commitment and readiness to
work with the Committees, and I thank the Chairs for
their valuable participation. We look forward to
continuing our work on this important issue.
