Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in French): As it
is late, I will be brief. First I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate. I also
thank Luxembourg for its tireless efforts in chairing
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
Without question, we also welcome the important
work of Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, and firmly support the Children, Not Soldiers
campaign to end the recruitment and use of children by
Government security forces in conflict by the end of
2016. Her work has already yielded significant results,
for example in Chad.

Despite such progress, hundreds of thousands of
children still suffer the effects of armed conflict in the
Central African Republic, South Sudan, Syria, Gaza
and elsewhere. In Nigeria, Boko Haram systematically
attacks schools and in Iraq, the scale and brutality ofthe

violence against civilians have achieved unprecedented
levels. That is why Switzerland welcomes the work of
the Global Coalition to Protect Education from Attack
under the Lucens Guidelines.

It is also urgent that we all mobilize to strengthen
respect for international law and put an end to grave
violations against the rights of children, especially
their recruitment and use by non-State actors. The
commitments made by such actors remain very limited
and the adoption of action plans with these groups
faces several obstacles, including their ephemeral
nature, governmental opposition or access restrictions
under legislation relating to the fight against terrorism.
Member States must always allow the United Nations
access to those groups with the aim of adopting and
implementing action plans. Switzerland continues
to support the critical work of the non-governmental
organization Geneva Call.

Serious violations of children's rights, particularly
sexual violence, too often remain without consequence
in armed conflict. Serious international crimes must
be judged primarily by national judicial institutions,
but if those are unable or unwilling, the Security
Council should use its power to refer matters to the
International Criminal Court. In addition, it is essential
to train peacekeepers on issues related to the protection
of children and to include related provisions in the
standard operating procedures and rules of engagement.
That programme should be mandatory for any troop-
contributing country. Switzerland will make a financial
contribution to a review of the impact of the deployment
of child protection advisers in peacekeeping missions.

Finally, Switzerland encourages States that have
not yet done so to ratify the Optional Protocol to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict.

