Mr. Assaf (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by thanking the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, for his
efforts and his briefing. Allow me also to thank
Ambassador Tanin for his statement.

Let me express once again our sadness at the loss
of Ambassador Richard Holbrooke, the special envoy
of the United States to Afghanistan.

Allow me to make the following observations. The
mere holding of parliamentary elections on 18 September
2010, in a very difficult political, security and
geographical situation, is a positive step towards
entrenching democracy. It is indeed appropriate for us to
welcome the encouraging participation by candidates and
voters in such circumstances, particularly women.

However, widespread fraud and violations, as
reported by the Secretary-General, and the
deteriorating security situation, did not allow the
Afghan people to express their will in the desired
manner. We believe that there ought to be
accountability for those proven to have committed
violations or acts of fraud, in order to prevent such acts
in the future.

We would like to reiterate our condemnation of
the terrorist acts that have targeted innocent civilians
and international forces. We view the lack of
improvement in the security situation in many parts of
the country with concern, as security is a sine qua non
for economic and social development. Perhaps the
International Committee of the Red Cross's description
of the security situation as being worse than ever is a
warning that the Security Council ought to heed.
Perhaps it should lead the Council to approach the
situation in Afghanistan in a more holistic manner.

Based on our belief that a political solution that
ensures the genuine participation of key parties in
governance is the way to end the crisis raging in
Afghanistan, we support the reconciliation and
reintegration process with a view to reaching a historic
settlement between all sectors of Afghan society. We
welcome the steps being taken to implement the
commitments of the Kabul process, particularly in
improving security, administration and development
and gradually transferring all security responsibilities
to Afghans.

On the other hand, we welcome the decision by
the Organization of the Islamic Conference to appoint a
representative in Afghanistan, as such a representative
could play a positive role in the service of the
country's security, stability and reconstruction. We also
express our appreciation for the decision of the State of
Kuwait to sponsor a support office for UNAMA staff,
as well as for the offer of the Netherlands to set up an
office to provide safe haven to staff in Kabul.

We stress the need for continuing regional
cooperation and support from neighbouring States, for
the situation in Afghanistan and surrounding countries
is clearly interlinked. That has economic and security
consequences, in particular in the fight against drugs.
Drugs are a fundamental means for financing terrorist
activities. Surely, the establishment of peace in
Afghanistan serves the interests of all neighbouring
States.

Let me conclude by renewing our appreciation to
the United Nations and its specialized agencies in
Afghanistan for their efforts to achieve development by
providing health, education, food assistance and
capacity-building and by improving the status of
women, promoting human rights and encouraging the
return of refugees. After a year of significant
international interest in Afghanistan, Lebanon hopes
that such efforts will continue next year so that the
Afghan people may finally enjoy security, stability and
prosperity.

