Mr. Bliss (Australia): I would like to thank Special
Representative Zarif for his briefing to the Security
Council today. I also welcome First Deputy Prime
Minister Dacie of Serbia and Foreign Minister Hoxhaj
of Kosovo and thank them for their statements and their
presence.

I also acknowledge the report on the activities of
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX), and welcome the extension of EULEX's
mandate through June 2016. The extension, supported
by Kosovo, will ensure that EULEX can continue to
investigate and prosecute serious organized crime,
corruption and war crimes, while helping to build the
capacity of Kosovo's multi-ethnic justice and police
institutions, and working to progressively transfer tasks
to local institutions.

Australia welcomes the successful holding of
Kosovo Assembly elections on 8 June, which the
European Union (EU) election observation mission
assessed as being transparent and well organized. In a
major achievement, the elections were held peacefully
across the country, including in Kosovo's four northern
Serb-majority municipalities, under a unified legal
framework. We recognize the role of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe in facilitating the
electoral process in northern Kosovo. We acknowledge
the series of political developments in both Serbia and
Kosovo that have slowed high-level dialogue on the
implementation of the 19 April 2013 First Agreement of
Principles on the Normalization of Relations between
the two countries. The delays are understandable but
should not stand in the way of practical steps at the
working level to implement existing agreements. We
recognize that both sides remain committed to the
process, and we call for renewed political dialogue
as soon as a new Government is formed in Kosovo.
Australia commends the European Union's efforts to
facilitate technical discussions in order to maintain
momentum for dialogue.

We were concerned by the violent clashes that
took place in Mitrovica on 22 June. We commend the
response of the Kosovo police, EULEX and the Kosovo
Force. We strongly encourage all sides, at all levels, to
renounce violence, eschew inflammatory rhetoric and
commit fully to reconciliation and dialogue.

Australia commends the efforts of the European
Union Special Investigative Task Force to investigate
allegations of widespread and systematic crimes
committed after the end of the war in 1999. The work
is challenging and complex, not least because of utterly
unacceptable witness intimidation. It is critical that
the perpetrators of serious international crimes found
to have been committed in Kosovo be held to account
and that no one impedes that process. It is essential
that the specialist court to be established to adjudicate
allegations arising from the work of the Task Force be
set up as soon as possible.

We note the report of the United Nations Special
Rapporteur on the human rights of internally displaced
persons, presented in Geneva on 12 June (A/HRC/26/33/ Add.2). While progress has been made in assisting the
230,000 people who were displaced during the Kosovo
conflict in returning to their homes, much remains to
be done. Their return is an essential component of long-
term reconciliation in Kosovo.

The shooting of a Serbian police officer on
27 August near the Serbian town ofMerdare and close to
the border with Kosovo is a worrying development that
must be investigated. But, as Special Representative
Zarif has said, it will be important not to speculate
on possible political motives. Australia is encouraged
that the overall security situation in Kosovo generally
remains peaceful. It is essential that the new leadership
in Kosovo, once in place, recommits to dialogue. It was
on the basis of a mutual commitment to such dialogue
that negotiations on a Stabilization and Association
Agreement for Kosovo were concluded and accession
talks with the EU by Serbia opened.

In conclusion, Australia encourages the newly
elected leadership in Pristina and in Belgrade to work
together to consolidate the peaceful future for their
peoples that is within close reach.

