Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like, on behalf of my country, to thank the Kingdom of Belgium for having organized this open debate to arrange for an exchange of views on such an extremely important subject. Transitional justice is an essential pillar for strengthening security and stability in States and societies that are going through a radical political transformation. I also thank all those who have given valuable briefings during this meeting.Iraq attaches the greatest priority to transitional justice. We are strongly convinced that stability can be realized only if we ensure justice for the victims of the criminal acts committed under the former dictatorial regime on the one hand, and by terrorist groups, particularly the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh) and Al-Qaida, on the other. Perhaps the most prominent example of those horrendous crimes is the finding of hundreds of mass graves dug by the defunct regime. We have also found more than 200 mass graves, including 12,000 corpses, in various Iraqi governorates that were under the control of Da'esh. The legacy of violence and injustice left by the previous regime, as well as the stark violations of human rights perpetrated by Al-Qaida and Da'esh, mean that transitional justice in Iraq faced a number of political and security obstacles after 2003. My Government is keen to achieve justice for the victims of the dictatorial regime through a number of mechanisms, starting with the holding of public, transparent and fair trials of senior officials of the former regime, and establishing many institutions to implement transitional justice in order to ensure that there is no impunity. The most important of them are the Iraqi High Criminal Court, which deals with crimes against humanity; the Supreme National Commission for Accountability and Justice; the Property Claims Commission; and the establishment of the Martyrs and Political Prisoners Foundation. The Government also provided financial and moral reparations to affected victims, either through direct financial aid to the victims or compensation for the families of martyrs and prisoners. The Government also provided young people, women and children with financial and moral compensation, as enacted in Law number 3 of 2006, under article 132 of the Iraqi Constitution. Special school opportunities are also provided for families of martyrs and political prisoners in order for them to complete higher studies in all specialties. Consecutive Iraqi Governments created, after 2003, an environment conducive to activating civil-society organizations. Those organizations are playing an important role in supporting the process of transitional justice by collecting evidence and carrying out transparent surveys among the population to see whether they are satisfied with the progress made. They also deal with the oppressed and defend them. The National Assembly also established an advisory body that includes civil-society organizations dealing with human rights. That was the first such body in Iraq, with 19 representatives from different civil- society organizations. It helps the parliamentary human rights committee in effectively participating with civil society in order to promote human rights in Iraq. Given the Iraqi plan to create an environment appropriate to preventing any recurrence of violations and realizing the goals of transitional justice, consecutive Governments were keen to strengthen societal awareness supporting this process through democratic education, with a view to supporting peace and stability. Circumstances within Iraq are also connected to circumstances outside the country that also affect transitional justice. In May 2003, the Security Council adopted resolution 1483 (2003), which considered Iraq to be under occupation. The State institutions had collapsed, and Iraq was managed by the authority of the temporary coalition. Order number | of 16 May 2003 was adopted to eliminate the Baath Party, which caused great social and political controversy. The order was then superseded by Law number 10 of 2008, based on national dialogue, giving way to a new stage of evidence-collecting and holding accountable those responsible for criminal acts against the Iraqi people through a new institution, namely, the Supreme National Commission for Accountability and Justice. Iraq seeks to strengthen its system, which is based on institutional and constitutional legitimacy, by implementing the provisions of its constitution of 2005 in order to overcome the heavy burden of the past and through a number of measures aimed at promoting stability and security. My country has nonetheless faced serious challenges that have prevented us from making progress - not only on transitional justice, but in other areas as well. The main challenge and threat was terrorism, as manifested in the Al-Qaida and Da'esh terrorist groups. Terrorism was not Iraq's sole challenge; rather, it was the prelude to and result of other challenges, including administrative corruption, as well as economic and financial challenges, along with their repercussions in terms of deepening the development gap in the various governorates of Iraq. In addition, the nascent democracy and transitional justice aimed to achieve justice for the victims. That was accompanied withefforts to ensure accountability for terrorists, which posed legal and logistical challenges for my country, Iraq, at the domestic and international levels.
