The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Burundi, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nahayo
(Burundi) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: On behalf of the Council, I
extend a warm welcome to Mr. Adolphe Nahayo,
Director of the Department of International
Organizations at the Ministry for Foreign Affairs of
Burundi.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Youssef Mahmoud, Executive Representative of
the Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Integrated Office in Burundi.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Mahmoud to take a seat at the
Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency Mr. Per Orneus, Deputy Permanent
Representative of Sweden to the United Nations, who
will speak on behalf of the Chairperson of the country-
2
specific configuration on Burundi of the Peacebuilding
Commission.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Orneus to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document 8/2009/270, which contains the fifth report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Integrated Office in Burundi.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings from Mr. Youssef Mahmoud and His
Excellency Mr. Per Orneus. I now give the floor to
Mr. Mahmoud.


