Mr. MacKay (New Zealand): Let me express our
appreciation to you, Mr. President, and to the other
members of the Council for acceding to the request of
Member States, including ourselves, for an open
meeting on the item on Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
broader issue in this item is of course the linkage being
drawn with the jurisdiction of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), which has just been addressed
by the representative of Canada. This issue clearly has
implications for all Members of the United Nations, not
merely those party to the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court. It has implications for
United Nations peacekeeping, for fundamental issues
of international law and the international treaty-making
process, and for the role of the Security Council itself.
In our View, no decision should be taken by the Council
on such issues without full consideration and reflection
of the views of all Member States that wish to express
them.

We note at the outset the comments of the
Secretary-General in his letter transmitted to the
Council and his advice that the issue before the
Council could only arise out of a most unlikely series
of events, namely a situation where service personnel
on peacekeeping duties were alleged to have
committed crimes of genocide, war crimes or crimes
against humanity and where the authorities of their
own State were unwilling or unable to properly
investigate those allegations. As I say, and as the
Secretary-General has said, that is an improbable
situation. But the mere possibility of the existence of
such a situation of fact could not in any event be said
to constitute a threat to international peace and security
such as would require a Council decision upon it. I
would refer, in that respect, to the comments already
made by the Permanent Representative of Canada on
the same point.

Nor do we see this question as a conflict between
the International Criminal Court and peacekeeping. To
our mind, both institutions are aimed at a common
goal: at securing and maintaining international peace,
and upholding the principles on which this
Organization stands. Neither should be held hostage to
the other, and indeed no State should be required to
choose between them as members of the Council are
being asked to do in the current situation, with the stark
options that have been presented to Council members.

New Zealand, as a State which is both party to
the Rome Statute and a troop-contributing country, sees
no justification or need for exemption of peacekeepers
from the jurisdiction of the Court. We only see
downsides to such a proposal. To provide such an
immunity in any fashion would seem to enshrine an
unconscionable double standard. It would appear to
place peacekeepers above the law and indeed places the
moral authority of peacekeepers and the indispensable
institution of United Nations peacekeeping in serious
jeopardy.

However, to attempt to provide an immunity by
the mechanisms currently under consideration by the
Council, in our View, raises even greater difficulties.
Attempts to invoke the procedure laid down in article
16 of the Rome Statute in a generic resolution, not in
response to a particular fact situation, and on an
ongoing basis, are inconsistent with both the terms and
purpose of that article. While article 16 undoubtedly
allows the Security Council to stop investigations and
prosecutions for a 12-month period, its wording as well
as its negotiating history - and I can say that I was
one of those who was involved in negotiating this
among other provisions of the Statute - make clear
that it was intended to be used on a case-by-case basis
by reference to particular situations, so as to enable the
Security Council to advance the interests of peace
where there might be a temporary conflict between the
resolution of armed conflict, on the one hand, and the
prosecution of offences, on the other. Here, no conflict
between the two arises. The article might also be used
as a protection of last resort against frivolous or
political prosecutions. Again, that does not arise here.
But it certainly provides no basis for a blanket
immunity to be imposed in advance. Again, I would
reiterate, as one who participated in the negotiations on
article 16, that this was a long and drawn-out
compromise. There were concerns expressed by
members of the Security Council, which were taken
into account. There were concerns by non-members of
the Security Council, who wished to ensure that a
balance be retained; and this balance was the outcome.
It would be most unfortunate, to say the least, if article
16 were to be misused in this particular way.

To purport to provide a blanket immunity in
advance in this way would in fact amount to an attempt
to amend the Rome Statute without the approval of its
States parties. It would represent an attempt by the
Council to change the negotiated terms of a treaty in a
way unrecognized in international law or in
international treaty-making processes. Member States
would have to question the legitimacy and legality of
this exercise of the role and responsibility entrusted to
the Council were that to occur.

New Zealand recognizes that the United States
has strong concerns about the International Criminal
Court. We do not share those concerns, but we do
respect that they exist. Similarly, though, we would ask
that the Council afford the same respect to those States
which have chosen to bind themselves by the
obligations of the Statute. We therefore ask that no
action be taken by this body which would purport to
undermine the terms or integrity of the Rome Statute or
its implementation by its States parties.

As our colleague the Permanent Representative of
Canada has so eloquently outlined, there are indeed
adequate protections already within the Rome Statute
that address the concerns raised by the United States.
In particular, we would note that the Rome Statute was
very deliberately built on the principle that national
courts have primary responsibility for the prosecution
of crimes by their nationals. The ICC is very much a
court of last resort. It may conduct a prosecution only
if impunity would otherwise result. There are also
safeguards built in - and, again, very deliberately
built in - to prevent decisions on prosecutions being
based on political rather than legal grounds.

If such protections are not considered to be
enough, however, it remains open to individual States
to take additional measures to protect their interests.
They could, for example, decline to participate in
United Nations missions - although, as our colleague
from Canada has said, that would undoubtedly be a
most regrettable result that certainly none of us would
wish to see - or they could negotiate appropriate
bilateral agreements with host States. In our View,
those are the options that should be considered first.

There are also various options in front of the
Council itself, short of the enactment of a blanket
immunity for peacekeepers. Consistent with the
mandate of Chapter VII, the Council should act to
reach solutions in specific cases, taking account of the
full range of facts in each situation. Such facts will
inevitably vary from case to case and from mission to
mission. But we note, for example, the Secretary-
General's suggestion that a pragmatic solution already
exists in respect of the missions in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Prevlaka should the Council wish to
pursue it.

We urge the Council and each of its members not
to proceed with a blanket-immunity approach and to
consider the pragmatic solutions that have already been
identified, without sacrificing the principles for which
the International Criminal Court stands: to put an end
to impunity and to ensure that the most serious crimes
of concern to the international community not go
unpunished.

