Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): At the outset, I would
like to commend the Argentine presidency of the
Security Council for convening this important annual
open debate on the working methods of the Security
Council and preparing the concept paper (S/2014/725, annex). I would like also to thank the two briefers,
Ombudsperson Kimberly Prost and Prosecutor Fatou
Bensouda, for their valuable presentations.

It is obvious that the effective functioning of the
Security Council has a direct impact on the maintenance
of international peace and security. Article 24 of the
Charter of the United Nations indicates that the Council
acts on behalf of the entire membership of the United
Nations. Therefore, the Council's working methods
do not belong only to its 15 members - they are the
collective responsibility of the general membership. For
that reason, reforming the Security Council's working
methods is one of the five linked items to be negotiated
in the context of the intergovernmental negotiations on
Security Council reform, in accordance with General
Assembly decision 62/557.

Algeria appreciates the efforts of the Informal
Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions under the chairmanship of
Argentina to improve the Council's working methods
and notes the different documents agreed upon by the
Informal Working Group since last year's open debate
(see S/PV.7052).

Yet we think that more efforts should be exerted
to promote the full implementation of the note by the
President contained in document S/2010/507 of July
2010 and subsequent notes. Obviously, we must also be
more ambitious and advance our discussions beyond
those notes. For example, formalizing the Security
Council's provisional rules of procedure, which have
been in force for over 60 years, would be a major step
towards improving the transparency, openness and
consistency of the Council.
In the same vein, private meetings, informal
consultations and closed meetings should be kept to
a minimum. In addition, issues to be covered at any
briefing by the Secretariat should be determined in
coordination with the concerned State. Moreover,
the concerned party should be given the opportunity
to express its views on such briefings. We think
transparency and openness would not undermine
efficiency.

Let me recall that, through the note contained
in document S/2013/515, Security Council members
committed themselves to implementing a number of
measures to enhance the efficiency and transparency of
the Council. In that regard, Council members agreed to
make more effective use of public meetings, informal
interactive dialogues and Arria Formula meetings.
Those meetings should be used effectively by providing
for real opportunities and more meaningful exchanges
of view to take into account the contributions of
non-Council members, in particular those that may be
directly affected by the decisions of the Council.

For instance, wrap-up sessions have proven useful
in taking stock of the activities of the Security Council
at the end of each month. We thank those Council
members that have held wrap-up sessions at the end of
their presidencies. That practice complements the one
whereby Council Presidents brief the wider membership
on the programme of work at the beginning of each
month.

My delegation would like to stress its strong View
on the need to submit to the General Assembly the
Council's annual report, which should include enough
information and analytical content. We think that the
entire United Nations will benefit from such bold steps.

We also believe that it is crucial to strengthen
cooperation between the Council and regional and
subregional organizations. Equally, States who have
embarked upon or undertaken initiatives such as
mediation should have more opportunities to interact
with the Council. That would definitely work to the
benefit of the international community as a whole, since
such endeavours are aimed at early warning, conflict
prevention, conflict resolution and the promotion of
peace. Messages from such States or organizations
should be heard, if not followed, by Security Council
members. We strongly believe that the monthly
presidency could do a lot in that regard.

Regarding the issue of sanctions, in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations, the imposition
of sanctions should be considered only after all means
of peaceful settlement of disputes under Chapter VI of
the Charter have been exhausted. Accordingly, Chapter
VII should be invoked as a measure of last resort.
Sanctions should be imposed only when there exists a
threat to international peace and security.

In conclusion, let me say that there is still much
room for improvement. Algeria counts on all members
of the Council, in particular its permanent members,
to make greater progress in improving the Council's
working methods so as to strengthen its ability to carry
out its mandate of maintaining international peace and
security in accordance with the Charter.

