Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, allow me once again to express to
the President our appreciation for his wise leadership of
the Security Council during this month and to wish you
every success. I also wish to thank you for convening
this open debate on the situation in the Middle East.
Allow me also to thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing this morning.

It is also my pleasure to refer to the important
statement delivered by His Excellency the President of
the People's Republic of China before the Council of
the League of Arab States at the beginning of the year,
on 21 January, when he specifically called again for an
end to the historical injustice done to the Palestinian
people, referring also to the need to enable that people
to exercise their right to establish their own sovereign
Palestinian State, based on the pre-1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital. We wish to express our
appreciation for all the efforts by friendly China and for
the President's efforts in that regard.

We meet today once again as Israel pursues its
aggressive terrorist practices as well as its grave
violations of international law. Israel persists in
challenging international legitimacy, with no fear
of sanctions or accountability. We have called on the
Council again and again to compel Israel to end its
war crimes and its violations of human rights, which
it has been perpetrating despite the unanimity in the
international community on the illegitimacy of Israel's
colonialist policies and arbitrary practices against
the Palestinian people. It seems that the Security
Council remains timid vis-a-vis the need to end
Israeli aggression, to make Israel responsible for that
aggression and to make it accountable for its ongoing,
repeated crimes against the Palestinian people.

Israel continues to use excessive force against
the Palestinian people. It has detained thousands of
Palestinians. They are tortured, they are exploited, and
many are simply being killed in the field. Despite its
ongoing acts of terrorism, Israel now claims that it is
committed to the two-State solution. We wonder: what
two States are the occupier talking about? Settlements
continue to be built without any restraint. Land and
properties are being confiscated. Homes are being
demolished. Families are being expelled. There are
acts of forcible displacement. Does the Council not
know, for example, that Israel took a decision to build
200 new settlements in the West Bank just days ago?
Israel continues to implement its illegal plans to annex
the Holy City of Al-Quds, distorting its Arab identity,
changing its demographic makeup and isolating it from
the Palestinian community. It continues its ongoing
attempts to change the legal status of the Holy Al-Aqsa
Mosque, wishing to lay its hands on Islamic and
Christian properties in Al-Quds and Haram Al-Sharif.
What two States is Israel talking about?

Matters have reached a point where the Israeli
occupation Government holds meetings in occupied
Arab Syrian Golan, which is a grave development. The
occupying Power is demanding that the international
community recognize its occupation of the Golan. It
claims that the Golan is an indivisible part of the State
of Israel in the modern era, that the Golan Heights will
remain in Israeli hands forever. That is a clear violation
of resolution 497 (1981), as well as of all international
instruments, which do not accept a change of status
for occupied territories. We condemn in the strongest
terms such declarations and such acts of aggression. We
call upon the Council to compel Israel to implement all
United Nations resolutions concerning its withdrawal
from all Palestinian lands beyond the pre-1967 borders
and all Arab occupied lands, including the occupied
Arab Syrian Golan.

Against that backdrop, my delegation would once
again like to welcome the French initiative to convene an
international peace conference, as this would contribute

to peace and security in the region, in accordance with
the terms of reference of the peace process, the Arab
Peace Initiative and the relevant Security Council
resolutions. We must devise an effective international
mechanism that ensures that an end is put to the
Israeli occupation of the State of Palestine within a set
time frame.

The Palestinian people have long suffered from
a brutal occupation, policies of racism and arbitrary
repression. We commend the Palestinian people for
their steadfastness and for defending their people
and their holy sites. We call on the Security Council
to ensure that the Israeli Government bears criminal
responsibility for its actions. Israel must be called upon
to immediately release all detainees and prisoners and
immediately respond to the resolutions of international
legitimacy and the Arab Peace Initiative.
We also reiterate our call to ensure a quick
intervention so as to provide international protection
to the Palestinian people. We appeal to the Security
Council to respond in a manner that is commensurate
with the gravity of the situation and to grant the
Palestinian people their right to self-determination and
their independent State, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its
capital, on the borders of June 1967.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia wishes to express
its grave concern at the continuing suffering of the
brotherly Syrian people. Despite the efforts made to
resolve the Syrian crisis; the adoption of resolutions
2254 (2015) and 2268 (2016); and the cessation of
hostilities and the delivery of humanitarian assistance,
with a view to the resumption of official negotiations
on a political transition and the full implementation of
Geneva 1, these violations by the Syrian forces continue.
Syrians are being killed and maimed on a daily basis.
Their cities are being destroyed, including through the
use of weapons with indiscriminate effects, including
barrel bombs.

Iran's Revolutionary Guards are also present in
Syria, as are Hizbullah militias, which are terrorist
militias that have participated in the criminal acts
perpetrated by the Syrian regime against its people.
These represent grave continuing escalations that could
have terrible repercussions on peace and security in the
region and the entire world.

We would also like to express our grave concern
at the deteriorating humanitarian situation in Syria.
A siege continues to be imposed on many cities and
regions, including Daraya, where dozens of women
and children are protesting on their destroyed homes
against the fact that international parties are ignoring
them and will not act to lift the siege.

My delegation reiterates its support for the United
Nations Envoy to Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, within
the mandate entrusted to him and resolution 2254
(2015), which set out the road map for official political
negotiations on a political transition.

We wish to stress that we will continue to support
the Syrian people by all means available and to respect
their decisions. We call for the establishment of a
transitional authority with full executive powers to
build Syria's future. Syria, whose sons, whatever their
political, religious or ethnic origins, reject terrorism
and violence, has no place in it for those whose hands
are stained with the blood of the Syrian people.
