Mr. Cohen (United States ofAmerica): I would like
to thank today's briefers and to give a warm welcome to
Foreign Minister Barry.

The past six months in the Sahel have been concerning.
The security situation continues to deteriorate. Radical
elements have driven intercommunal violence to an
all-time high. The massacre in Ogossagou points
towards potential widespread intercommunal violence
throughout the region. Meanwhile, terrorist groups
and criminal organizations continue to thrive, moving
across borders, attacking civilian communities and
Government and international security forces.

Such insecurity impacts all West Africa. The heroic
rescue of four kidnapped civilians last week, during
which the two French soldiers lost their lives, reminds
us all of the danger. The United States honours the two
fallen French soldiers and their families for their loss
and their great sacrifice.

The international and peacekeeping forces alone
will not resolve the security crisis in the region. That is
why it is critical to work on the long-term goal of fully
operationalizing the Joint Force ofthe Group ofFive for
the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). The United States recognizes that
and, thus far, has committed approximately $111 million
to the G-5 Sahel States to fill capability gaps by
providing equipment, training and advisory support.

We are encouraged by the resumption of operations
of the Joint Force and we pay tribute to the sacrifices
that Member States are making in order to bring
stability to the region. We call on the Joint Force and
Member States to continue to take the necessary steps to
become fully operational, including through adherence
to the compliance framework to prevent, investigate,
address and publicly report violations and abuses
of human rights law and violations of international
humanitarian law.

The United States continues to believe that bilateral
assistance remains the best way to support the Force and
is disappointed that other members of the Council and
beyond continue to call for Chapter VII authorization
and United Nations-assessed funding for the Joint
Force. As I noted in my remarks last November (see S/PV.8402) and as the United States has repeatedly
stated, Chapter VII authorization is not needed to
accomplish the Joint Force's mission, as the G-5 Sahel
States already have existing agreements in place for
military operations in their respective territories.

We note with regret that, as highlighted in the
Secretary-General's recent report (S/2019/371), the
G-5 Joint Force in Mali is not sufficiently leveraging the
established technical agreement with the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) and the European Union. We call on
the Joint Force, the Malian Government and partners to
find ways to help the Force to use that opportunity more
efficiently. Some of our briefers and Council colleagues
have expressed an interest in exploring possible ways to
deliver reimbursable support to the Joint Force outside
Mali. I urge our colleagues to recall that in resolution
2391 (2017) the Security Council encouraged that the
technical agreement constitute a temporary measure
towards full self-sufficiency of the Joint Force. In
addition, the Council emphasized that any facilitation
of support through the technical agreement should not
adjust or adversely impact MINUSMA's own operations
or put its personnel at undue risk. The United States
believes that the international community should
focus its collective support on the G-5 Sahel Joint
Force as an African-owned, African-led response to
regional instability.

The dire security situation demands that the
international community focus its collective efforts
in the Sahel in a smart, deliberate and collaborative
way. As others have noted, that requires that the region
and its partners continue to pursue more than security
responses alone and address the root causes of conflict
through coordinated humanitarian, health, agricultural,
governance and development assistance. As I have
stated before, through our effective coordination with
the security and development actors in the region and
the leadership of the African Union and the Economic
Community of West African States in solving regional
and local disputes, significant improvements in security
are achievable.

The sustainability of those improvements will
depend on the progress of the G-5 Sahel States
towards effective governance, the creation of access to
opportunity and respect for human rights, accountability
and inclusiveness. It is also critical to increase the roles
for women, young people and marginalized groups in
decision-making. Together, such combined endeavours
can achieve durable peace and stability and unleash the
potential of this vital region and its people.

