Mr. Yaakob (Malaysia): Let me begin by
congratulating Sweden on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
July and for organizing this open debate. Malaysia also
thanks this morning's briefers.

Malaysia aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the representative of Viet Nam on behalf of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.

Malaysia thanks the Secretary-General for his
annual report on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict (S/2018/462), dated 14 May, and supports
the mandate carried out by the Security Council,
which includes the integrity and impartiality of
the mechanism for listing all perpetrators of grave
violations of children's rights. The report highlights
the consequential impact of when children are denied
humanitarian access, including the use of starvation as
a method of warfare.

Malaysia encourages the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict to develop practical guidelines on
data collection regarding the denial of humanitarian
access. We hope that such an effort would help to
standardize and support the work of United Nations
country task forces on monitoring and reporting.

Malaysia shares the view of many delegations that
spoke this morning on the dangers, risks and violations
that children fall prey to in armed conflict, including
abduction, when children, as we all know, should be
in school. Therefore, in our view, today's unanimous
adoption of resolution 2427 (2018) is important,
as it underscores our unified stance on protecting
children and condemning abduction. In addition,
strengthening monitoring and reporting abductions, as
well as identifying the perpetrators, will contribute to
ensuring accountability.

At the same time, we must also ensure that security
forces and peacekeeping missions are competent and
proactively respond to situations in which children
are exposed to the risk of abduction and other grave
violations. We must also recognize that reintegration is
a long-term effort that requires the shared responsibility
of all stakeholders, including regional organizations. In
that regard, we call on Member States, United Nations
entities and other parties concerned to integrate
child protection provisions in community-based
reintegration programmes that foster a spirit of unity
and reconciliation among communities ravaged by war.

We are equally shocked by the increasing
number of attacks on schools and hospitals, as well
as the military use of schools by State and non-State
armed groups alike, thereby subsequently depriving
access to education and health care to thousands of
children. Therefore, my delegation encourages all
Member States to consider endorsing the Safe Schools
Declaration, which aims, among other goals, to raise
awareness of good practices that would deter from the
military use of educational facilities in armed conflict
and maintain schools as mainstays of learning, not
bloodshed. My delegation also urges Member States
to implement the recommendations of the Secretary-
General on measures to protect health care contained
in resolution 2286 (2016), which Malaysia supported
and co-sponsored. The resolution aims to enhance the
practical implementation of protections afforded under
international law to prevent acts of violence against
the wounded and sick and medical and humanitarian
personnel exclusively engaged in medical duties, as
well as hospitals and other medical facilities, and to
better ensure accountability for such acts.
The issue of accountability must be pursued, as
it is a vital component of a comprehensive approach
to child protection. My delegation urges that firm
action be taken under national or international justice
mechanisms, where appropriate, against parties that
commit violations and abuses against children. We
reiterate the importance of the Security Council
framework on children and armed conflict and the
various tools that have been developed to ensure the
accountability and compliance of parties to conflict,
including through the listing mechanism of the annual
report. We believe that facts should be the determining
factor that guide our actions under the framework.

In conclusion, we fervently hope that the adoption
ofresolution 2427 (2018) will serve to further strengthen
our collective resolve to continue developing effective
strategies and responses for the protection of children
in armed conflict, even in the face of unprecedented
challenges. Furthermore, we urgently call for the
immediate, safe and unconditional release of abducted
childrenm and their family reunification, reintegration
and rehabilitation. Malaysia reaffirms its commitment
to working together with other Member States to
ensure that children around the world affected by
armed conflict receive the greatest consideration and
attention, which they truly deserve.

