Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): The delegation of Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the
holding of this open debate on the working methods of
the Security Council under your presidency, Sir. We
also welcome the very instructive briefing by Mr. Ian
Martin on this topic. My delegation is convinced that
our exchanges will make it possible to take an additional
step forward towards improving the working methods
of the Security Council in order to achieve greater
transparency and effectiveness in its work.

Cote d'Ivoire congratulates the members of the
Council and all other individuals and organizations on
the quality of their respective contributions, which they
have been making for some years now, to improving the
working methods of the Security Council. It commends
and expresses its appreciation to Japan in particular,
whose continuing commitment to this process has led
it to head the Informal Working Group of the Security
Council on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions on several occasions.

My delegation's statement will focus on three
points that we deem vital to achieving the major
progress required to increase the effectiveness of the
Council's work.

First, concerning the participation of new
non-permanent members in the work of the Security
Council before their term has begun, my delegation
welcomes the option given to newly elected members
to participate, for a three-month period prior to the
beginning of their mandate, in all Council meetings,
including its plenary consultations and those of its
subsidiary bodies. This decision is to be welcomed
as it allows new arrivals to understand the dynamics
involved as well as the Council's practices, procedures
and working methods, so that they can hit the ground
running from the time they begin their term.

Secondly, my country welcomes the dialogue
among troop- and police-contributing countries, the
Security Council and the Secretariat, with a view to
enabling their points of View and concerns to be taken
into account. Such consultations also make it possible
better to prepare peacekeeping operations.

Thirdly, Security Council field missions to
conflict areas allow the Council to better grasp the real
problems being experienced in the countries visited and
to come into contact with all concerned stakeholders
and promote dialogue between them in order to help
them emerge from crisis. Such missions are also a
direct way of gathering information, making it possible
for the Council not only to assess whether progress has
been made, in order to better craft its decisions, but also
to bring pressure to bear on the parties to a conflict in
order to induce them to better fulfil their commitments,
for example in the framework of a peace agreement.

Nonetheless, my delegation would like to commend
the Council for the quality of its relations with the press
via presidential statements and press statements, which
help to disseminate information about the work of the
Council among the general public.

Mydelegationalsoencouragestheoperationalization
of joint missions of the Security Council and of the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union to
areas of conflict in Africa.

Let me say by way of conclusion that my delegation
wishes every success to the delegation of Kuwait in
its capacity as Chair of the Informal Working Group
of the Security Council on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions, and it reiterates its full readiness
to contribute to the work of the Group. My delegation
also thanks the Secretariat for its dedication and urges
it to ensure that all reports and other required working
documents are made available as soon as possible and
in all working languages of the Organization in order
to enable their consideration by the various delegations.

