Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): I should like to extend my
delegation's sincere appreciation to you, Mr. President, and
to the delegation of Slovenia for your initiative in
organizing this open debate of the Security Council on the
role of the Council in the prevention of armed conflict. My
delegation also wishes to thank the Secretary-General for
his opening remarks, which provide a useful framework for
today's debate. This open meeting reflects the Council's
continued commitment to engage in broader thematic
debates that, hopefully, will expand its capacity to deal with
the ever-evolving challenges to international peace and
security. The wide participation of Members of the
Organization today is a clear reflection of the usefulness of
the open debate you have initiated on the subject.

In addressing the issue before it, it is imperative for
the Council to remind itself that in seeking to fulfil its
Charter-mandated role, the Council must, at all times, fully
respect the principles and provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations, in particular those relating to the pacific
settlement of disputes and action in respect to threats to the
peace, breaches of the peace and acts of aggression. The
Security Council acts on behalf of the entire membership of
the Organization, and therefore responsibility, consistency
and even-handedness must be the hallmarks of its actions.

Believing in the adage that prevention is better than
cure, my delegation joins the call for the Council to
continue to enhance its capacity for preventive action.
Clearly, as stated by the Secretary-General, building a
culture of prevention is much more beneficial, long-lasting
and less costly than reacting to catastrophes only after they
have struck. The Council has time and again emphasized
that the prevention of armed conflict begins and ends with
the protection of human life and the promotion of human
development. It is timely that in the context of a more
proactive and creative approach in the maintenance of
international peace and security, the Council should
consider concrete and practical measures for preventive
diplomacy. For this purpose, there is a need on the part of
the United Nations for better information-gathering and
analysis and for enhancing its early-waming capacity in
order to monitor and, more importantly, to respond
promptly and appropriately when confronted with these
situations. Timely action is of critical importance if
conflicts are to be addressed before they explode into
violence, with their grave humanitarian consequences.

The prevention of armed conflict is multidimensional
in nature, requiring the resources of a comprehensive and
integrated United Nations system. Clearly, a cohesive and
well-coordinated United Nations system is vital in any
effort to prevent the emergence or re-emergence of armed
conflict.

In this regard, we note with appreciation the
enormous contributions made by all the principal organs
and agencies of the United Nations, such as the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the
United Nations Children's Fund, the United Nations
Development Programme and others. Their active
engagement in post-conflict peace-building situations is
important in preventing war-ravaged societies that are in
transition towards peace from returning to armed conflict.
In this regard, it is imperative for the Organization to
oversee the successful implementation of the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme
of ex-combatants in all post-conflict activities, as it is for
it to address the root causes of the conflict.

My delegation believes that there should be greater
recourse to the use of preventive diplomacy and the good
offices of the Secretary-General. The positive outcome of
the Council's recent mission to Jakarta and Dili would
argue for greater utilization of this mechanism by the
Council in respect of future conflict situations, before
they get out of hand. It is perhaps timely to dispatch such
a mission to Africa, as has been proposed by a member
of the Council. At the same time, there should be greater
use of the Secretary-General's good offices in the context
of preventive diplomacy as well as of the resolution of
ongoing conflicts. The Secretary-General is well placed to
bring to the attention of the Council early evidence of
threats to international peace and security, genocide and
other manifestations of systematic and widespread human
rights violations and other developments affecting
international peace and security for its consideration and
for appropriate action.

This particular role of the Secretary-General in
providing information to the Council is in conformity
with the provisions of Article 99 of the Charter. We

 

commend the role played by the Secretary-General in this
regard, which on many occasions has contributed to
facilitating consensus in the Council. The dispatching of
envoys or special representatives to areas of serious conflict
to undertake quiet diplomacy is invaluable and has been an
increasingly important aspect of the role of the
Secretary-General in assisting the Council to address the
various issues of peace and security that come before it.

The alarming increase in intra-State warfare is fast
changing the landscape and nature of modern-day conflicts.
More and more, United Nations peacekeeping operations
become embroiled in internal conflicts involving, on the
one hand, legitimate Governments and, on the other, rebels
and warlords under a loose chain of command. In these
conflicts, the destruction not just of armies, but of civilians
and entire ethnic groups or groups of people of different
faiths or religion, is increasingly becoming the main, or the
strategic, objective. This must be strongly condemned. In
such conflict situations, the defence of imperilled humanity
must be of paramount importance for the United Nations
and the international community. We believe that in the
context of the changing nature of current conflicts the
Council must re-examine past and present approaches and
strategies and formulate new ones in keeping with the
demands of the times. Even in respect of classic inter-State
conflict situations, it is regrettable that the Council has not
been successful in bringing the warring parties to a
negotiated settlement of their armed conflict.

The Charter, of course, provides the Council with
options, including the invoking of certain provisional
measures not involving the use of force, in order to defuse
such situations. One such option comes under Article 40,
which provides an avenue for Council action, including the
imposition of arms embargoes and targeted sanctions.
However, in contemplating such actions, every effort should
be made to ensure that they do not lead to any undesirable
humanitarian impact on the general population.

With the decreasing incidence of inter-State wars, the
kind of intervention envisaged in the Charter has fallen out
of use, while the notion of humanitarian intervention has
increasingly been invoked to justify intervention in current
conflict situations. The Secretary-General himself has
recently raised this pertinent but contentious concept of
intervention in the light of his increasing concern at the
inaction of the Security Council and its failure to prevent
the genocidal war in Rwanda, with its horrific
consequences, and the forced intervention by the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) in the conflict in
Kosovo, which saved thousands of lives and reversed the
pernicious policy of "ethnic cleansing" in that territory,
but which was carried out without the authorization of the
Council.

At the core of the issue is the effectiveness of the
Council in responding to crisis situations, including
humanitarian calamities. The contradiction between, on
the one hand, respecting the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States and, on the other, the moral and ethical
imperatives to stop massacres within States, is real and
difficult to resolve. In any consideration of possible
Council intervention in such situations, there is a need for
a balanced approach, lest the Council be accused of bias
and selectivity and of intervening in conflict situations
involving some countries but not in others. What is
important is the ability of the Council to consider such
situations in a dispassionate manner and to find the
political will to act decisively to prevent or contain such
conflicts whenever and wherever they occur. Regrettably,
however, the narrow interests of some members of the
Council have often got in the way of effective
decision-making by the Council. Clearly, a more cohesive
and united Council would make an enormous difference
in addressing the issue of the protection of vulnerable
populations in situations of armed conflict.

There is much expectation on the part of the
international community for the Council to effectively
manage issues of international peace and security.
Consequently, when the Council is seen to be paralysed
in dealing with some important issues, there is great
disappointment over its lack of efficacy. Unfortunately, in
many situations the Council cannot act alone. It requires
the cooperation of all the parties concerned, including that
of regional organizations and arrangements. Indeed, in a
number of conflict situations, particularly in Africa,
regional and subregional organizations, such as the
Organization of African Unity and the Economic
Community of West African States, have been active
players. However, this should not absolve the Council
from playing its role. Regrettably, much of the impasse in
and paralysis of the Council has to do with the peculiar
decision-making process in the Council, so well known to
members and non-members of the Council.

In the face of the many complex challenges that lie
ahead, the issue of the efficiency and authority of the
Council will have to be resolved as soon as possible, lest
there be further erosion of the Council's efficacy and
credibility. Clearly, what is required is reform of the
Council to make it better reflect current realities, 54 years
after its founding. A more representative Council, with a

 

revamped decision-making process, would serve to enhance
its credibility and strengthen its capacity to deal with the
issues of international peace and security, including the
prevention of armed conflict.

In this regard, I would urge the Council to put into
concrete action the fine principles that have been articulated
by many speakers in this debate, including the Secretary-
General, particularly in the context of Africa, whose
conflicts occupy much of the Council's time. The draft
presidential statement which we will adopt should serve as
a powerful incentive towards that end.

Thank you again, Mr. President, for organizing this
important and useful open meeting.

