Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): I shall
try to be brief, as I am the next to last member of the
Council to take the floor, because I agree fully with the
analysis made by previous speakers and also because
Bulgaria fully endorses the statement to be made
shortly by the representative of Spain on behalf of the
European Union.

The fact that I am the penultimate speaker among
members places me in a somewhat difficult position,
because the praise given to the work of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC), and to its Chairman in
particular, has been extremely eloquent and it is very
difficult to add much more. However, I would like to
underscore the fact that, in our opinion, the success
achieved by the Committee and by its Chairman, Sir
Jeremy Greenstock, is not due solely to its working
methods, evoked by J ean-David Levitte a few moments
ago, but also to a certain style, a style that is on a par
with the task at hand and that is characterized by
extraordinary intellectual and moral rigour, equality,
benevolent discipline and full transparency leading to
consensus. I must say that we have rarely seen an
individual contribute so much to such a noble cause.
Sir Jeremy Greenstock and his colleagues in the United
Kingdom Mission are showing that diplomacy serves
some purpose.

I must very briefly highlight the aspects of the
work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee that are of
the greatest interest to us. First and foremost, I wish to
mention the unprecedented audit of the legislative,
administrative and other capacities of States Members
of the United Nations. That audit is indeed
unprecedented, and it has also been very effective and
thorough. Political will is generally present, but further
efforts must nevertheless be made. There are still
countries that have not yet submitted reports. They
must do so.

In particular, I wish to emphasize the importance
that Bulgaria attaches to the ratification of the 12
United Nations counter-terrorism instruments. I will
not hide the fact that my country is proud to be among
the 14 States to have ratified all 12 conventions.

It is a strong temptation for me not to conclude on
such a specific point, but, as Sir Jeremy mentioned a
while ago, a regional political forum of the countries of
South-Eastern Europe is being held today in Sofia on
the subject of the fight against terrorism. Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Greece,
Macedonia, Romania, Slovenia, Turkey and the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia are all taking part in that
meeting. Principal among the major objectives of the
forum is to establish permanent regional counter-
terrorism structures. Another important objective is to
develop a coordinated plan of action among the States
of the region and to encourage the creation through
parliaments of national structures devoted to combating
terrorism and to help accelerate the adoption of
counter-terrorism legislation.

I wish to point out, among the more specific
objectives, a unified format for travel documents and
identity cards for citizens of the States of the region.
And also on the agenda are items for training police
officers and customs inspectors to combat human
trafficking, illegal immigration, and drug trafficking,
which very often are the very source of terrorism. My
delegation will inform Members of the United Nations
of the results of its activities because we firmly believe
in the need for a regional approach to the fight against
terrorism. From this standpoint the work of the CTC is
headed in the right direction.

