Mr. Dangue Rewaka (Gabon) (interpretation from French): Like other delegations, we too would like to
commend the Swedish delegation for the welcome initiative
it has taken in organizing this meeting on the important
issue of protection for humanitarian assistance to refugees
and others in conflict situations.

There is hardly any need to recall here that protection
of and respect for individuals has always been a concern of
the international community, under normal circumstances
and, in particular, in times of war. Thus, a series of
universal legal instruments have been adopted within the
frameworks of human rights and international humanitarian
law. We have in mind, inter alia, the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and the
Additional Protocols to these Conventions.

But however abundant the legislation may be in these
areas, we must observe that it has not been strictly
implemented, either by States or by the various groups
engaged in conflicts. We deeply deplore this situation, the
consequences of which are well highlighted in the report of
the Secretary-General contained in document S/1998/883,
which we are considering today.

The international community can no longer stand by
while women, children, the elderly, refugees and the staff
of humanitarian organizations - in short, the civilian
population - is constantly targeted by armed groups. An
end must be put to such chronic abuses.

According to the Secretary-General's report, between
January 1992 and August 1998, more than 100 staff
members of the United Nations and humanitarian
organizations paid with their lives for their dedication to
the humanitarian cause. We would like to take this
opportunity to pay tribute to the memory of those soldiers
of peace and humanitarian security. We repeat once again
that these attacks are totally unacceptable, and we should
do our utmost to put an end to them by adapting and
strengthening existing instruments.

Similarly, we would like to express our gratitude and
our encouragement to the International Committee of the
Red Cross, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and all governmental and
non-governmental organizations involved in assistance
and humanitarian relief.
In this context, my delegation firmly supports the
useful recommendations of the Secretary-General aimed
at increasing protection for refugees and displaced
persons, as well as for the personnel of the United
Nations and humanitarian organizations.

However, all our efforts will be in vain if no
concrete action is taken to build confidence between
humanitarian organizations and the parties in conflict,
who sometimes accuse these organizations of supporting
one group at the expense of another.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate what our
delegation emphasized last 24 April in this Chamber: that
a solution to armed conflicts - the source of so much
human suffering - requires that we look for a global
solution to their causes.

This is equally valid for the item we are discussing
today.

