Mr. Mukongo N gay (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): Mr. President, at a time
when your presidency of the Security Council is
reaching its end, I have the pleasant duty to convey to
you my heartfelt congratulations and say how very
much my delegation admires the excellent quality of
the work you have accomplished during the
deliberations of the Security Council during the month
of August.

I would also like to congratulate the Permanent
Representative of China, your predecessor, for having
successfully guided the discussion of very complex
items before the Council in July.

Since we are all eagerly awaiting the launching of
phase III of the deployment of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC), I would like to take this
opportunity in addressing the Council today to convey
the encouragement of my delegation and of the entire
Congolese people to those whose dedication to the
cause of peace has allowed the opening of a real
window of opportunity in the peace process in my
country. This window of opportunity, unless it is
closed, will enable us to see in the very near future the
end of a war that has torn my country apart for more
than three years.

This honour is due particularly to Secretary-
General Kofi Annan, who has personally intervened in
relations with donor and troop-contributing countries
and with the African Union in their tireless efforts
towards peace in my country.

The present moment is also an opportunity to pay
well-deserved tribute to Ambassador Kamel Morjane,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. His leadership
at the head of MONUC was crowned with success after
successfully dealing with several turbulent areas,
especially during the deployment of military liaison
officers in the rear of the various military headquarters
and during the deployment of the military observers
while carrying out phase II of MONUC.

On behalf of my Government, I welcome the
arrival at the head of MONUC of its new leader, Mr.
Amos Namanga Ngongi. I am sure that upon taking
over his duties, he will diligently work for the
scrupulous application of the various resolutions and
recommendations of the Security Council and for a
massive, rapid and complete deployment of MONUC
under phase III of the operation, thereby justifying the
confidence the Secretary-General has placed in him
and responding to the well-known expectations of the
Congolese people.

I also wish to congratulate the facilitator Sir
Ketumile Masire for the success of the Gaborone
meeting.
As for the members of the Council, everyone is
aware that the involvement of the Council and the
international community in the peace efforts in my
country has enabled several advances. However, it
must also be recognized that the Council could have
done better.

Allow me to remind you that the eyes of the
international community are now upon you. You are
called on to meet a great challenge, that of exercising
the prerogatives of the United Nations Charter to
restore the rights of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and its people, which have been abused by three
years of barbaric and pointless aggression.

You are accordingly obliged to act in keeping
with all your relevant resolutions, from resolution 1234
(1999) of 9 April 1999 through resolution 1335 (2001)
of 15 June 2001. You also have recourse to the basic
principles of the San Francisco Declaration of 26 June
1945, which are the very basis of the United Nations
Charter and introduce the peoples of the entire world to
the rule of international law by upholding the respect
due to the dignity of human beings, the protection of
freedoms, the affirmation of equality, independence
and the sovereignty of States.

Today, more than every before, the need to
demilitarize the city of Kisangani is a priority. My
delegation notes with surprise that it is precisely now,
when the Congolese people most greatly aspire to
peace, that certain individuals have chosen to
deliberately delay the peace process in my country.
There is especially the persistent refusal of the
Rassemblement congolais pour la democratie-Goma
(RCD-Goma) to demilitarize the city of Kisangani,
despite the many resolutions of the Council urging it to
do so. It is the Council's responsibility to take note of
this refusal and to impose on RCD-Goma the measures
prescribed in previous resolutions.

As a prime witness of the martyrdom and the
suffering of the Congolese people, and as a political
and physical symbol of renewal and the restoration of
the dignity of an entire people, Kisangani must be
completely demilitarized in order to eliminate the
effects of the profound trauma suffered by the people
since the serious clashes in the streets of the city
between the Rwandan Patriotic Army (RPA) and the
Uganda People's Defence Force (UPDF).

Moreover, my delegation notes with regret that
despite the commitment made at the eleventh session of
the Political Committee, one of the parties has still not
completed its redeployment and disengagement along
the new defensive positions as defined by the Harare
subplans, in violation of resolution 1341 (2001) and
1355 (2001) of the Council. This has prevented my
Government from undertaking its responsibilities,
particularly in the establishment of a civil
administration in the areas to be evacuated adjacent to
the disengagement line.

This deliberate stalling has held up the complete
implementation of phase II of MONUC's deployment,
while in accordance with the spirit of the Lusaka
Agreement, the Congolese people is already well along
the path of dialogue. My Government believes that
now is the ideal time for the Security Council to fully
assume its responsibilities and to translate into action
its many resolutions on the situation in my country,
particularly by ordering the quick launching of phase
III of the deployment of MONUC, which must
accompany the withdrawal of troops of aggression and
other foreign forces from the territory of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Throughout the whole of the territory of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo - from Goma to
Matadi, from Gbadolite to Lubumbashi, from Ikela to
Kikwit, from Mbuji-Mayi to Yangambi and from
Kinshasa to Kisangani - the Congolese people cherish
the unity, independence and national sovereignty of
their country. They are weary of the effects of a futile
and pointless war of aggression that was imposed on
them by surprise. The preparatory meeting for the
inter-Congolese dialogue, whose work ended last
Friday, attests to the ardent desire of a people for peace
and for progress towards national reconciliation and a
culture of democratic values that will allow them to
begin work on the daunting task of national
reconstruction while all along respecting political
diversity, human rights and fundamental freedoms.

As the Council is aware, the open-mindedness
demonstrated by my country since the coming to power
of the President of the Republic, Major-General Joseph
Kabila, has been for all the Congolese people an
indication of renewed confidence among all the parties.
My Government's presence at the Gaborone meeting
was proof, if any were needed, of our determination to
seriously consider the question of the inter-Congolese
dialogue.

As announced by my Foreign Minister,
Mr. Leonard She Okitundu, at a press conference held
in Kinshasa on Monday, 27 August 2001, generally
speaking one can deduce from the pre-dialogue work
done at Gaborone that there is a clear desire to return to
peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo-
beginning with the withdrawal of foreign troops. On
can also deduce an emotional, patriotic appeal for
unity, national concord and reconciliation among all of
the sons and daughters of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo - conditions that would ultimately lead to
the holding of free, transparent and democratic
elections.

The work done at Gaborone did indeed produce
encouraging and significant results, including the
setting of 15 October as the date for the
commencement of dialogue at Addis Ababa. In
addition, the rules of procedure for the national
dialogue, the agenda, the declaration on the withdrawal
of foreign troops and the Republican Pact were also
concluded. It is now up to the Security Council to
support this will and to take this opportunity to secure
the immediate, unconditional, total and final
withdrawal of Rwandan, Ugandan, Burundian and
other occupying forces from the territory of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. That should be
done in conformity with the order to withdraw
contained in resolution 1304 (2000), and should make
it possible for the sons and daughters of the country to
air wash dirty linen in private.

With regard to the security concerns put forth by
the aggressor countries, my Government has opted to
deprive those countries of all diversionary tactics
aimed at prolonging the occupation of the territory of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and at justifying
the continuation of the hostilities, which make possible
the illicit plunder and exploitation of the natural
resources and other riches of our country.

It is for that reason that, although it has been
attacked in flagrant violation of international law and
the Charter of the United Nations, my country
reiterates its willingness peacefully and conclusively to
resolve the conflict stemming from the three aggressor
countries. My country has no hidden agenda vis-a-vis
the aggressor countries. I can assure the Council that
my Government will not allow its national territory to
serve as a base for launching operations to destabilize
neighbouring countries with which it lives amicably. I
would therefore like to announce to the Council today
that in a few days my country, which takes seriously
the security demands of Rwanda, will be calling in the
ambassadors and members of the diplomatic corps
accredited to the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
announce to them the necessary cantonment measures
we have undertaken in the framework of the plans for
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
resettlement or repatriation (DDRRR). We will in due
course invite the United Nations and the Security
Council to certify this and to help us implement the
DDRRR measures proposed under the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement.

With regard to human rights, the points made by
Special Rapporteur Roberto Garreton after his recent
visit to the country are still relevant. That is
particularly the case with regard to his conclusion that
progress has been made by the Government in the area
of human rights. Nevertheless, he was not wrong in
deploring the situation in the territories under
occupation, where killings are still taking place-
killings he ascribes to the Congolese rebels and their
Rwandan and Ugandan allies.

At a time when many people were focussing on
Gaborone, where the preparatory work for the inter-
Congolese dialogue took place, the machine to
exterminate the Congolese people, guided by the
aggressor countries, has not stopped functioning.
Massacres, kidnappings and deportations of Congolese
people have continued apace. According to a press
release from the non-governmental organization SOS
droits de l'homme en catastrophe, which operates in
South Kivu, a total of nine people were summarily
executed between 2 and 3 August 2001 by elements of
the Rwandan Patriotic Army in the city of Uvira.
Between January and July of this year 108 people were
killed in that city by Rwandan troops. Most of them
were young people between the ages of 20 and 30 years
of age, but children as young as three were also killed.
A total of 85 young Congolese persons were recently
arrested by elements of the Rwandan Army. That figure
includes the disappearances of 47 persons from Buriba
and 38 from Kiliba, in North Kivu. According to the
Missionary Service News Agency (MISNA), they were
deported to Rwanda. Given these repeated offences by
the aggressor countries, immediate withdrawal from
the territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
is an indispensable condition for the restoration of
peace and the improvement the human rights situation
in that part of the country.

With regard to humanitarian matters, all the
reports made by humanitarian agencies about the
Congo agree that the current conflict has caused what
the Prime Minister of Belgium refers to as one of the
worst humanitarian disasters the world has ever seen.
Three years of war have pushed my country down to
the one-hundred and fifty-second place out of the 174
countries surveyed in the United Nations Development
Programme's Human Development Index. That means
we have dropped 12 places.
The consequences of that situation are well
known. Over 2.5 million people have died. Over 2
million people have become internally displaced, most
of them being children separated from their families.
Over 16 million people are in desperate need of food
aid, while 18.5 million people lack access to medical
services. Given this situation, my Government calls
upon the Security Council to take into account the very
relevant recommendations made recently by the non-
governmental groups Oxfam, Save the Children and
Christian Aid.

My Government, which has always given its full
cooperation to opening up humanitarian corridors, also
calls upon the Council to step up pressure on those who
continue to impede the work of humanitarian
organizations, so as to improve the access of
humanitarian workers to heretofore largely inaccessible
regions and to allow for the distribution of assistance
and the counting of displaced people within each
province. It will also be necessary to open up
humanitarian corridors to restore commercial links
between Kinshasa and the eastern and northern
provinces, in accordance with the plan of the Food and
Agriculture Organization.

With regard to the economic aspects of the
situation, my Government welcomes the initiative
taken by the Security Council to call for the Bretton
Woods institutions to carry out 40 quick-impact
projects in areas where contingents of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) have been deployed.
This is a matter of urgency. Ultimately, however, the
Council will have to discuss how to include appropriate
post-conflict management of the current crisis in plans
for the return of lasting peace.

In the light of the progress made in the political
inter-Congolese negotiations - all our hopes now
being pinned on 15 October - and with a View to
implementing the promising plans worked out by the
Political Committee for the total withdrawal of all
foreign forces from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, my Government believes that launching phase
III of MONUC's deployment should not be further
delayed. This was the thrust of the joint appeal made
recently in Windhoek by President Joseph Kabila, of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and President
Sam Nujoma, of Namibia, calling on MONUC to speed
up its deployment.

In conclusion, I should like to reiterate the
commitment of my Government to comply with the
Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement as well as with all
relevant resolutions of the Security Council on the
situation in my country. Therefore, I call upon the
Council to take note of the determination that was
clearly expressed at the end of the Gaborone meeting
by the representatives of all parties to the inter-
Congolese political negotiations, who spoke of the
urgent need for foreign forces to withdraw from the
territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
They unanimously launched an urgent appeal to the
United Nations to speed up the withdrawal process in
order to enable the Congolese to work to rebuild their
country.

My country has made good-neighbourliness one
of the guiding principles of its foreign policy, and we
intend to live in peace with our neighbours. As our
head of State, His Excellency Major-General Joseph
Kabila, said at the fifty-seventh session of the
Commission on Human Rights, in Geneva, it is still
possible for us to build a better world for the
traumatized peoples of the Great Lakes region. Our
meagre resources should be used for the development
of our countries and for the well-being of our peoples,
not for waging war.

