Mr. Nesho (Albania): At the outset, allow me to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council and on the excellent
work that your delegation has done this month.

Our delegation commends the report of the
Secretary-General and believes that the
recommendations of the Secretariat and of the Security
Council will find the necessary support and will guide
future activities in Kosovo.

We commend the Secretary-General for his
foresight as concerns the proposed measures relating to
priority of action in the framework of the standards
policy for Kosovo and for his inclusive approach to the
evaluation of Ambassador Eide's report.

Albania welcomes the impressive start made by
Mr. Saren Jessen-Petersen in the position of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and takes this
opportunity to thank him for the effective and high-
quality work he has accomplished since the very
beginning and for the great effort he has made to move
forward the implementation of resolution 1244 (1999).

The elections held in Kosovo this past October
have rightly been assessed as an important moment
with a positive impact on developments in the near
future. The parliamentary elections of 23 October were
free and fair and held in accordance with the criteria of
a democratic system. That election demonstrated once
again the political willingness and proper engagement
of the Kosovar Albanians in the process of achieving a
democratic and stable Kosovo.

After the disheartening events of March 2004 in
Kosovo, this was the first time that the local authorities
were directly engaged and had the responsibility of
organizing the elections, whose outcome revealed once
again the leadership capabilities of local government in
Kosovo. That significant accomplishment is an
important step towards building a free, multi-ethnic
and democratic society in Kosovo.

We regret the fact that the Serbian community did
not participate in the elections, as we had wished and
expected, due to the negative influence of some
nationalist and religious circles still influential in
Belgrade. Nevertheless, the existing legislation in
Kosovo does guarantee a number of seats for minority
representatives, leaving the door open for the Kosovo
Serb representatives and enabling them to directly
exercise their right to protect their own community
interests, as the representatives of other minority
groups are already doing.

The new institutions formed after the elections
will face challenges in the next four years, and we
believe that their priority attention will be effectively
focused on the realization of the required standards for
Kosovo. We commend the establishment of a dialogue
among the different communities in the pre-election
period. Unfortunately, that dialogue did not continue
during or after the election, because of the pressure
exercised by outside political factors.

In that regard, we consider of great importance
the revitalization of that welcome dialogue, in the
strong belief that this will increase inter-ethnic
relations and cooperation. The revitalization of that
important bridge of communication will positively
affect the political dialogue between Pristina and
Belgrade.

This coming year will be of great importance for
Kosovo, especially with regard to the speed with which
it will approach its European future. That process,
which we believe will be affected by the expected
realization of the standards achieved, requires the
serious and full engagement of the democratic
institutions and civil society of Kosovo and of all the
other actors who are seriously interested and involved
in the quest to achieve a peaceful and stable region.

What we expect from Kosovo is a free, multi-
ethnic and democratic society, with full respect for
minorities and human rights, the return of displaced
persons and their integration into society, and the
strengthening of the rule of law, which will surely be a
real contribution towards the stability and security of
the region. In order to achieve that benchmark, it is
crucial that the necessary space be created for dialogue
and understanding and for the elaboration of
cooperation policies which should be developed
independently, away from the political debate on the
future status of Kosovo.

The economic development of Kosovo is strongly
and directly related to its future. We welcome the
affirmation of that crucial factor in Ambassador Eide's
report and fully support the evaluation of the current
situation in Kosovo. We support the development and
the implementation of an economic plan, with the
engagement of the international institutions and the
Provisional Institutions of Kosovo.

The final status of Kosovo is part of a broad and
multidimensional process that has already started and
involves a number of players. Each of them has its own
place and is offering its own contribution. In these
circumstances, we believe that the decision on the final
status of Kosovo, to be taken by the Security Council,
has to take into account the will of the Kosovar people.
We are of the opinion that a decision on the future
status of Kosovo should go beyond regional round
tables and should be decided in a measured and
determined way by the international community,
thereby fostering peace and stability in the region.

Last but not least, our delegation commends the
excellent statement made today by the British
representative, Sir Emyr Jones Parry, which not only
reflected a good understanding of the situation on the
ground but also wisely and realistically put forward
some of the duties and responsibilities that should be
undertaken by all the players in the region; indeed, a
simple emotional response will hardly suffice.

