Mr. Malok (South Sudan): Permit me to begin
by congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
May. I would like to assure you of our full cooperation
in achieving the success of your presidency.

I would also like to acknowledge the positive role
played by your predecessor in leading the Council
last month.

We warmly welcome the report (S/2017/3l2) of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Abyei and strongly
support the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA). As we have
repeatedly stated, although it continues to face serious
challenges in implementing its mandate, UNISFA is
the best thing that has happened to Abyei in its long
history of struggle. With regard to UNISFA's presence
in the Abyei Area, the report of the Secretary-General
shows that, although a great deal remains to be done,
notable progress has been made in promoting peace
and security in Abyei, thereby fostering reconciliation
and cooperation among the communities that converge
seasonally in the Area, delivering social services and
humanitarian assistance, and initiating programmes
dealing with social economic development. That
would not have been possible without the creative and
determined effort of UNISFA.

Cooperation between the two countries is critical
to any constructive and productive effort in Abyei.
Indeed, even the progress made by UNISFA could
not have been possible without a certain degree of
functional cooperation between the Governments
of the Sudan and South Sudan. However, much more
cooperation is needed if the efforts of UNISFA are to
continue to bear tangible results that will benefit the
two countries and help facilitate continued progress in
the countries' relationship.

The Government of the Republic of South Sudan
believes that the withdrawal of support for the Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism would
negatively impact the implementation of the Agreements
on Cooperation and Security Arrangements, by
emboldening each side to take a more combative
posture along the border. The Security Council is urged
to continue to encourage support of the Mechanism
because ceasing the vital support that is much needed
for the Area may lead to a proxy conflict along the
South Sudan-Sudan border.

We are indeed encouraged by the recent
improvement in relations between the two countries.
The Government of South Sudan sincerely hopes that
that will develop into even greater cooperation in a
wide range of areas of mutual concern and interest.
In this connection, it is our firm belief that the Abyei
Area could contribute significantly to the development
of cordial ties between the two countries. This can
be done by building on grass-roots intercommunal
cooperation, which can extend to the national level in
the two countries.

In conclusion, as things now stand it is obvious
that the search for a final solution to the Abyei problem
has stalled due to the differences between the two
Governments, despite the tireless efforts of the African
Union High-Level Implementation Panel, under the
leadership of the former President of South Africa,
Thabo Mbeki, and the support ofthe African Union and
the United Nations.

The people of Abyei and the neighbouring
communities from both the north and the south who
migrate to the Area seasonally in search of water and
pasture cannot be abandoned to suffer neglect in a
vacuum of State responsibility for their security and
general welfare. The international community is called
upon to step in and fill the vacuum, not only in the
immediate interests of the communities concerned,
but also in the long-term interests of the two countries.
This is urgently needed to stabilize the situation in the
Area and create an environment for a more constructive
and fruitful dialogue on the future of Abyei.

The meeting rose at 7.50 pm.
