Mr. Thu (Myanmar): At the outset, I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this meeting
on the important issue of children and armed conflict.
We would also like to express our appreciation to the
Secretary-General for providing us with the report
contained in document S/2013/245. And I take this
opportunity to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, for her
positive commendation of the Government of Myanmar
on the important steps it has taken to better protect
children.

Indeed, my delegation is pleased to see many
positive conclusions about my own country in the
Secretary-General's report. The very first paragraph
on Myanmar highlights the fact that

"[i]n 2012 there were encouraging commitments
and actions by the Government of Myanmar to
prevent and end grave violations against children"

(S/2013/245, para. 99).

It also acknowledges that the number of cases of the
recruitment and use of children by the national armed
forces has decreased, thanks to prevention measures
and strengthened recruitment processes. That progress
was the result of the wide-ranging democratic reform
measures instituted by the new Government just over
two years ago, which included its renewed commitment
and efforts towards promoting and protecting the
fundamental rights of the people, including women and
children. The signing on 27 June 2012 of an action plan
between the Government of Myanmar and the United
Nations country team was a historic development that
demonstrated the Government's firm commitment to
ending the recruitment and use of underage children by
the armed forces.
The implementation of our action plan has gained
momentum with the launching, in cooperation with the
country task force on monitoring and reporting, of an
awareness campaign among the armed forces, at various
levels, designed to increase understanding of the laws
and regulations prohibiting underage recruitment.
There were reports of a slight rise in the number of
complaints of underage recruitment in 2012 compared
to 2011, but that was due not to actual recruitment
increases but to enhanced awareness of the complaint
mechanism and a newfound freedom of expression.

Just seven months after the signing of the action
plan, a total of 66 underage recruits were allowed to
demobilize and reintegrate with their parents on two
occasions. During 2012 alone, 538 potential underage
recruits were rejected at the screening stage. The
number of demobilized so far may not yet match the list
of suspected underage recruits provided by the country
task force, as it is a time-consuming job to check and
verify them thoroughly around the country; the list
may also include fabricated complaints. My delegation
fully recognizes that many challenges remain to be
addressed. There may still be some cases of individuals
who are guilty of illegal recruitment, intentionally
or unintentionally. The Government does not
condone such individual violators. We must therefore
distinguish isolated cases of certain individuals from
the policy of the armed forces as a whole, which have
laws prohibiting the recruitment of underage children
for military services.

With regard to access to operational regiments,
since the action plan was launched the Government has
already allowed the country task force to make at least
10 visits to monitor regional commands, basic military
training facilities, military recruitment centres and
mobile recruitment teams. Visits to some areas have
been put on hold due to the absence ofmany officers and
other ranks from their regiments on ongoing national
duty for overriding reasons of defence, security,
disaster prevention or resettlement. The absence in
large numbers of the rank and file does not make for
effective or meaningful monitoring visits.

As my delegation has stated time and again, the
best way to enhance the protection of children in armed
conflict is to address the root causes of those conflicts
by promoting peace, national reconciliation, sustainable
development, poverty eradication and the protection of
human rights. The reported violations took place during
military clashes in Kachin State more than a year ago.
That fighting is now a thing of the past. The guns have
fallen silent in every corner of the country since the
Government recently reached ceasefire agreements with
almost all the armed groups, including the remaining
group of the Kachin Independence Organization, which
has also struck an agreement with the Government
in recent peace talks. Just last week the Government
granted humanitarian access to Kachin State for the
first time in a year. We hope that the spread of peace
and security will eliminate the alleged violations in
both our armed forces and non-State armed groups.

The action plan and renewed commitment are now
in place to further address the issue. The Government
needs greater encouragement from the United Nations,
with full understanding of our challenges, in order to
speed up its implementation. If the United Nations can
increase its support for Myanmar's efforts to achieve
full implementation of the action plan, and de-list
Myanmar's armed forces, the Tatmadaw Kyi, Myanmar
could become a model success story of the ending of
the use of child soldiers. To that end, Myanmar looks
forward to working closely with the Office of the
Special Representative and the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict.

