Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank
Jordan for the initiative of calling for this public meeting
and the Spanish presidency for having convened it
immediately afterwards. I also thank Mr. Taye-Brook
Zerihoun, Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, for his briefing.

Chad is deeply concerned about the outbreak
of violence in the occupied Palestinian territories,
particularly in East Jerusalem, provoked by the recent
incursions by extremist settler groups on the esplanade
of the Al-Aqsa Mosque. Indeed, these incursions have
led to a series of legitimate angry protests against the
endless Israeli occupation, the indiscriminate acts of
repression and the constant humiliation of Palestinian
civilians.

We strongly condemn all violence from any quarter
against innocent civilians. The increasingly growing
number of reported civilian casualties, including
children and women, since the beginning of October
reflects the extent of violence in the occupied territories,
particularly in the city of Al-Quds Al-Sharif. These
acts of repression are unacceptable and constitute a
flagrant violation of international humanitarian law, in
particular the Fourth Geneva Convention.
Given this situation, the international community
and especially the Security Council must assume
their responsibilities without hesitation by taking
appropriate measures to ensure the protection of
Palestinian civilians. The Security Council must act
urgently to end these serious violations and ensure
that the provocations of extremist settlers aggravating
the situation, including recurrent desecrations of holy
places, are not repeated. The international community
must not accept any of the horrors that Palestinians have
to suffer every day. And the occupying Power should
not benefit from total impunity for serious violations
that it continues to commit vis-a-vis innocent civilians.

This new deterioration of the situation underscores
the urgent need to relaunch the political process on new
bases in order to put an end to endless negotiations
that are currently deadlocked and make the two-State
solution a tangible reality. In this regard, the Security
Council must get more involved if the solution of two
States living side by side in peace and mutual respect
is to be saved. The parameters of the two-State solution
are known to all and should in no way be called into
question under any circumstances.

In this context, we call on both parties to work harder
to calm the situation and to put confidence-building
measures in place. Accordingly, Israel must freeze
settlement construction and stop attacks against
civilians, incursions into the Al-Aqsa Mosque, the
demolition of housing and the forced displacement of
Palestinians.

In conclusion, we reiterate our firm conviction
that the two-State solution alone is the fairest and most
realistic option and that it could allow Israelis and
Palestinians to live in peace and security.

