Mr. Mayr-Harting: Let me first thank you,
Mr. President, and your delegation for having organized
this very important debate.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union (EU) and its member States. The candidate
countries Turkey, Montenegro and Serbia, the country
of the Stabilization and Association Process and
potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well
as the Republic of Moldova, align themselves with this
statement.

In your concept note (S/2014/30, annex),
Mr. President, you reminded us ofthe opening paragraph
of the Charter of the United Nations, which expresses
the determination of the peoples of the United Nations
"to save succeeding generations from the scourge of
war, which twice in our lifetime has brought untold
sorrow to mankind".

Speaking as a European before the Council in 2014,
exactly 100 years after the outbreak of the Great War
and 75 years after Adolf Hitler plunged Europe into a
second global conflagration, I have to face the fact that
both of those World Wars were started in Europe. Just
two days ago, the Holocaust Memorial Ceremony in the
General Assembly Hall once again reminded us of the
very darkest pages of recent European history.

But speaking for the European Union today, I am
taking the floor for the very organization that probably
represents the most striking case of lessons learned in
the history of our war-torn continent. It is true that great
Europeans such as Jean-Jacques Rousseau, Immanuel
Kant, Giuseppe Mazzini and Victor Hugo devised
strategies for perpetual peace and European unity long
before the process of European integration ever started.
But it was this very process of European integration
that was able to make a real difference after centuries
of war and conflict.

When Robert Schuman announced the creation
of the Coal and Steel Community in May 1951, he
predicted that this pooling of resources would make war
between France and Germany "not merely unthinkable,
but materially impossible". As the Permanent
Representative of Luxembourg already reminded us
at the very beginning of this debate, Schuman also
insisted that

"Europe will not be made all at once, or according
to a single plan. It will be built through concrete
achievements which first create a de facto
solidarity".

Those who follow our efforts, be it in Brussels or
here in New York, are only too well aware that "making
Europe" remains hard work, even more than 60 years
after the Schuman declaration. But they also know
that, for the European nations joined in that process,
those six decades represent the longest shared period
of uninterrupted peace throughout their entire history.

Ahead of this debate, Sir, you stressed the importance
of reconciliation. We believe that the European
experience has demonstrated that reconciliation is
possible, even between those who saw each other as
hereditary enemies for countless generations. But
reconciliation cannot be decreed. Reconciliation among
nations requires leadership, but it must grow over time.
One of the best practical ways to promote reconciliation
is probably to focus on common concrete achievements
of the kind that Schuman spoke about.

You, Mr. President, underlined the need to
base meaningful reconciliation on shared historical
understanding. You have also made a number of
interesting practical suggestions in that context and
on how to promote such a reconciliation process. We
agree with your basic assessment, but we know that
efforts in this field represent a considerable challenge,
even in our European framework. Nonetheless, some
remarkable work has been done in this field, primarily
at a bilateral level, between individual Member States,
including on the development of common educational
material for schools.

Let me add that the first precondition for providing
a better historical understanding to people, especially
young people, in post-conflict situations is to maintain
educational activities during conflict, or at least
re-establish them as soon as fighting has ended. If
entire generations of children in regions of conflict
do not have the chance to go to school, it will be even
more difficult to win their hearts and minds, and
reconciliation will face even greater challenges. That
is one of the main reasons that the European Union is
placing so much emphasis on support for education
for the hundreds of thousands of children affected by
conflict all over the world, most recently in Syria.

Let me underline that the European Union and its
member States fully share the View expressed in your
concept note, Sir, that durable reconciliation cannot be
achieved without individual criminal accountability for
those responsible for the most serious crimes: genocide,
crimes against humanity and major war crimes. That
is another part of our shared European experience.
Ensuring that kind of accountability is a specific
responsibility of the Security Council. In that context,
the Council's continued support for the International
Criminal Court is particularly important.

Based on our own experience, we are firmly
convinced that regional integration is a concept that
can make a major contribution to peace and lasting
reconciliation, including beyond the present borders of
the European Union. As Council members know, we
offer the perspective of membership in the European
Union to all the countries of the Western Balkans. We
are convinced that European integration also provides
them with the best chance to overcome the legacy of
history and forge a brighter future under a common
European roof.

Also based on our own experience, we are
committed to supporting all those who pursue the goal
of integration in other parts of the world. Our close
and intensive cooperation with the African Union
demonstrates that in an especially vivid manner.

The Security Council has repeatedly underlined
the important contributions that regional and
subregional organizations can make to the maintenance
of international peace and security. The European
Union and its member States have a longstanding and
firm commitment to international peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, including through European Union-led
military and police missions. It is therefore very
fitting that this important debate is taking place just
one day after the Council unanimously authorized the
deployment of an EU operation in the Central African
Republic.

The Austrian writer Ingeborg Bachmann once wrote
that history was a great teacher, but that it did not find
any pupils. I believe that our European experience, but
also that of the United Nations, the African Union and
numerous other regional and subregional organizations
across the globe, demonstrates that nations and peoples,
as well as the international community as a whole, are
able to learn from history. It is a learning process that
requires constant encouragement, such as through the
meeting that you, Sir, decided to convene today. Thank
you once again for this initiative.

