Mr. Mohamed (Somalia): It gives me a great
pleasure to appear before this body today to report
about the success that the Transitional Federal
Institutions (TFI), including my Government, have
achieved during their first 100 days in office, as well as
the challenges ahead as we bring to a close the seventh
year of the transitional federal system of governance in
our nation. I come before the Council today to give an
update on the progress we have made, the challenges
we face and the strategies that we hope to employ to
mitigate those challenges.

As I mentioned in January (see S/PV.6467) and as
stipulated in the road map, my Government's five main
priorities are to improve security, enhance
reconciliation, complete the transitional tasks -
including the completion of our constitutional
process- address humanitarian crises and promote
good governance.

Let me begin by expressing my heartfelt gratitude
and sincere appreciation for the ongoing support to
Somalia from the United Nations, the African Union
(AU) and the international community. That
11-25831
unwavering support is critical to our efforts to rid
Somalia of its sworn enemy, the Al-Shabaab, which is
part of a vast global terrorist network. In particular, we
are especially grateful to the young men and women
who make up the AU troops. Hailing from Uganda and
Burundi, they are sacrificing their lives for Somalia.
We salute and mourn those who paid the ultimate price.
We are eternally grateful for their priceless sacrifice.

Let me state in no uncertain terms that my
Government is the Council's committed and credible
partner in defeating our two common enemies, namely,
Al-Shabaab and lawlessness - that is, piracy. Our
troops and the forces of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) are currently making tangible
progress in reclaiming large portions of territory from
the enemy throughout the country, including the
nation's capital, Mogadishu, and its surroundings, as
shown in the map I have provided. As we mobilize the
Somali people behind these security successes and
forge ahead on our explicit road map in the next few
months, we are confident that we will meet our
objectives in bringing most of southern Somalia under
the Transitional Federal Government (TFG). It is our
View that by meeting that objective we will be that
much closer to attaining the transitional tasks set out in
our Federal Charter.

We are in the first line of defence against two
evils, namely, the scourge of piracy and the plague of
terrorism. We need to defeat them at the source, which
requires cooperation and collaboration between us and
the international community. Fighting these twin evils
requires moral fortitude and a strong political will from
us, the Somalis, and strong commitment and support
from the international community. We have to
understand that lawlessness is both the root cause and
the breeding ground for both terrorism and piracy,
coupled with poverty and unemployment and
permeated by fanaticism and religious indoctrination.

We recently saw the human face of piracy when
four innocent Americans were killed by ruthless pirates.
Our heart goes out to their loved ones. The scourge of
piracy cannot be defeated on the high seas. Its solution
lies in bringing back the rule of law to Somalia and
helping coastal communities to develop alternative
livelihoods. Moreover, not only are these two ills
working in tandem, but they are learning from each
other. It will not surprise us if Al-Qaida agents in
Somalia start hijacking tankers in the high seas and
using them as deadly weapons, as they did in

11-2583]
September 2001. Why bother with a small plane when
you can capture a tanker?

During the past 100 days, my new Government,
comprised of 18 ministers who are able technocrats
from within and outside the country, is changing the
political landscape and earning the respect of our
citizens and our partners in the international
community. We are fully and forcefully engaged in
implementing good governance to improve our
capacity and to realize our national road map, which
includes the following.

With regard to accountability and transparency in
financial management, we have, for the first time,
established measures that will enhance the collection of
public revenues from both the seaport and the airport
of Mogadishu, the two main revenue-generating
Government services in the public sector, as well as the
distribution of public funds. Since then public-revenue
collections have improved significantly, in line with
the annual State budget for 2011 approved by the
Parliament and the audited accounts of 2010, which
have been submitted to our international partners.

With regard to the anti-corruption taskforce,
following more than 20 years of statelessness,
corruption in Somalia has became endemic, with the
pilfering of public funds being an activity undertaken
shamelessly. Against that backdrop, the anti-corruption
taskforce is an essential and necessary deterrent
measure to end the abuse and misuse of public funds,
goods and property. Members of my Cabinet and I are
were the first signatories of these anti-corruption rules
and procedures, so as to send the message that this
Government has a zero-tolerance policy on corruption
and the appalling practices of the past.

With regard to enhancing the delivery of services,
it is essential to empower and rebuild the capacity of
Government institutions so as to reach our citizens.
Some of the successes achieved in that regard involve
public safety and security, new or improved public
health services, the opening of new schools, the
installation of new street lights and cleaning and waste
collection services.

With regard to the security sector, with improved
street lighting and police patrols day and night, the
Government-controlled areas of Mogadishu are a lot
safer, as indicated by the growing nightlife in the
streets. Another critical component of our security
strategy involves the ongoing reform of the services.
These reform efforts are focused on providing the
necessary logistics, tools and equipment, as well as
paying salaries on time.

Let me emphasize the urgent need of deploying
the additional 4,000 AU troops approved by the
Security Council to reinforce the efforts to bring about
peace and stability.

An equally important priority for my Government
is the establishment of a credible and effective
disarmament, demobilization and rehabilitation
programme. After 20 years of continuous conflict,
many of our youth have not experienced peaceful
coexistence in their entire lives. Restoring their faith in
society and Government and reintegrating them into
their communities is a long-term task that we must
initiate immediately. We have devised the means to
welcome and assist a rising number of youth defectors
from the ranks of Al-Shabaab. To that end, we are also
searching for effective means to counter the soul-
destroying radicalization efforts of the insurgent
groups, not just in Somalia but also in diaspora
communities around the world. That is absolutely
critical if we are to win the hearts and minds of our
youth and to secure their future.

Regarding the constitutional development process,
in our quest to reform the TFG model, we have
undertaken, with our international partners, a process
that has produced a draft constitution. To expedite that
further, we now have in place an independent
constitutional commission, a parliamentary
constitutional committee and a cabinet-level ministry
that are hard at work coordinating and finalizing the
draft constitution and achieving the necessary
consensus within the Transitional Federal Institutions
and the Somali public.

With regard to reconciliation and outreach, we all
agree that reconciliation and conflict resolution at the
local, regional and national levels are the cornerstone
of peace and security in our nation. In that spirit, my
Government continues to engage in and to facilitate the
resolution of conflict through dialogue and peaceful
means.

That is evidenced by the achievements of the two
Cabinet-led missions to the central regions in the past
100 days. The first resolved the hot war between two
clans in Galmudug and Puntland, and the second
between clans in Galmudug and Himan and Heeb. Our
agreement with Ahlu Sunnah Wal Jama'a is holding
firm and is being implemented; and it will continue to
be part and parcel of the current Government. Let me
highlight again that the Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama'a and
TFG forces are jointly conducting security operations
in many parts of the country with a successful outcome.

Regarding humanitarian assistance, with the
expanding security operations and a debilitating
drought across the country, there has been a major
increase in the number of internally displaced persons
(IDPs). In Mogadishu alone, up to 80,000 IDPs have
moved into Government-controlled areas. We appeal to
the international community for urgent medical and
food assistance to help the IDPs. For our part, in
addition to the port and airport facilities in Mogadishu,
we are opening up new corridors along our borders,
particularly in the central and southern parts of the
country.

As is clear from this summary of our road map,
my Cabinet and I have the will and the commitment to
rebuild State institutions so as to meet the basic
requirements of our citizens. We are winning the hearts
and minds of the Somali population. A recent study
conducted by Mogadishu Media House, an independent
local media organization, released this month shows
that 75 per cent of the people surveyed in Mogadishu
indicated strong displeasure with Al-Shabaab and its
extremist ideology. Of the participants, 70 per cent
recognized that the TFG is making a great effort to
reach out to the regions and the opposition groups.
Finally, 75 per cent rated AMISOM. and the African
Union forces as friends of the Somali people. That is
clearly a far cry from the general public view only a
few months earlier.

On transitional issues, the transitional period will
end on 20 August. Although the seven-year term of the
current TFG has had its ups and downs, some progress
has been achieved. Nonetheless, I am here today to
underpin our ongoing consultations as partners with a
common interest in reaching a consensus on the post-
transitional framework.

First and foremost, as confirmed by the Cabinet
meeting in Mogadishu on 7 March, the executive
branch has approved and adopted the following: first,
the formal end of the TFG term on 20 August 2011, in
accordance with the Charter; secondly, the election of
the Speaker and the deputies to be held in July 2011;
thirdly, the election of the President to be held in
August 2011; fourthly, the new Government should be
11-25831
given ample time to fulfil the remaining transitional
tasks, including the ratification of the constitution and
the establishment of the election commission; flfthly,
parliamentary reform to commence immediately in line
with the ongoing reform of the executive branch and
the security sector; and sixthly, a caretaker
Government to be appointed by the new leadership to
move the country to permanent statehood.

In conclusion, let me reaffirm our commitment to
our people and to the international community. I state
before the Council that we will regain our land, our
identity and our dignity from the extremists. We will
not compromise the interests of our nation or the future
of our children. We will do whatever it takes to regain
our status as a State that protects its borders from
enemies, foreign and domestic, ends all forms of
international piracy, protects its citizens, and produces
a nation at peace with itself and its neighbours.

