Ms. Baldwin (United Kingdom): On behalf of
the United Kingdom, I too would like to express our
gratitude to the Polish presidency for organizing today's
important discussion, and to thank our briefers for their
statements this morning.

There are few values more important to the United
Kingdom than upholding international law. It is the
very foundation of peace and security. Today, conflicts
and tragedies in Syria, Burma, Ukraine and elsewhere
have shown us the importance of that commitment and
the consequences of the failure to uphold international
law. In Syria, appalling violations of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law
by the regime and its backers continue. Russia's use
of the veto in the Security Council, which stopped
the work of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism, means that there is currently no means
available to properly investigate the use of chemical
weapons against Syrian civilians. In Burma, the
authorities have yet to begin a credible domestic
investigation into the clear violations of human rights
law in Rakhine state. Yet it is imperative to ensure
that there is a route to hold the perpetrators of those
crimes to account. In Ukraine, the illegal annexation
of Crimea four years ago represents a egregious assault
on international law. The enduring conflict in eastern
Ukraine continues to destroy lives.

When armed conflicts break out, it is vital that
all parties respect international humanitarian law
and act in accordance with their obligations under it.
As members of the international community and the
Security Council, we are all responsible for upholding
international rules and norms. Today we must ask
ourselves how we discharge that responsibility.
The initiative on strengthening compliance with
international humanitarian law facilitated by the
International Committee of the Red Cross and the
Swiss Government has significant potential to aid that
effort. It is a valuable first step, and I encourage all
States to engage with that process, but that alone will
not be sufficient.

Enabling the meaningful participation of women in
decision-making is also key to upholding the rule of
law. We know that inclusive decision-making processes
are critical to preventing the escalation of conflict and
maintaining and supporting peace in post-conflict
societies. I call on States to act on the commitments
agreed to in the Council's resolutions on women and
peace and security, and to recognize that they are an
integral part of our effort to maintain peace and security.

Sadly, there will be times when violations of
international humanitarian law or international human
rights law do occur. There must be no impunity in such
instances. It is, of course, States themselves that have
the primary responsibility to ensure that perpetrators
are brought to justice, but we, as the international
community, also have a role in helping States meet
their responsibilities. A year ago, the Council voted
unanimously to adopt resolution 2379 (2017), which
set up an investigative team to assist efforts to hold
Da'esh accountable for crimes committed in Iraq.
That team will collect, preserve and analyse evidence
of Da'esh's heinous crimes and will work closely with
the Government of Iraq and organizations already
collecting such evidence. We hope that all States will
support that important mechanism by contributing to
the United Nations Trust Fund.

The United Kingdom has strongly supported
Human Rights Council resolutions aimed at increasing
accountability. We welcome the efforts of the Secretary-
General and the Secretariat to mainstream the promotion
and protection of human rights in all United Nations
activities. Such United Nations human rights tools as
monitoring, reporting and analysis can provide key
early-warning systems and help to identify and address
the root causes of conflict as a means of prompting an

effective and early United Nations response.

The International Criminal Court also has a key
role to play in restoring peace and security. It ensures
accountability, acts as a deterrent, supports victims and
helps to establish a historical narrative of accountability.
However, for it to succeed, the Court requires the full
cooperation of States. Its inability to act directly against
those whom it seeks to arrest makes it entirely reliant
on States to execute the arrest warrants it issues. But for
too long and too frequently those indicted by the Court
have been able to travel freely without fear of arrest
and prosecution. We therefore urge all States to honour
resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1593 (2005) by cooperating
fully with the Court and its Prosecutor.

The ad hoc International Tribunals set up by the
Security Council have been crucial in bringing to
justice those most responsible for the terrible crimes
committed in Rwanda and the Balkans during the 1990s.
We are so grateful to Judge Meron and his colleagues for
taking forward the important work of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. We hope
that States will continue to ensure that the Mechanism
has sufficient resources to fulfil its mandate. We also
note the important role that the International Court
of Justice has played for many years in ensuring the
maintenance of international peace and security.

In summary, the United Kingdom believes that we
must continue to work together to deliver accountability
andjustice, and to reaffirm our commitment to the core
tenets of international law.

