Mr. Okio (Congo) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks you, Mr. President, for having
convened this meeting in a new format that enables us
to have a comprehensive assessment of the activities
carried out by the three subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council: the Committees established pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540
(2004). We also wish to commend and thank in
particular Ambassadors Verbeke, Arias and Burian for
the quality of their work in leading the Committees, as
well as the expert groups that assist them in carrying
out their missions.

As we stated in our first statement on this topic to
the Security Council as an elected member, 22 months
ago, the phenomenon of terrorism is spreading. Its
horizontal and vertical growth leads us to compare it to
the Hydra of Lerna, the serpent with seven heads that,
according to mythology, would grow back as soon as
they were cut off. That growth is both visible and daily,
despite the national and international measures that we
have taken since 2001. That can only make us worry.
Therefore, we must wonder about the effectiveness of
our strategies and their implementation.

What we should point out here is that the
activities of the three Committees, while remarkable,
certainly do not attack the root of this evil, which,
moreover, is not their mandate. The Committees are
committed to taking appropriate measures against
Al-Qaida, the Taliban and associated individuals - all
of whom are terrorists - to deprive them of travel,
access to sources of financing and weapons of mass
destruction. But the breeding ground for terrorism
remains more or less intact. Squalor, poverty,
corruption, injustices of all kinds and the illegal trade
in small arms and light weapons are more present
today than ever before in certain countries. And it is in
that context that terrorism is spreading.

If we have more or less managed to reduce
terrorism's financial and material resources, we have
not yet succeeded at reducing its recruitment base.
Unfortunately, when we deal with these sometimes
existential issues, certain tensions arise. What should a
policeman or an underpaid customs officer do when
faced with the lure of corruption? What can be done by
a guard at a border post who lacks the tools needed to
detect a false passport, for example? We should simply
like to highlight the need to pay greater attention to the
essential, burning questions being asked today in
vulnerable regions or countries that could become
fertile ground for terrorism tomorrow.

Our fight against terrorism must be diversified to
include the issues of development, development
assistance and strengthened technical assistance. Of
course, none of that falls within the Council's purview.

We take this opportunity to welcome the major
role played by certain bodies, such as INTERPOL and
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC), in raising the awareness of States and the
international community about the real threat of
terrorism. We share the view of the Chairmen of the
three Committees, who stressed in their joint statement
that the primary responsibility for combating terrorism
rests with Member States. That is true, but only if the
State concerned itself has the means to act. Some
States are nearly bankrupt. What can they do under
those circumstances? Others do not even have effective
control over their own territories and borders. That is
why we believe that interactive action between States
that provide assistance and States that request it, as
well as with all actors involved to some degree in the
fight against terrorism, must be strengthened.

In that context, we also believe that particular
emphasis should be placed on the situation of African
countries, which for the most part have large territories
and porous borders and lack appropriate infrastructure,
logistics and sufficient financial and human resources.
Thus, they run the risk of becoming fertile ground for
the development of terrorist activity.

Finally, we call on the international community,
particularly the United Nations, to encourage
initiatives such as the those undertaken recently by the
three Committees to fight terrorism in association with
the UNODC, to continue holding seminars at the
regional and subregional levels and to increase the
number of visits to States, in order to share information
or experience that could prove useful in the long run.

In conclusion, we ask the Security Council to
take into consideration the concerns of the States of the
West and Central African regions as expressed in the
final document adopted at the subregional workshop
held in Dakkar from 25 to 27 September 2007, so as to
make it possible for them to prepare responses for the
Security Council Committees involved in the fight
against terrorism.

