Mr. Ahmad (Pakistan): Once again we return to
this Chamber, as we have done so many times before,
to discuss the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question. Like others, Sir, we too are
happy to see you presiding over this important Security
Council meeting.

The deteriorating situation in Palestine now
threatens to nullify all the efforts made over the past
two decades to bring peace and stability to the Middle
East. With the peace process derailed and violence
spiraling out of control, never in the history of the
Palestine crisis has the situation been so fragile or the
need to respond more critical.

We have debated the issue of Palestine for well
over half a century in this chamber. It is one of the two
unresolved disputes - the other being the Kashmir
issue - involving the destiny of peoples and their
inalienable right to self-determination which have
serious implications for world peace and security and
have been on the agenda of the Security Council all
these years. In both cases, there are Security Council
resolutions which provide a framework for their
resolution and, unfortunately, in both cases the
resolutions remain on the shelves of the Council,
unimplemented.

The Security Council's resolutions on Palestine
call for peace in the Middle East based on Israel's
withdrawal from the occupied territories. Yet, as these
resolutions remain unimplemented, this peace also
remains as elusive as ever. Violence continues to spiral
out of control. The Palestinian people, like others in
similar circumstances, continue to be deprived of their
legitimate right to self-determination. While we have
waited for this body to act and to implement its own
resolutions, the situation has continued to deteriorate,
with flickers of hope turning into ashes of despair. The
Secretary-General could not have put it more
appropriately when he said that "we are nearing the
edge of the abyss".

We agree with Secretary-General that the
situation is bleak, but not irreversible, and that there is
room for hope. We also agree with him that the
situation now unfolding requires urgent steps. The
Secretary-General has also given a realistic expression
to the collective hopes of the United Nations

S/PV.4478

 

membership for an end to this dismal situation by
welcoming what he described as "new thinking and
imaginative ideas" that seem to find currency in the
face of the aggravating situation. This new thinking, if
pursued in good earnest, should augur well for the
prospect of peace in the Middle East. Every challenge
brings with it an opportunity and, indeed, exceptional
challenges warrant exceptional responses. The time has
now come to close this unpleasant chapter of conflict
and misery and turn over a new leaf for peace and
coexistence on the basis of justice and equity. In
building upon any new approach, we do not have to
look very far beyond Security Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973), which provide the fundamental
basis for peace in that region.

Violence only begets violence. It solves no
problem. The present deteriorating situation warrants
our urgent attention. The international community must
act and act with determination to prevent the situation
from worsening. The prospects for peace in the Middle
East will remain bleak without the immediate cessation
of all acts of violence, provocation and destruction.
The peace process needs to be put back on track, and
that is not possible without a return to the situation that
existed before September 2000. Violence of all sorts
and on any scale is deplorable and must come to an
end. The recommendations of the Mitchell report need
to be implemented. A better environment needs to be
created to ensure the safety of all civilians. The
international community, particularly the guarantors of
the peace process, must use their influence and good
offices to ensure full compliance with the peace
agreements and the relevant Security Council
resolutions.

We all know that no lasting peace in the Middle
East will be possible without achieving a peaceful
settlement of the question of Palestine. And we also
know that the realization of the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people, especially the right to self-
determination and the withdrawal of occupation forces
from the occupied territories, as well as the
dismantling of illegal settlements, are the essential
ingredients of a peace settlement. We urge the
concerned parties, especially the guarantors of the
peace process, to bring this about. We also call on the
Security Council to fulfil its Charter obligations by
taking urgent steps to safeguard peace and security in
the region.

The international community must encourage and
facilitate a meaningful dialogue with a View to
breaking this gridlock which has held the entire Middle
East region hostage for so long. The United Nations
has always upheld the legitimate struggles of peoples
for self-determination and must do so now. It has a
responsibility to take the lead role in brokering peace
based on the Security Council resolutions. This is the
least the Organization can do to justify the Nobel Peace
Prize that it recently shared with the Secretary-General
in recognition of its Charter mandate to ensure world
peace and security.

The present challenge provides us with an
opportunity to move away from the brink. The time has
come for a purposeful dialogue to end the legacy of
violence and conflict. It must not be allowed to get lost
in the maze of obstructionism and filibustering. The
time has come for the international community to
enable this Council to uphold its moral and legal
obligations under the Charter. Those who have the
responsibility to maintain international peace must act
now to revive the process of negotiations and the hopes
of durable peace in the Middle East.

