Ms. Gunnarsdettir (Iceland): The conflict in Syria
must be stopped. The Council's inability so far to unite
in action weakens the prospects for peace. The conflict
has already had dire consequences for Syria and the
Syrian people. We are all aware of the tremendous cost,
with over 60,000 people killed and the already high
numbers of refugees and internally displaced persons
increasing every day. The Icelandic Government, for its
part, decided last week to contribute close to $200,000
to United Nations humanitarian assistance.

The Security Council must take the lead in fostering
a political and peaceful solution, for the sake of Syria
and the Syrian people as well as for wider regional
stability, which could easily be threatened should the
conflict continue. Waiting is not an option. The Security
Council has the responsibility and the tools to maintain
international peace and security, and the situation calls
for urgent Council action.

Steps must be taken to ensure that the regime
and anyone else responsible for the horrible atrocities
committed will ultimately be held accountable. For
that reason, Iceland was among 57 Member States
that jointly sent the Security Council a letter last week
requesting the Council to refer the situation in Syria
to the International Criminal Court (S/2013/19, annex).
We would like to take the opportunity here today to
reiterate that request.

The Palestinian people enjoy overwhelming
support among the United Nations membership for
their inalienable right to self-determination. That was
clearly expressed by the membership on 29 November
last year, when the General Assembly, in resolution
67/ 19, welcomed the State of Palestine as a non-member
observer State.

That development will hopefully persuade
the Security Council to take a more active role in
solving the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. For too long,
especially in the absence of an active peace process, the
involvement of the international community has mainly
been reactionary, with statements being issued on an ad
hoc basis in reaction to individual actions, such as the
recent decision of the Israeli Government to go ahead
with building new settlements in the E-l zone. If the
international community is indeed committed to the
two-State solution, it has to become proactive instead
of being a passive bystander.

"We exist." That is a phrase from an appeal sent by
Palestinians living in and around the E-l area asking
relevant parties to advocate on their behalf that they
not be evicted from their homes and displaced again.
"We exist." Those are the words of people who have
again and again been victims of demolitions of their
properties, rendering them and their families repeatedly
homeless. "We exist" is a necessary reminder to us all
that, in the end, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is about
a people that indeed exist and their land.

Iceland would like to use this opportunity to urge
the Security Council to visit the State of Palestine,
to reaffirm the illegality of the settlements, to accept
the State of Palestine's application for United Nations
membership and, finally, to bring the parties back to
the negotiation table.

