Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): We congratulate you,
Mr. President and your team for ably guiding the work
of the Security Council for the month of December,
and we thank you for convening today's debate. I
would also like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Ladsous for his briefing.

Pakistan greatly values the role of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
in coordinating a comprehensive international effort in
Afghanistan. In the past, we have welcomed the
enhancement of that role in political and security
fields. We hope that the review of UNAMA's mandate
will enable the United Nations to make more
meaningful contributions to peace and development of
Afghanistan.

On its part, Pakistan is committed to peace,
stability and development in Afghanistan. On 15 December,
our honourable Prime Minister, His Excellency
Mr. Syed Yusuf Raza Gilani, stated in the Parliament of
Pakistan:

"I would also like to reiterate that Pakistan, as a
peace-loving country, remains committed to
promoting stability and peace in our region, in
particular Afghanistan.

"We have, in all earnestness, extended a hand of
friendship to the people and government of
Afghanistan. As immediate neighbours and
sincere well-wishers of the people of
Afghanistan, we remain committed to promote
the best of relations in all spheres".

In his report (S/2011/722*) under consideration
today, the Secretary-General termed Pakistan's
bilateral relations with Afghanistan as paramount in
furthering peace, reconciliation and stability. That is a
valid observation. We are committed to peace,
reconciliation and stability in Afghanistan. Pakistan
looks forward to contribute, as effectively as possible,
in an environment free from recrimination and blame-
gaming and on the basis of mutual respect and trust.
Speculative statements made in a knee-jerk reaction to
events vitiate the atmosphere and erode mutual trust.
Such blame-gaming must stop. Pakistan cannot be held
responsible for the problems and the challenges
afflicting Afghanistan.

Afghanistan, the international community and
Pakistan must work closely and together as responsible
partners in a cooperative manner and not rush to
judgment or question each other's intentions. It is
imperative that we avoid references, such as that made
by the representative of France earlier today, which
seek to find a convenient scapegoat, while continuing
to miss the larger picture.

We are not preaching something that we do not
practice. Pakistan has never resorted to blame-gaming,
even when militants cross over from the other side and
attack our troops and innocent civilians.

The attack on the Pakistan border post on
26 November, which resulted in the martyrdom of
25 soldiers, was a grave incident. It constituted a
transgression of Pakistan's territorial integrity and a
flagrant violation of the Charter of the United Nations.
As a result of the 26 November attack, Pakistan was
constrained to absent itself from the Bonn Conference.
While taking that decision, the Federal Cabinet of
Pakistan had,

"expressed the hope that the international
community will reaffirm its support for peace and
development in Afghanistan at the forthcoming
Bonn Conference. Pakistan looks forward to the
success of this Conference".

I will echo our Foreign Minister in acknowledging
the invaluable contribution of Germany towards peace
in Afghanistan, as well as the commitment of the
German leadership to the cause, demonstrated in their
efforts to host the Bonn process. We want the
international community to succeed in Afghanistan
because such success is in Pakistan's own national
interest.

I would be remiss if I did not congratulate
Mr. Jan Kubis on his appointment as the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan. We assure him of all cooperation and
wish him success.

