Mr. Yel'chenko (Ukraine): We congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency and on the
convening of today's urgent and important meeting of
the Security Council. We also pay tribute to
Ambassador Moctar Ouane of Mali for his excellent
work during the month of September, which led to the
convening of the Security Council Summit.

Ukraine is deeply concerned about the high level
of violence that broke out in the course of the past
several days at the Al-Haram Al-Sharif compound in
East Jerusalem and spread to other parts of the West
Bank and the Gaza Strip, as well as to some parts of
Israel. We were shocked and appalled by the
disproportionate use of force, in particular the use of
heavy weapons, by the Israel Defence Forces and by
police against Palestinian civilians, which claimed the
lives of more than 60 people, including Palestinian
children, and left more than 1,500 people wounded or
injured. We are similarly shocked by the casualties on
the Israeli side.

I would like to add my voice to that of
delegations that expressed their condolences to the
families of all those who have been killed and wounded
in these tragic events. We are hopeful that the
ceasefire, which has been in place since dawn today,
will hold, helping to prevent further loss of life and
injuries among the civilian population.

My country strongly condemns all acts of
violence and aggression by whomsoever committed.
We urge the parties to stop the hostilities, to refrain
from unilateral provocative actions and to persevere in
their efforts aimed at reaching a final settlement
agreement as soon as possible. The lives of innocent
civilians should remain an absolute priority. In this
connection, we call on Israel to ensure full respect for
the Fourth Geneva Convention in the Palestinian
territories.

Ukraine has always been supportive of the
Middle East peace process, which is based on the
relevant United Nations resolutions and the principles
laid down at the Madrid Peace Conference. We are
convinced that the Palestinian and Israeli sides have no
alternative but to complete the implementation of the
Madrid peace process formula, which is based on
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973), as well as on the principle of land for peace.

It is also our firm belief that the political wisdom
and far-sightedness of the Israelis and Palestinians will
eventually help them reach a mutually acceptable
compromise on such sensitive issues as the fate of the
Holy City of Jerusalem and other permanent status
issues. Ukraine hopes that, as a result of the strenuous
efforts of the two sides, the Palestinian people will at
long last find themselves in a position to exercise in
full its right to self-determination and statehood.

We look forward to the forthcoming Israeli-
Palestinian summits, to take place in Paris and Cairo.
My country welcomes the readiness of France and
Egypt to host these important events at such a critical
moment. Ukraine highly commends the efforts of the
United States in this regard. My delegation also
welcomes the constructive engagement of the
Secretary-General and his special representative on this
issue.

Finally, my delegation believes that the Security
Council should continue to follow closely the
developments on the ground and act, as appropriate, in
exercise of its primary responsibility for maintaining
peace and security. Ukraine is also of the view that the
United Nations should retain its permanent
responsibility towards the question of Palestine until it
is resolved in conformity with the relevant United
Nations resolutions.

