Ms. Zewde: I would like to begin by expressing
my appreciation to you, Madam, for convening today's
meeting on cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations, including
the African Union (AU).

Today's meeting is taking place at a time of
unprecedented collaboration between the United
Nations and the African Union. As the Secretary-
General noted in his briefing to the AU Peace and
Security Council in Addis Ababa last week, of all the
world's regional organizations, the African Union is the
most important strategic partner of the United Nations
in terms of peace and security, development and human
rights. Our two organizations have given priority to the
development of a systematic, predictable and strategic
partnership based on mutual respect, shared values
and comparative advantage. Since the signing of the
Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for
Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security, in April
2017, and the Joint Framework for the Implementation
of Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, signed in January 2018, the partnership
has been characterized by closer collaboration, more
regular exchange of information, consultations and
coordinated action, including joint field Visits and
joint statements.

The important events taking place this month
between the two organizations, in particular the second
annual conference between the Secretary-General
of the United Nations and the Chairperson of the AU
Commission and the joint briefing to the AU Peace and
Security Council, both held in Addis Ababa on 9 July;
the joint meeting of the Peacebuilding Commission
and the AU Peace and Security Council, which took
place this morning; and the twelfth annual consultative
meeting between members of the Security Council
and the African Union Peace and Security Council,
which will take place tomorrow, not only all serve to
illustrate the importance of the partnership between the
two organizations but also provide an opportunity to
discuss how to strengthen it even further.

The Council has before it the report of the
Secretary-General on strengthening the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union on
issues of peace and security in Africa, including on
the work of the United Nations Office to the African
Union (S/2018/678). The important recurring themes
in the report, which are illustrated by the strategic
engagements I have just referred to, are the following.

First, the complex peace and security challenges we
face in Africa are such that neither the United Nations
nor the African Union can address them on their own.
Partnership is therefore not a choice but a necessity. The
two organizations recognize their interdependence. We
also recognize the critical role played by subregional
organizations, which are often the first to detect early
warning signs of impending conflict and are important
partners in promoting dialogue and reconciliation,
exercising leverage through personal contacts with
the parties to a conflict and in countering terrorism,
preventing violent extremism and addressing
migration. Having strong partnerships with subregional
organization is therefore key to ensuring consistency of
messaging and alignment of positions and action.

(spoke in French)

Secondly, the need for partnership leads us to
recognize the imperative of even closer collaboration
with the African Union, in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations. As detailed in the report, there
has been much progress in strengthening collaboration
between the United Nations and the African Union
in the area of peace and security. Interactions and
collaboration at all levels, from the Secretary-General
and the Chairperson of the Commission to the Under-
Secretaries-GeneraI and Commissioners of the African
Union,includingatthelevelofstaffatbothorganizations,
have become more frequent, constructive and collegial.
Such collaboration is also becoming the norm in field
missions, where the Special Representatives and
Envoys of the two organizations are working more
closely together and are jointly informing the Security
Council and the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union with increasing frequency.

In addition, I would like to highlight in particular
the increasing trend towards joint field missions led
by senior United Nations and African Union officials.
Last week, the Deputy Secretary-General of the
United Nations and the African Union Special Envoy
on Women, Peace and Security briefed the Council on
their recent mission - their second such mission on
the ground in as many years, this time to the Niger,
Chad and South Sudan (see S/PV.8306). These missions
sought to highlight issues relating to women, peace and
security, and development. Similarly, last April, the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations
and the African Union Commissioner for Peace and
Security undertook a joint mission to the Central
African Republic and the Sudan, with the aim of
supporting a common vision of peacekeeping in Africa.

I would also like to acknowledge the joint work on
the financing of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) undertaken by Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno
and Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, Special Envoys of the
United Nations and the African Union, respectively,
who conducted consultations with a wide range of
partners. The aim was to propose a transformation of
AMISOM. with a View to assisting the transition to
Somalia's full ownership of its security and therefore
to continuing funding the Mission to that end. In April,
they submitted a joint report that contributed to the joint
United Nations-African Union review of AMISOM,
conducted last May.
The increasing use ofjoint missions,joint briefings,
joint reports and declarations, and joint messages
illustrates progress towards a common understanding
of peace and security issues and a common approach to
addressing them. Indeed, at the second annual African
Union-United Nations conference in Addis Ababa last
week, the Secretary-General and the Chairperson of
the Commission agreed to make joint communiques
systematic wherever possible. Building trust has been
essential, and I believe we have made tremendous
progress in this regard over the past year.

Thirdly, the Secretary-General and the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission continue to stress
the importance of conflict prevention by responding
quickly and decisively, in collaboration with national
stakeholders, including civil society and subregional
organizations, in order to address emerging signs
of conflict while ensuring African ownership in this
process. This means that we must conduct more joint
analyses and assessments and align our early warning
indicators, where appropriate.

We must also engage more actively with those with
influence over the parties to conflict, often neighbouring
countries and community leaders. We must continue to
focus greater attention and resources on peacekeeping
and preventing the resumption of conflict, including by
identifying and addressing the root causes of conflict.
In that regard, the Peacebuilding Commission has done
commendable work across the continent over the past
15 years. The African Union initiative Silencing the
Guns by 2020 also provides a road map for concrete
actions that can be undertaken and supported.

With regard to peacekeeping, the Secretary-
General was clear in his briefing to the African Union
Peace and Security Council last week on the challenges
that require us to rethink our approach to peacekeeping
through his new Action for Peacekeeping initiative. The
Secretary-General stressed that the conflicts in Mali,
the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and South Sudan 4 with their blocked
peace processes, multiple actors, tragic acts of extreme
violence and an increasing number of casualties among
peacekeepers - show that the current model is not
adapted to contemporary challenges. A redefinition of
the division oftasks has been proposed by the Secretary-
General in order to further deepen cooperation with
regional organizations and to clarify the mandate of
peacekeeping operations.

(spoke in English)
That leads me to my fourth and last point. It
is also essential that the issue of predictable and
sustainable financing, on a case-by-case basis, for AU
peace support operations authorized by the Security
Council be framed within the context of a common
political strategy, agreed to by the two Councils and
informed by joint analyses and assessments of conflict
situations. Within that context, support to AU peace
support operations should be Viewed as a means by
which the Security Council can exercise its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security through effective collaboration with
regional organizations, in accordance with Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.

The Security Council, in resolution 2378 (2017),
expressed its intention to give consideration to the
possibility that practical steps that can be taken for
African Union-led peace support operations authorized
by the Security Council could be partly financed
through United Nations assessed contributions. The
Secretary-General has also expressed his support for
financing AU-led peace support operations authorized
by the Security Council, including through United
Nations assessed contributions.

With regard to the conditions outlined in resolution
2378 (2017), we welcome the progress made by the
African Union on the operationalization of the Peace
Fund, the development of a compliance framework
and the development of a reporting framework.
Contributions to the Peace Fund have reached their
highest level since the establishment ofthe Fund in 1993
and demonstrate the commitment of AU member States
to financial burden-sharing and greater self-reliance.
Further work on priority areas is still required, and we
look forward to collaboration in that regard with the AU
Commission through its interdepartmental task force.

Finally, I would like to express appreciation
for the continued high-level political support of the
Security Council, which ensures our ability to fully
operationalize the strategic partnership in peace and
security, as called for by the Council. The role of the
United Nations Office to the African Union, as the
conduit and main United Nations interlocutor with
the African Union in peace and security, will remain
critical, and we look forward to the Council's continued
support for the work of the Office. I also wish to place
on record our appreciation to the AU Commission
for its strong and steadfast support for enhancing the
strategic partnership.

