Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I thank
our briefers. I also thank China for organizing this very
important debate.

Over the past couple of decades, a welcome shift has
occurred in the international community's relationship
with Africa. The United States regards itself as a partner
to Africa and looks to build on that relationship and
strengthen it. In a relationship of equals, responsibility
falls on both parties to contribute to solutions.

We applaud and encourage the increasing leadership
that the African Union and African Member States
have exercised in contributing to peace operations
and battling terrorist and insurgent groups. Today we
reaffirm the African Union's role as an indispensable
partner to both the United States and the United
Nations in promoting peace and security in Africa.
But true progress cannot be achieved unless the efforts
of the United Nations and others are accompanied by
accountability on the part of the Governments involved
in conflict. The developing famines in Africa are a
tragic example of that. More than 14 million people are
at risk of famine today in north-east Nigeria, Somalia
and South Sudan. That is a crisis that should be leading
every newscast and should be on the front page of every
newspaper. The United States will continue to lead in
bringing together resources to overcome that crisis.
On 8 July we announced an additional $446 million
in humanitarian assistance to suffering people from
South Sudan, Nigeria and Somalia, bringing the total
for fiscal year 2017 to $1.4 billion.

We thank all the donors and communities hosting
displaced persons for their incredible generosity; but
our ability to provide real relief is hampered by one
inescapable fact: armed conflict is the primary cause of
food insecurity in South Sudan, Nigeria and Somalia.
Famine in Africa is an issue of peace and security.
People are dying of hunger, not because of acts of
God, but because of acts of man. It is the parties to
those conflicts that bear direct responsibility. They are
responsible for the lack of access to people in need of
food, water and health services. They are responsible,
as well, for the millions of refugees and internally
displaced persons suffering in Africa today.

More than half of the population in Somalia is in
need of humanitarian assistance; but ongoing violence,
including deliberate attacks on aid workers, is preventing
people from getting the assistance they need.

Al-Shabaab's terrorist attacks, as well as logistical

and administrative obstacles, are cutting off access to
hard-hit rural areas. We urge the Federal Government
of Somalia and the leadership of the interim federal
member states of the country to facilitate the delivery
of humanitarian goods. We also strongly call for an
end to the use of illegal checkpoints by Government-
affiliated entities.

The man-made crisis in South Sudan has created
the greatest number of refugees in Africa since the
Rwandan genocide. The crisis would be much worse
if it were not for neighbours like Uganda, which is
taking in hundreds of South Sudanese every day. But
the patience and generosity of humanitarians are being
severely tested. Their efforts to lessen the suffering
in South Sudan are being actively obstructed by the
Government and other parties. Such famines are a sign
of a collective failure, and any effective response must
begin with the nations of Africa themselves. African
Union (AU) member States must ramp up their response
to this crisis. AU Commission Chair, Mr. Moussa Faki
Mahamat, spoke for many of us when he said,

"I cannot hide my deep frustration at the silence
and inaction of Africans in the face of the terrible
tragedy of famine in these regions."

We must continue to look for ways to bolster the
capabilities of Member States to promote peace and
security. The African Union must work with subregional
organizations and individual States to confront peace
and security challenges with one voice.

African nations must also work constructively with
the United Nations to address an underlying cause of
the conflict that is driving the risk of famine in Africa. I
have spoken many times about the relationship between
human rights violations and conflict. To its credit, the
African Union has established a Hybrid Court for South
Sudan to investigate and prosecute individuals who
have violated human rights laws during the conflict.
The establishment of that Court and the message that it
will send are important and necessary, if there is to be
lasting peace in South Sudan.

However, the commitment to promoting human

rights must precede conflict and take precedence over
politics in order to secure peace and security. When the
nations of the Group of African States put forward a
country like the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
be a member of the Human Rights Council it does more
than just weaken that body, it adds to the conflict that
is causing so much suffering on the continent. This is
a pivotal time for the Human Rights Council. It has the
potential to be an asset to the men, women and children
suffering in Africa today, but it can play that role only
if its membership consists of nations committed to
promoting and upholding universal human rights. That,
in turn, depends upon African States putting forward
credible candidates with strong human rights records.
The nomination of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is an inexcusable failure of that process.

My hope is that we can all summon the political
will and courage to change the trajectory of the ongoing
political and humanitarian crisis in Africa. Famine
should not exist in 2017. Our duty is to hold those
responsible to account. The United States will continue
to do its part.

