Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the Under-Secretary-
General Mr. Pascoe for his comprehensive briefing on
the situation and peace process in the Middle East. We
welcome the participation in the present meeting of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Palestine, Mr. Riyad
Al-Malki.

The question of a solution in the Middle East and
the continuing tensions in that region continue to be a
central item on the agenda of the international
community. The Group of 8 Summit at L'Aquila and
the recent ministerial-level meeting of the Quartet have
shown that there is broad consensus in the international
community, on the whole, on the approach to finding a
Middle East settlement. The international legal basis
for the peace process, the significance of the Arab
Peace Initiative, the principle of two States and the
need to freeze settlement activity, including natural
growth, were all reaffirmed.

As comprehensive efforts to resume Palestinian-
Israeli contacts are continuing at present, it would be
somewhat premature to make any final assessment
regarding the shape of a future regional settlement.
There is, however, something that no one disputes:
time is running out, and this is very dangerous. We
must continue working intensively to establish the
necessary conditions for the renewal of negotiations on
all available tracks - first and foremost, on the
Palestinian-Israeli track. It is only through such
negotiations that mutually acceptable solutions can be
found to all key issues needed to establish a sustainable
and fair peace in the Middle East. Our common
objective is to promote this in every possible way.

We continue to send clear signals to Palestine,
Israel and other leading States of the region on the
need to exercise restraint, to return to the negotiating
table, and to avoid taking unilateral steps that would
predetermine the outcome of the final status
negotiations.

One important contribution to assistance efforts
in that regard will be the Moscow conference on the
Middle East, which we are making serious efforts to
prepare for and convene. We consider that forum,
which has been endorsed by the Security Council, the
Quartet and the Group of Eight, to complement the
efforts to breathe new life into Palestinian-Israeli
contacts and to be a link in our important ongoing
collective work to find a sustainable and
comprehensive settlement in the Middle East.
Following the desired resumption of negotiations
between the Palestinians and Israelis in the near future,
we are ready immediately to announce a date for the
Moscow conference.

During the course of the conference, the
international community will be in a position to
support the process and to assist the resumption of
negotiations on the Syrian, Lebanese and multilateral
tracks of the Middle East settlement process. In that
regard, I reiterate that we must base our actions on
existing international law, including all relevant
Security Council resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the Madrid principles. The outcome of our work
should be a viable, independent Palestinian State living
in peace and security side by side with Israel.

We are concerned by rising tensions surrounding
the Temple Mount in Israel. We cannot allow religious
issues to be exploited for political ends or to
exacerbate the situation and people's suffering. All
parties must exercise restraint and live by the letter and
spirit of existing agreements on holy sites in Jerusalem.
We believe that the most sound approach to resolving
the situation in the city is to do so exclusively through
dialogue on the final status negotiations for the
Palestinian territories on the basis of the
aforementioned international legal basis.

Another pressing issue is the restoration of unity
within the Palestinian factions on the basis of the
Palestine Liberation Organization platform. Concrete
steps to resolve the relevant these issues have been and
continue to be taken, inter alia, through the facilitation
of the Egyptian side, which has earned our appreciation
and support. Resolving the issue is an important
element of progress towards a settlement of the
Palestinian-Israeli issue.

In the context of the situation along the Blue Line
in southern Lebanon, it is more critical than ever that
all parties respect resolution 1701 (2006). We urge all
Lebanese political forces to repudiate the logic of
political confrontation, accusation and ambition and to
move in a spirit of good faith to establish an effective
Cabinet that represents the interests of all Lebanese.

I turn now to the report of the United Nations
Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict
(A/HRC/12/48), the discussion of which will continue
on 15 and 16 October in the Human Rights Council in
Geneva. We view that document from the perspective
of the need to resolve key elements of the regional
peace process, including strict compliance by the
Israeli and Palestinian sides with international norms in
the fields of humanitarian law and human rights. We
reject all manifestations of terrorism and
disproportionate and indiscriminate responses to them
that lead to civilian deaths. In that context, we
condemn all violations of international humanitarian
law perpetrated during the conflict in Gaza.

The authors of the report did a very impressive
job gathering the testimony of witnesses and
establishing facts. The facts and recommendations set
out in the report require further careful and balanced
consideration. We believe that the best approach would
be undertake that task in the framework of
international humanitarian law in the Human Rights
Council. Clearly, the full implementation of resolution
1860 (2009) and the resolution of the remaining issues
related to the very pressing humanitarian and economic
situation in Gaza are of equal urgency, including the
need to lift the blockade of the Gaza Strip.

