Mr. Pascoe: We are once again at a critical
juncture in the effort to move to serious Israeli-
10-4587]
Palestinian negotiations aimed at achieving a two-State
solution. These talks are essential for ending the 1967
occupation and the conflict and for resolving all core
issues between the parties, including Jerusalem,
borders, refugees, security, settlements and water, as
prescribed in the resolutions of the Council and
agreements between the parties.

Six rounds of proximity talks have now been
facilitated by United States Envoy Mitchell, and both
President Abbas and Prime Minister Netanyahu have
visited Washington, DC. President Abbas, Prime
Minister Netanyahu and Special Envoy Mitchell each
met Egyptian President Mubarak in Cairo on 18 July.
The Secretary-General met Prime Minister Netanyahu
in New York on 7 July, and Special Coordinator Serry
saw President Abbas in Ramallah earlier today.

It remains the shared goal of the Quartet to bring
about direct negotiations facilitated by the United
States as soon as possible. This should take place in a
framework of respect by the parties of their obligations
as well as the requisite commitments regarding
negotiations. Intensive discussions are continuing. I
note that the Arab League follow-up committee is due
to meet on 29 July to review progress. We urge the
parties not to miss the current opportunity to make
progress in these talks and to move to direct
negotiations with active third-party involvement and
close Quartet support.

On 20 June, the Government of Israel announced
a package of measures aimed at easing the blockade on
Gaza. The Quartet welcomed this announcement while
restating its overall goals for Gaza and expressed the
hope that the package would contribute to the
fulfilment of resolution 1860 (2009), including for the
unimpeded flow of humanitarian aid, commercial
goods and persons to and from Gaza. The United
Nations and the Quartet are following closely the
implementation of these measures.

On 5 July 2010, as a first step - which the
Secretary-General welcomed - the Government of
Israel switched from a positive list of goods allowed
into Gaza to a negative list of goods whose entry is
prohibited or restricted. Under the new guidelines,
anything that may be used as military material,
including so-called dual-use goods and items,
continues to be subject to specific, exceptional
permission to enter Gaza. Construction items and
materials are to be allowed entry only for projects
10-45871
authorized by the Palestinian Authority and
implemented by the international community.

Since the announcement of the new policy, new
food and productive items have entered Gaza and the
volume of imports into Gaza has increased steadily. A
weekly average of 780 truckloads entered during the
reporting period - a 40 per cent increase compared to
the weekly average in 2010 prior to the announcement.
Approvals have also been given for a number of
additional United Nations projects in the vital areas of
education and health.

While these are positive steps, we hope they can
be enhanced to address the deplorable conditions in the
Strip. Further measures need to be taken to enable
exports and movements of people and to streamline
procedures for project approval. Our goal remains the
full opening of land crossings, in the framework of the
Agreement on Movement and Access.

The situation in Gaza has been compounded by
the electricity crisis. Given the internal disputes over
revenue collection and funding for fuel for the Gaza
power plant, the plant's output has declined steadily.
The Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process (UNSCO) is active
between the Palestinian Authority and the de facto
authorities in Gaza to urge a Palestinian solution to this
problem.

The Rafah border crossing with Egypt has
remained open since 2 June, and there has been a
significant increase in the number of people allowed to
cross for humanitarian purposes. Egypt continues its
efforts to counter smuggling across the border with
Gaza.

I am pleased to report that arrangements agreed
by UNSCO to ensure that the cargo of the Turkish
vessels in the 31 May convoy reaches its beneficiaries
in Gaza are being implemented, and agreement has
been reached to effect similar arrangements for the
cargo of the Rachel Corrie. The Libyan-sponsored
vessel that sailed on 12 July with aid for Gaza arrived
in an Egyptian port without incident. Arrangements are
being made by the Egyptian Government to transfer the
material into Gaza. I would like to point out that such
convoys are not helpful in resolving the basic
economic problems in Gaza, and they needlessly carry
the potential for escalation.
3
The Government of Israel has initiated
investigations into the 31 May incident. A military
investigative committee headed by former National
Security Adviser Eiland has issued its report. A public
commission headed by Justice Tirkel, in which two
Israeli-nominated internationals are participating as
observers, is under way. The Security Council has
called for a prompt, impartial, credible and transparent
investigation conforming to international standards.
The Secretary-General continues to be in contact with
the parties involved to gain agreement for his proposal
for an international panel of inquiry that would be
based on domestic inquiries.

Israeli Corporal Gilad Shalit has entered his fifth
year in captivity. We call again for his immediate
release. The fact that there has been no humanitarian
access is inexcusable. We also note the detention of
over 9,000 Palestinians in Israeli jails. We urge the
completion of a prisoner exchange agreement, as well
as releases of Palestinian prisoners to the Palestinian
Authority.

The reporting period saw a lack of progress in
intra-Palestinian reconciliation based on the Egyptian-
mediated proposal. We restate our full support for
unification of Gaza with the West Bank within the
framework of the legitimate Palestinian Authority.

The Secretary-General condemned the cowardly
attack on 28 June by militant elements in Gaza on a
children's camp run by the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA). This is the second attack against such a
facility in a month. It is crucial that there be respect
for, and no interference with, United Nations
operations on the ground, and we reiterate the
responsibility of the de facto authorities in this regard.
We are also concerned by reports of political arrests by
the de facto Hamas authorities.

On 12 July, Special Coordinator Serry and the
Executive Director of the United Nations Development
Fund for Women visited Gaza to meet with
representatives of women and reaffirm the importance
of the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

During the reporting period, Palestinian militant
groups fired 41 rockets and mortars into southern
Israel, causing no injuries. The Israel Defense Forces
conducted 6 air strikes and 21 incursions, killing
4 Gazans, including 1 alleged militant, and injuring 23.
Citing security concerns, the Israeli security forces

continue to restrict Palestinian access to areas close to
the border with Israel by opening warning fire on
people entering this area, killing 1 person and injuring
18, including 4 children, during the reporting period.

We continue to closely follow developments in
Jerusalem. In 2006, four Jerusalemite lawmakers from
the Hamas-affiliated Change and Reform bloc were
charged with not fulfilling the minimum loyalty to the
State of Israel, stripped of their Jerusalem resident
status and handed prison sentences of up to four years,
which they have now served. Following their recent
release, they were given 30 days to leave East
Jerusalem. Court proceedings are continuing. I wish to
stress that the prospect of expulsion of Palestinian
legislators from their home city would be a serious step
backwards and would undermine the hopes of making
political progress.

Notwithstanding comparative restraint on the
ground in East Jerusalem in recent months, on 12 July
the Jerusalem municipality approved the construction
of 32 new apartments in an East Jerusalem settlement.
On 13 July the municipality demolished six Palestinian
structures in East Jerusalem, displacing 26 people,
including 14 children. We have repeatedly stated that
the international community does not recognize Israel's
annexation of East Jerusalem and that the Fourth
Geneva Convention is applicable. The future of
Jerusalem remains to be determined in final status
negotiations, and a way must be found for the city to
emerge as the capital of two States.

The lO-month moratorium on West Bank
settlements construction is largely being observed, but
it is set to expire on 26 September. We call for the
moratorium to be extended and expanded to cover all
settlement activity throughout the occupied Palestinian
territory, including in East Jerusalem. No further steps
have been taken towards dismantlement of settlement
outposts erected since March 2001. During the
reporting period, the Israeli authorities demolished a
total of 106 structures in area C of the West Bank. We
reiterate the Quartet's call on 19 March in Moscow for
the parties to implement their obligations under the
Road Map and international law.

The barrier, constructed in deviation from the
Green Line and in contravention of the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice, continues
to pose significant challenges to movement of
Palestinians in the West Bank. Despite efforts to ease
restrictions on movement and access, the number of
obstacles in the West Bank remained at 505 during the
reporting period.

Palestinian security forces continued to maintain
law and order and to fight extremism in the West Bank
during the reporting period, in furtherance of Road
Map commitments. During this period, the Israeli
security forces conducted 376 incursions into the West
Bank, resulting in 74 Palestinians injured and 322
arrested, while 11 members of the Israeli security
forces were injured. In demonstrations against the
barrier, dozens of Palestinians and peace activists were
injured, arrested or suffered from gas inhalation.

There were 21 violent clashes between Israeli
settlers and Palestinians in the West Bank during the
reporting period, in which three Palestinians were
injured and/or suffered damages to their property. In
several separate incidents in the past two months,
Israeli settlers used their vehicles to run over and injure
or kill Palestinians. Settlers were also injured by stones
thrown at their vehicles.

I am pleased to report that according to the
preliminary growth figures for the first quarter of 2010
released by the Palestinian Central Bureau of Statistics,
gross domestic product in the occupied Palestinian
territory increased by 12.5 per cent, as compared to the
first quarter of 2009. To ensure that the enabling
reforms undertaken by the Palestinian Authority are not
undermined, continued external financing to support
the Authority's recurrent budgetary needs is critical.

There were tensions in the occupied Syrian Golan
during the reporting period. On 11 July Israeli
policemen conducting a search operation were
surrounded by a large crowd. In the course of events,
there were reports that more than 40 civilian residents
of the Golan suffered from tear gas inhalation and that
three Israeli police cars were damaged. Settlement
activity in the occupied Syrian Golan continued
throughout the reporting period. During this period an
Israeli bill that would require a referendum before any
withdrawal from the occupied Syrian Golan passed a
committee reading.

Turning now to Lebanon, where the situation
remains stable, allow me to recall that the Special
Coordinator for Lebanon and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations briefed the Council on 14 July
on the implementation of Security Council resolution
1701 (2006). Since the tensions in southern Lebanon

earlier this month, the situation has remained quiet.
Throughout the month, Israeli aerial violations
continued. Lebanese Prime Minister Hariri visited
Damascus on 18 July 2010, when he led a large
ministerial delegation to discuss bilateral affairs. The
two Governments signed 17 agreements covering
various aspects of cooperation between the two
countries.

The Lebanese Parliament has continued
discussions on draft legislation on the civil rights of
Palestinian refugees. Consensus appears to be within
reach, and the United Nations would welcome this as a
first step. The United Nations has also focused on the
need to ease restrictions on access to the Nahr el-Bared
refugee camp. Reconstruction of the camp continues,
and the return of the first 2,000 residents is expected
by the end of the year. I urge donors to continue to
provide vital financial assistance to UNRWA.

In the period ahead, we must work to bring the
parties into direct talks without delay on a basis that
gives confidence in the possibility of genuine progress
on the core issues and on the ground, including
restraint in Jerusalem, implementation of Road Map
obligations on settlements and further measures to
empower the Palestinian Authority. We must ensure
that policy change towards Gaza is fully implemented
and followed with further steps. And we must place
these efforts in their larger regional context and
reinvigorate the search for a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace.

