Mr. Salame: At the outset, I would like to
congratulate Egypt on its presidency of the Security
Council this month.

I am very pleased to be speaking to the Council
from the compound of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) in Tripoli. My presence
here is intended to signify the Mission's and my
personal resolve to working as closely as possible with
Libyans in Libya. A month ago I assumed my position
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of UNSMIL. I was fortunate enough to have
already met Prime Minister Serraj and Marshal Haftar
in Paris on 25 July and to have had exchanges with them
before taking up my post, as well as to receive on my
nomination hundreds of calls, letters and e-mails from
representatives of all walks of Libyan society.

On 5 August, I made my first official visit to Tripoli
and met with the Prime Minister and Mr. Abdelrahman
Al-Sweihli. Chairman ofthe High Council of State. The
following day I also met with Mr. Saleh Issa, Speaker of
the House of Representatives, and Libyan officials. The
trip launched my consultations with Libyans across the
political spectrum and the country. Since then, I have
been present in Libya as often as possible and have
been to towns across most of its regions - Tripoli,
Al Qubba, Benghazi, Misrata, Zintan and Al Bayda. I
am sorry to say that due to external restrictions I have
yet to Visit the south; in fact, a trip scheduled for last
Thursday was cancelled a few hours before departure,
but we are working hard to make sure that it happens
as soon as possible. In each place I met with political
figures, military and security officials and women,
intellectuals, activists and young people. I firmly
believe that our attachment to the Libyan Political
Agreement as a reference should not prevent us from
reaching out to all Libyans, whatever their status and
their past or present positions. Rather, we must reach
out so that there is reconciliation for all.

In my external consultations, I have sought to
prioritize Libya's neighbours. They include Tunisia,
where I also thanked the authorities for their support
and hospitality to UNSMIL over the past three years.
In Egypt, I met with the officials in charge of the
Libyan dossier, representatives of the League of Arab
States, and some of the leading members of the Libyan
community established there. When I was in Algeria,
Prime Minister Ouyahia and Foreign Minister Messahel
reiterated their support for our efforts. I also visited
Italy, where Prime Minister Gentiloni Silveri and his
ministers expressed their commitment to the success
of our efforts. All of those countries will benefit from
a stable, peaceful and reconciled Libya, as will many
more. I look forward to travelling to the Republic of the
Congo next week, where the African Union High-Level
Committee on Libya is convening key Libyan actors
in Brazzaville. It is my intention to extend the scope
of my visits in the coming weeks and months to other
neighbours, countries in the region and beyond.

From my meetings with Libyans, a clear picture is
emerging. People are frustrated with their deteriorating
living conditions. I passed the same bank in Tripoli
repeatedly from 10 o'clock in the morning until
10 o'clock at night and saw so many people I thought
it was a demonstration, but they were just waiting
to access a fraction of their month's salary - the
equivalent of what is now worth $25.

It is unnatural that in this wealthy country,
university departments are closing one after the other
because the outrageous gap in the exchange rate has
led foreign faculty to quit en masse. People are tired
of the endless cuts in electricity and water, which in
turn take down the telephone system and the Internet.
Libyans cannot understand being poor in a country rich
with natural resources, an oil-producing country where
they must queue, sometimes for a day, to get 20 litres
of petrol.

The impression of a now well-rooted political
economy of predation is palpable, as if the country
were fuelling its own crisis with its own resources to
the benefit of the few and the frustration of the many.
There is clearly a serious problem of governance that
can hardly wait to be addressed.

The people's welfare is, obviously, a fundamental
element in Libya's future stability. I intend to work
closely with our partners to ensure that we are fully
coordinating in realizing a macroeconomic vision for
the country while helping the authorities provide basic
services. Unless the economic challenges are addressed,
and soon, the humanitarian crisis in Libya will deepen.
For civilians in need, access to humanitarian assistance
should go unimpeded and relief personnel should
be protected.

Of particular concern is the present situation in
Derna where we have repeatedly called for civilians
to have freedom of movement and actively worked
for the entry of basic necessities to the city. The other
challenge which Libyans are concerned about is, of
course, their security. There is much fear of criminality,
of kidnapping and the threats posed by the widespread
proliferation of arms. My first night in Tripoli, I fell
asleep to the protracted staccato of gunfire. Civilians
are killed or injured across Libya as a result of
sporadic armed clashes and explosive remnants of war.
Thousands are also detained for prolonged periods of
time, many with no prospects ofa fair trial.

The terrible attack at the al-Fuqaha checkpoint on
Thursday, 24 August, which saw the brutal killing of
nine soldiers and two civilians was attributed to the
Islamic State of Iraq and the Sham (ISIS). The Libyans
I have spoken to want an end to uncertainty and
instability, and they respect those who are working to
bring the situation under control. In Tripoli and certain
other parts of the country, the security situation has
truly improved. Oil production has increased markedly,
enabling the Presidency Council and Central Bank
of Libya to work together to deliver on the budget.
These are positive steps, but the key to lasting stability
requires addressing the overarching political situation.
In this regard, the main issues that dominate the
political landscape are as follows.

First, with regard to the upcoming two-year
anniversary of the Libyan Political Agreement on
17 December, there is uncertainty over what the end
of the transitional period outlined in the Agreement
actually means. One of the most immediate tasks is
to help build a consensus among Libyans on the legal
and political significance of that date. An institutional
vacuum at this crucial time will not serve Libya's
interests. Most of my interlocutors have raised with
me their thoughts on amending the Libyan Political
Agreement. A consensus is emerging on this issue and
I hope to be able to announce some movement on it in
the coming days.

Secondly, with regard to the prospect of adopting
a constitution, the vote by the Constitution Drafting
Assembly on 29 July to finalize the draft text was an
important milestone. However, at the moment, the
legality of the vote is being considered by the courts.

Thirdly, there are growing and widespread calls for
fresh elections. Before these take place, it would be wise
to ensure that the political and technical preconditions
for successful elections be addressed and in particular
a commitment on the part of all parties to accept the
election results. Elections are not about accumulation,
but about peaceful and organized rotation.

Finally, a political package is required to bring
these three elements together coherently. In that
regard, sequencing is the name of the game. Libyans
can successfully go into these three processes only if
they define in what order and with what urgency they
should do so, and if we help them combine the three
into one single package which most, if not all, players
consider acceptable.

In any case, any efforts to forge a solution must be
Libyan led and Libyan owned. The United Nations is
here to support them in their endeavours and certainly
not to replace them. We will in particular work with
them to promote the rapid reunification of their political
and financial institutions.

Libya's problems are not just confined to the Libyan
people. The presence of ISIS, Al-Qaida-affiliated
terrorist groups, foreign fighters and mercenaries,
the trafficking of arms and the cross-border black
market economy are challenges which extend across
Libya's borders and impact its neighbours and the
wider international community. Three days ago, deadly
clashes near the border with Chad reminded all of the
regional sensitivity of Libya's present conditions.

Irregular migration, and the revenue it generates
for smuggler networks, has also proven to be a direct
threat to stability in parts of Libya. At the same time,
hundreds of thousands of migrants and refugees who
are stuck in Libya often suffer abuses and detention
in inhuman conditions. We need to act, we need to act
together and we need to act now.

We are not starting from zero. Thanks to my
predecessors and the concerted efforts of Member
States, we have the political framework of the Libyan
Political Agreement. There is fairly widespread
recognition in Libya that the current situation cannot
drag on indefinitely. The commitments to a ceasefire
and a political rather than military solution to the crisis
made in the Paris communique need to be supported by
concrete actions to avoid renewed military escalation.

To deliver on our mandate, we continue to prepare
to ramp up the presence of the United Nations family in
Tripoli and from Tripoli across the country, as security
conditions allow. A convoy of UNSMIL personnel was
attacked with gunfire and rocket-propelled grenades
on 28 June. One staff member was injured and we are
really fortunate that there were no further casualties.

The United Nations presence in Libya is already
significantly larger than any other diplomatic mission,
and it will soon expand further. We must remain aware
that there are real risks in operating in Libya, and it is
incumbent on me to ensure that those risks are mitigated
as effectively as possible.

I would like to thank all the Member States that have
worked to support the Libyan Political Agreement since
its signature, who have contributed to fighting ISIS and
other listed terrorist groups and who have contributed
to stabilizing the country. I look forward to working
with all of those Libyan and international stakeholders

to bring together our political, security and economic
efforts in a coherent and coordinated manner.

I appreciate the efforts of all Governments
and organizations working to promote peace and
reconciliation among Libyans. But a proliferation of
initiatives to mediate somehow risks confusing the
political landscape. There is a window of opportunity,
and it is in the hands of the Libyan people to seize it. I
would not have assumed this role ifI did not believe that
a peaceful and positive end to the Libyan crisis were
possible. For that reason, during the upcoming meeting
of the General Assembly, Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres plans to convene a high-level meeting where an
action plan will be presented. I will not go into further
details as it would be premature prior to the conclusion
of my round of consultations with the Libyans.

The United Nations stands willing and able to
act in the best interests of all Libyans and with all
parties equally. I very much hope that with the trust
of our Libyan partners and the confidence of the
regional organizations and concerned Member States,
we will be able to strengthen and unify our collective
efforts and together restore Libya to its rightful place
in the family of nations - as one united, stable and
prosperous country.

