Mr. Lambertini (Italy): At the outset, I would like
to commend the Malaysian presidency for organizing
this debate and to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, Special Representative for Children and
Armed Conflict Zerrougui and UNICEF Executive
Director Lake for their briefings and for their work in
identifying ways that will help us in better preventing
and responding to the scourges that continue to affect
children in armed conflict.

Italy aligns itself with the statement to be made
by the observer of the European Union and with the
statement made by the representative of Canada on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Children and Armed
Conflict. I wish to add the following remarks in my
national capacity.

The celebrationthis year of the twentieth anniversary
of the establishment of the mandate of the Special
Representative on Children and Armed Conflict, which
we strongly support, represent an invaluable occasion
to assess the developments and the failures made by
the international community in this area. During
this period, remarkable progress has been registered
in the demobilization of child soldiers and in their
reintegration into their communities of origin. Most of
all, 20 years on, we particularly welcome the evolution
of a stronger normative and institutional framework for
the protection of children in armed conflicts, mainly
through the institution of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism established by resolution 1612 (2005).

Last year, two more remarkable steps were taken:

the adoption of resolution 2225 (2015), which recognizes
abduction in armed conflict as a listing criterion in the
annexes of the Secretary-General's annual reports,
and the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1), in
which Member States committed themselves to take
immediate and effective measures to eradicate forced
labour, end modern slavery and human trafficking and
secure the prohibition and elimination of the worst
forms of child labour, including the recruitment and
use of child soldiers. But much more relevant than
those documents and resolutions is their concrete
implementation. In that regard, Italy's contribution to
that very sensitive issue is multifaceted.

First, as a non-permanent member of the Security
Council during the period 2007-2008, we strongly
supported the inclusion of specific provisions on the
protection of children in the mandates of the United
Nations peacekeeping operations, which is now the
standard practice of the Council, and we actively
participated in the drafting of resolution 1820 (2008),
on sexual violence and armed conflict, which was the
first resolution to openly recognize that sexual violence,
when used as a tactic of war, may exacerbate conflicts
and impede the restoration of peace and security. We
stand ready to do our part again as member of the
Security Council next year.

Secondly, we continue to be engaged through our
training centres. The oeace operations review provided
useful recommendations on how this important
topic can be considered in planning and conducting
peacekeeping operations. We believe that the targeted
training of United Nations personnel on children's
rights has to remain paramount to ensuring effective
peacekeeping on the ground.

Thirdly, we renewed our political commitment to
humanitarian law, being threatened by the involvement
of non-State actors in conflicts. In this spirit, Italy
joined the Safe Schools Declaration, which supports
the Guidelines for Protecting Schools and Universities
from Military Use during Armed Conflict, promoted
by a coalition of countries, United Nations actors
and non-governmental organizations. In line with
our commitment, we also support campaigns such as
Children, Not Soldiers, launched in 2014 by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict and UNICEF. Campaigns like
this are an essential instrument for guiding the action
of the international community in bringing an end to
violations against children.

Fourthly, given the growing trend of abuses
and violence committed against children in current
crises, we are promoting and implementing long-term
initiatives for the recovery and social integration of
former child soldiers and victims of conflicts through
our development cooperation programmes, in particular
in the Middle East and in Africa.

Finally, given the unprecedented and steady
rise in mixed migration flows on the Mediterranean
central route, we are putting in place a new ad hoc
legal framework in order to better assist and receive
minors coming from conflict areas, thus strengthening
the implementation of their rights. In particular, after
having increased the financial resources dedicated to
unaccompanied minors from €90 million in 2015 to
€170 million in 2016, Italy is committed to taking in
more unaccompanied minors and being better equipped
to receive them: 2,000 more reception centres will be
available by the end of 2018, and highly specialized
services will be provided, based on the principle of the
best interest of the child.

Let me conclude by saying that all these
commitments and measures cannot be decoupled from
the need to bring perpetrators to justice. Accountability
at national and international levels is key to ensure that
no more children are involved or used as soldiers in
armed conflicts. With the Sustainable Development
Goals, we committed ourselves to end recruitment and
use of child soldiers by 2030. Let us work together to
transform this promise into a reality.

