Mr. Manolo (Philippines): At the outset, I wish
to join the other speakers in expressing condolences to
the Governments ofIndia and of Pakistan in connection
with the tragic earthquake that struck yesterday.

Mr. President, my delegation would like to thank
you for organizing this open debate, which comes at a
critical time in the work of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET).
We also thank the Secretary-General for his lucid and
comprehensive report on the activities of UNTAET
over the past six months. We also welcome the
presence of Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and
Transitional Administrator; Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta; Mr.
Harri Holkeri, President of the General Assembly; and
the officials of the international financial institutions,
who all spoke today. We thank them for their valuable
contributions to today's deliberations.

Allow me also, Sir, to pay tribute to the
presidency of Singapore in the Security Council and to
convey our congratulations for the work you have
accomplished so far this month. In particular, the
Singaporean presidency has given further impetus to
the work of the United Nations in East Timor by
opening the Council's discussions to non-members,
especially to those who are participants and
contributors to UNTAET. This, in our View, reinforces
the importance of the principle of close cooperation
between troop contributors and non-members with the
Council.

We also appreciate the fact that earlier this week,
the Council presidency conducted formal, "triangular"
consultations among troop contributors, the Council
and the Secretariat.

We are at a crucial stage as far as the situation in
East Timor is concerned. In February last year,
UNTAET began the arduous task of helping the East
Timorese achieve self-rule. Less than a year later, we
are now facing the real prospect of an independent East
Timor by the end of this year. This is indeed a laudable
goal, whose achievement will require the utmost
cooperation of all concerned. In solidarity with this
objective, we support the recommendation of the
Secretary-General to extend the mandate of UNTAET
until 31 December 2001 in order to continue the task
that will ensure that this aspiration for independence
becomes a reality for the Timorese people. For success
in East Timor will stand as testimony to the
unwavering vision and remarkable fortitude of the
Timorese people, as well as the undaunted commitment
of UNTAET under the leadership of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. It will also
serve as testimony to the importance of international
and regional cooperation.

However, the road ahead will not be easy. Broad
and intensive public consultations must be conducted
to ensure the unity of purpose and constructive
cooperation of all those with a stake in the future of
East Timor. Furthermore, details of the plans for the
Constituent Assembly and the election scheduled for
this summer must be finalized soon.

There are crucial factors that may affect the
timetable for these activities, the most important of
which remains the security situation in the territory.
During the last six months, we have seen the deaths of
two United Nations peacekeepers, as well as of three
staff members of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees. Several others have also
been injured. We therefore believe that a draw-down of
the current level of troops in East Timor should not be
pursued until the security situation is deemed to have
stabilized. The extended mandate should not include
any reference to reduction of troops. Any future
reduction of troops in UNTAET should be made only
after a thorough assessment on the ground of the
security situation.

Security Council resolution 1319 (2000) called
for steps to disarm and disband the militias. We were
glad to hear today that their activities, as well as
politically motivated violence, have fallen off.
Nevertheless, the security of the territory and the
refugee camps in West Timor should continue to be
addressed closely. We welcome the trial that began in
Jakarta two weeks ago of the suspects in the Atambua
murders, and we commend the Indonesian Government
for cooperating with the United Nations efforts to
improve the security situation in the territory.

The Philippines is committed to participating in
the work of the United Nations in East Timor until the
Timorese people have attained their independence. We
recognize, however, that after independence East Timor
will still require substantial international assistance to
support its efforts to promote development, meet the
basic needs of its people and build capacity. A post-
independence scenario should also include the
continuation of United Nations engagement in the
military, police and civil affairs of the new state. Such
arrangements, we believe, would be required until the
political infrastructure of an independent East Timor is
fully in place. We would hope, however, that before the
mandate of a post-independent United Nations effort in
East Timor is finalized, extensive triangular
consultations would be conducted, as in the case of
UNTAET. In this regard, the Philippines would be
prepared to consider participating in a post-
independence United Nations effort, depending on the
mandate that will be finalized by the Council. Such an
effort should have a clear mandate and exit strategy
and effective regional representation. It must also be
deployed as a United Nations peace operation and,
naturally, in accordance with an agreement reached
with the new government. We look forward to open
discussions and consultations on this matter.

