Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Let me thank
Assistant Secretary-General Keita for her briefing and
wish her well in her new role, as this is the first time that
I have seen her since she took it up. I also welcome the
presence of Her Excellency Foreign Minister Camara in
the Security Council.

I will focus largely on the implementation of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali in my
statement. The year 2018 saw renewed commitments by
the Government of Mali and the signatory armed groups
to the expedited and full implementation of the 2015
agreement. In March, we saw the parties commit to a
road map for the implementation of priority actions. In
October, the Pact for Peace was signed, recommitting
to the swift and inclusive implementation of the
agreement. The United Kingdom welcomes recent
progress, notably the launching of the accelerated
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
process and the establishment of a working group on
the participation of women in the peace process. We
welcome the efforts of the Malian Prime Minister
in support of the implementation of the agreement,
including the establishment of a new Ministry.

Those developments are welcome and underscore
the genuine importance that the Government
attaches to the process. Having heard the Minister
speak with passion and conviction, I know that she
is also personally committed. However, there must
be considerable and rapid further action in order to
achieve the full implementation committed to by all
parties to the agreement. For example, as noted in
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/1174),
progress is being made to establish 10 district-level
interim administrations, but steps must now be taken
to operationalize those interim administrations. Of
the 72 civil administrators appointed in June last year,
only 7, we understand, have been deployed to their duty
stations. It has been three and a half years since the
agreement was signed. Timelines in the March 2018
road map have passed unfulfilled.

We are encouraged by the Government's plans
for 2019, and we hope that those will be successful
so that the Malian people can enjoy a more peaceful
and prosperous future. As Assistant Secretary-General
Keita recalled and the parties to the agreement will
recall, the Security Council decided last month to place
three individuals on the sanctions list compiled by the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2374
(2017) for impeding the peace process. The parties will
also recall our expressed readiness to take further such
measures if needed. The United Kingdom therefore
reiterates its previous calls on the Government of
Mali, the Platform coalition of armed groups and the
Coordination des mouvements de l'Azawad to redouble
their efforts and take the additional steps needed for
the immediate implementation of the agreement.
As Assistant Secretary-General Keita said, there is
impatience around the table concerning the missed
milestones that we have heard about meeting after
meeting in the Council.

Turning to the situation on the ground, we recognize
the challenging circumstances in which the Malian
Government and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
operate. The United Kingdom unequivocally condemns
recent attacks against MINUSMA personnel and
supporting contractors. We express our condolences
to the families of those who have tragically lost their
lives, and we thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Mali and all of his staff for their
important work in very Challenging circumstances.

The United Kingdom is deeply concerned about the
large numbers of civilians who continue to be affected
by targeted terrorist attacks and intercommunal clashes,
particularly in the centre of Mali. We welcome the steps
taken by the Government of Mali to re-establish a State
presence by the integrated security plan for the centre.
However, in order to ensure that the root causes of
instability in the centre are sustainably addressed and
enable MINUSMA to provide complementary support,
the United Kingdom encourages the Government to
also develop a comprehensive political strategy for
the centre.

The human rights situation remains concerning.
However, the United Kingdom welcomes the progress
that has been made in the prosecution of members of
the Malian defence and security forces who have been
accused ofperpetrating human rights violations. In order
to increase the people's confidence in those defence
forces, it is critical to thoroughly investigate all human
rights violations and ensure justice and accountability.

In conclusion, the United Kingdom welcomes the
recent steps that have been taken to foster stability in
Mali. Now is the time for further action. Rapid progress
is needed with regard to the implementation ofthe peace
agreement in a full, effective and inclusive manner,
while political security and development efforts,
particularly in central Mali, are intensified. The United
Kingdom stands ready to support such progress. We are
increasing our diplomatic presence in Mali, the Niger
and Chad. We have deployed Chinook helicopters to
support Operation Barkhane, which provide logistical
support for the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the
Sahel. Our Department for International Development
has spent $317 million across the Sahel in the past four
to five years, and we will significantly increase our
development assistance in coming years.

