Mr. McLay (New Zealand): We welcome your
initiative, Madam President, in bringing truly relevant
and innovative briefers to the Security Council.
Journalists reporting on situations of armed conflict,
like the briefers we have heard today, deserve credit
for bringing to Headquarters the grim reality of armed
conflict.

Together with the United Nations own reporting,
news media form part of the international community's
decision-making matrix, as has already been made clear
by a number of Council members, not least in respect
of the decisions made by the Council itself. Media
can also help transform and resolve conflicts, as the
work of professional and citizen journalists disperses
information, discloses wrongdoing and sheds light
on atrocities. Indeed, the presence of an independent
media is essential to stress-test other reports of what
is happening in conflict areas, and is an important
check on the so-called official line, whether it be from
host Governments, interested stakeholders or even the
United Nations itself.

We have been reminded several times in this debate
that truth is often the first casualty of war. In speaking
truth to power, journalists in conflict situations can
help right that wrong. The flow of information and
the expose of war crimes are crucial mechanisms for
combatting impunity in respect of war crimes.

Many of the important points that might be raised
in relation to this topic are also, more generally, relevant
to the protection of civilians. But today we should focus
on aspects relating to the special characteristics of
journalists themselves.

On reviewing the list of the many media personnel
killed in Syria over the past year, it is striking
how many are not affiliated with traditional media
organizations. International humanitarian law protects
new media, such as Internet media, bloggers, online
videos and other digital news sources, all now so
ubiquitous in this digital age. But this democratization
of content also means that, unlike traditional media,
new media journalists and other practitioners may not
have the same level of awareness of, and training in,
respect of their rights or of the practical, protective
actions they might take in conflict zones. We therefore
strongly commend initiatives taken by the International
Committee of the Red Cross and by non-governmental
organizations such as Reporters Without Borders to fill
that knowledge gap.

Media deaths, sadly, do not correspond to the
intensity of combat. The large number of deaths in Syria
and Somalia compared to those in other conflict zones
emphasizes that different conflicts require different,
tailored responses to protect journalists - an issue
that should now be addressed by the Security Council
at the country-specific level, for which we encourage
the inclusion of specific language on the topic in
the relevant Council mandates. It is not sufficient
anymore that this issue be addressed only through a
resolution that is now six and a half years old; it must be
operationalized in the field, allowingjournalists access
to their sources and, as the representative of Brazil has

just stressed, allowing them to protect those sources
and, in particular, to protect them from harm.

Above all, journalists can play an important role
in conflict prevention, horizon-scanning and early
warning. In the absence of peacekeeping or observer
operations and political missions, the international
community relies on the media to inform and alert it
to situations that are at risk of deteriorating into armed
conflict, and that, I know, can be particularly helpful
to the Council's elected members. We must all support
the media as important actors that enable the United
Nations and the Security Council to act in preventive
mode.

It is inherent in journalists' work that in war zones
they assume a task that exposes them to danger. Indeed,
they often seek it out, and, paradoxically, we benefit
from that proximity. The challenge for the international
community is to ensure that, in performing their
essential function of speaking truth to power,
journalists are not also exposed to deliberate, targeted
acts of violence. That, I suggest, is the task - indeed,
the responsibility - we should reaffirm today.

