Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Thank
you, Mr. President, for those kind words. And I wish to
thank you, Minister Davutoglu, and your delegation for
the initiative of holding this important debate. I also
wish to thank the Secretary-General for the information
he has provided to the Council.

Numerous attacks and recent failed attempts in
various parts of the world have shown that, lamentably,
this scourge continues to represent a serious threat to
international peace and security. In light of that reality,
the delegation of Mexico reiterates its most energetic
condemnation of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, irrespective of where it comes from
and by whom and for whatever purposes it is
committed. Our commitment to the international
counter-terrorism fight is steadfast. The current debate
not only gives us an opportunity to reaffirm this
commitment, but also to identify the progress made
and the outstanding challenges in this sphere.

Mexico has been a fervent and constant promoter
of complete respect for human rights in the fight
against terrorism. It is a priority matter for us, which
we have championed in various forums of the United
Nations system, including the Security Council, as well
as at the inter-American level. The obligations arising
from the Council's counter-terrorism regime are
consistent with other obligations of international law,
particularly those pertaining to human rights and
humanitarian and refugee law.

It was the Council itself that confirmed and
consolidated this relationship in a number of
resolutions and statements, including the one that we
will be adopting today. The consolidation of this
complementary and mutually reinforcing relationship
contributes to a better understanding of the scourge of
terrorism and of the appropriate methods to fight it and
in that way to effectively combat it. As we have
pointed out on various occasions, legitimacy and
effectiveness go hand in hand.

In this context, it appears to us to be fundamental
to stress the progress made under the sanctions regime
set up by resolution 1267 (1999) on Al-Qaida and the
Taliban. Resolutions 1822 (2008) and 1904 (2009)
have made significant contributions towards
transparency and due process under this regime. That
progress has been seen in practice, as evident in the
recently concluded revision of the Consolidated List
and the establishment of the Office of the
Ombudsperson.

We cannot fail to insist, however, that fair and
clear procedures will not be achieved until we have an
effective remedy for listing and de-listing. That is one
of the most significant challenges that the Security
Council's counter-terrorism and sanctions regimes are
currently facing, in the light of the rule of law at the
international level.

We share the approach of seeing the threat of
terrorism from a multidimensional perspective that
deals with the underlying causes for its spread. In
particular, Mexico believes that areas where there is
exclusion, marginalization, ignorance and poverty are
in some cases support for the spread of this threat. That
is why we need to strengthen the holistic approach in
our initiatives to reduce poverty, exclusion and
frustration in the face of the lack of legitimate political
hopes of peoples, groups and individuals, according to
their regional contexts.

The comprehensive approach of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, with its
four pillars, is on the right track. The review of the
Strategy that the General Assembly has just concluded
and Assembly resolution 64/297 show that the
international community is united with regard to this
approach. The international community has a solid
international legal framework that covers a very broad
panoply of terrorism actions. That legal regime and
institutional framework designed as part of the Global
Strategy is an ideal forum for cooperation.

Like other delegations, the delegation of Mexico
would like to stress the importance of having a general
counter-terrorism convention that could complement
that legal framework. Negotiations to that end have
taken too long, and we call once again for their prompt
conclusion. We already have a number of special legal
instruments for fighting terrorism, but despite that we
have not been able define the phenomenon.

The effectiveness of international norms,
including the relevant resolutions of the Council,
depends in large measure on implementation at the
national level. We thus consider it indispensable to
redouble efforts to provide more proactive technical
assistance by specialized bodies and agencies such as
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. We
also recall the importance of taking into account
realities and needs at the local level. In the light of the
proliferation in global counter-terrorism regulation, it
is also indispensable to strengthen an integrative
approach within the framework of the strengthening of
the rule of law.

The advantages offered by a globalized world
through borders open to the flow of people and
commercial goods cannot be used as a window of
opportunity for terrorists to move around freely,
engage in unbridled arms trafficking or to mobilize
resources unchecked. Mexico reaffirms its commitment
to progress towards the strengthening of practical
measures to strengthen border controls.

Close coordination between the three subsidiary
bodies of the Council is another fundamental aspect
where significant progress has been made and must
continue to be intensified. As Chairman of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), Mexico would like to reiterate its commitment
to such coordination. The threat arising from weapons
of mass destruction in the hands of non-State actors,
particularly for terrorist purposes, is one of the most
serious to international peace and security. Based on
the broad examination concluded last January, we have
engaged in intensive consultations as part of a
thorough reflection on the 1540 Committee and its
future role in order to prevent, through the
consolidation of international cooperation, the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction in the
hands of non-State actors.

Allow me to conclude, Mr. President, by
congratulating you and your delegation for the
excellent work that you have done in leading the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC). Under the
leadership of Turkey, the CTC has acquired new
momentum that has begun to show significant results.
The streamlining of the working methods, the thematic
debates and the more frequent reports to the
membership of the United Nations are just a few
examples. Initiatives such as the Ankara meeting last
June and the meeting of public prosecutors on the topic
of counter-terrorism planned for the end of this year
are crucial in order to better project the work of the
Committee and to promote understanding and
cooperation among capitals, which are indispensable
requirements for ensuring that our common efforts
against this scourge are more successful.

