Mr. Swan: I congratulate you, Madam President,
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of November. I am honoured to report to the
Council today on the situation in Somalia.

Let me begin by recognizing the important progress
achieved in Somalia over the past decade. That progress
has included building national and federal member
state institutions, scoring significant military gains
against Al-Shabaab, enhancing economic growth and
improved public sector management. Somalis want to
see that progress consolidated in 2020 and, indeed,
made irreversible, and so do their international partners
and friends. I am pleased to confirm a number of
examples of further progress since my previous report
to the Council three months ago (see S/PV.8601).

Somalia remains on the path to debt relief, with
favourable assessments by the International Monetary
Fund and strong creditor support. A new national
development plan was adopted by the Government
in September and will guide international partner
programmes. Somali National Army troops have held
territory they captured from Al-Shabaab earlier this
summer in Lower Shabelle. On the diplomatic front,
President Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed Farmajo and
his Kenyan counterpart, President Uhuru Kenyatta, met
last week and announced plans to normalize bilateral
relations that had been strained since February. To boost
prospects for further advances in 2020, the Somali
Government hosted the Somalia Partnership Forum on
1 and 2 October, which identified critical priorities for
2020 and defined specific objectives and timelines in a
mutual accountability framework agreed with partners.

Progress on the ambitious agenda for 2020 will
require a high degree of political consensus. That will
entail dialogue and compromise between the central
Government and federal member states, between the
executive and legislature, between current office holders
and those now out of power and between elite leaders
and those community elders, civil society organizations
and women's and youth groups who give voice to so
many Somalis. After more than a year without effective
cooperation between the central Government and key
federal member states, the situation has become an
obstacle to improving and achieving important national
priorities. Somalia's leaders must act urgently to
break the stalemate between the centre and the federal
member states in the interest of the nation.

Political dynamics in Somalia are increasingly
driven by a focus on the 2020 election. I wish to
underscore the critical importance of Parliament
passing the electoral code and adopting amendments
to the law on political parties before the end of
December. Any delay in that timeline puts the 2020
electoral calendar at risk. I commend the Government
for confirming an initial tranche of financing towards
costs related to voter registration. I also commend the
Government for naming the national electoral security
task force in September, which must now urgently
begin its important work.

While that technical progress is encouraging, I
must again underscore the need for Somalis to forge
a broad political consensus on the electoral system for
2020. In that regard, I very much welcome yesterday's
meeting between President Farmajo and his two
predecessors and encourage more such consultations.
As the election approaches, I call on authorities at all
levels of Government to ensure that political space is
preserved. Citizens must have the right to speak out,
to access media, to organize and meet and to travel
to engage fellow Somalis throughout the country. At
the same time, I call on all political leaders to act with
responsibility, to eschew violence and to protect the
integrity of national institutions.

Somalis are also paying close attention to
reconciliation and electoral processes at the federal
member state level. Reconciliation efforts in Galmudug
state now face challenges as competition intensifies
over the composition of the parliament. Tensions in
Jubaland resulting from the disputed electoral process
in August continue to pose risks of violence, clan
divisions and even external intervention if not carefully
managed. We urge that those situations be addressed
through dialogue, compromise and pragmatism.

With respect to relations with Somaliland, we urge
authorities in both Mogadishu and Hargeisa to focus on
the needs of the population and to remain open-minded
about new initiatives to encourage dialogue. With
parliamentary elections also expected in Somaliland in
2020, it is important that political freedoms and human
rights be respected there, too.

The Federal Government has committed to
adopting an amended federal constitution by June 2020.
Somali leaders and stakeholders must now redouble
their efforts to complete that foundational document.
It must address the central issues of the federal model,
such as the allocation of powers, the structure of
Government and the status of the capital, Mogadishu,
and guarantee women's political representation. Peace
and stability in Somalia require strong institutions to
protect the human rights of citizens and build trust in
the State. I call on the central Government and federal
member states to reach an agreement on the justice
and corrections model and establish the constitutional
court, judicial services commission and human rights
commission. Among other priority legislation, I urge
expedited consideration and passage of the sexual
offences bill by Parliament.

Insecurity remains a major challenge to making
progress in Somalia. Al-Shabaab continues to
execute deadly terrorist attacks against civilians and
military targets. With a View to disrupting attacks in
Mogadishu, the Somali National Army, with support
from the African Union Military Observer Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM) and international partners,
began operations in April to recapture territory from
Al-Shabaab in the Lower Shabelle region. Following
its previous offensive in August, the Somali National
Army has successfully held its ground, despite
repeated Al-Shabaab counterattacks. Additional force
generation is now required not only to continue those
advances but also to support other institutional reforms
that are needed in order to implement the security
transition plan.

On the economic front, Somalia is on track to reach a
decisionpointundertheHeavilylndebtedPoorCountries
Initiative by early next year. The Federal Government
and federal member states have fully cooperated at the
Finance Minister level in making progress towards
that shared goal. I welcome the Federal Government's
adoption of the new National Development Plan. Its
content was thoroughly consulted with federal member
states and international partners alike. Donors have
pledged to align their programmes with the Plan. While
the Government and partners remain committed to the
longer-term peacebuilding and development agenda for
the people, Somalia regrettably continues to be hard
hit by humanitarian crises. Thanks to the leadership of
the Somali Government's humanitarian team and the
generosity of many international partners, lifesaving
support has been afforded to those most in need. We
express our steadfast solidarity with those Somalis
affected by the recurring crises.

In closing, I commend the courage and tenacity
of Somali and AMISOM. forces in their continued
efforts to improve security throughout the country. I
underscore the centrality of respect for human rights
in all of our collective efforts in Somalia. I reiterate the
importance of women, youth and civil society as vital
partners in building Somalia's future.

