Mr. Shobokshi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, I would like to associate myself with
those who preceded me in congratulating you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. We are convinced that, by
virtue of your wisdom, competence and skill, you will
be able to lead the work of the Council to success. We
would also like to thank the Permanent Representative
of Mauritius for having led the work of the Security
Council so skilfully during the last month.

No one in the world today can deny that what the
Palestinian people are enduring in the occupied
territories is one of the worst forms of injustice, racial
persecution, occupation and systematic terrorism in the
history of mankind. The Palestinians are subjected to
injustice, oppression and domination in the view of the
entire world, and Israel flouts all resolutions of
international legitimacy and defies the most
fundamental human rights. Despite all the international
resolutions that have been adopted against Israel, none
of them has been implemented and Israel has not been
compelled to comply with any ofthem.

Israel claims that it seeks peace and aspires to
good-neighbourliness on the basis of security, and that
the Palestinians do not seek peace and are endangering
its citizens. However, it is the Arabs who seek peace
and good-neighbourly relations and are the ones who
made peace a strategic option. Therefore, the initiative
of the Crown Prince and Deputy Prime Minister was
welcomed and supported throughout the world. The
world was convinced that the demands of the Arabs
include reclaiming their lands in the Palestinian
occupied territories, the Golan Heights and Shebaa'
Farms in Lebanon, in accordance with international
resolutions, as well as regaining the legitimate
Palestinian rights and putting an end to the Israeli
occupation. Israel created new pretexts regarding its
security, and it has brandished those pretexts in the
face of all those seeking peace, thus trying to obstruct
any attempt to implement the resolutions of the United
Nations.

This has been Israel's policy. Even the application
of international legality is subjected to Israel's own
concepts of security. No one denies that every State has
a right to ensure the security of its people, but what
security is Israel speaking of? Is it an exclusive right of
Israel that excludes all other peoples in the region? Is it
to be carried out in the absence of peace while
occupation continues? Israel deprives Arabs of their
rights and water, expands its settlements, seeks to
dominate others, imposes a blockade on Palestinians
and prevents them from working, all for security
reasons? Can Israel demolish houses, destroy fields and
crops and carry out a policy of displacement and
forcible expulsions, all for security reasons?

In view of these facts, we ask: where is security
for Palestinians? Every Palestinian should have
security. As Palestinians have suffered from the
inhuman practices to which they are subjected every
day, the pretext of Israel's security is total disregard of
the security needs of Palestinians and Arabs.

Israel has no desire for peace and no desire to
settle the Middle East problem or to comply with
international resolutions, and thus it drags the
international community into a vicious circle of
security considerations to prevent it from considering
the very essence of the Middle East problem, which
lies in the Israeli occupation of Palestinian lands. To
continue its occupation and oppression of those lands,
Israel has prevented the recognition of the legitimate
right of the Palestinian people and obstructed the
Security Council. Israel is aware of all of this, and the
international community knows that Israel is seeking to
promote its security at the expense of preventing any
attempt to examine the occupation.

Israel's oppression of Palestinians and its
repeated statements regarding Palestinian violence
should lead us to ask what causes have led to that
violence, which are Israel's unwillingness to seek
peace and its desire to circumvent the peace process. It
is seeking to avoid any withdrawal from the occupied
Arab territories and Jerusalem and to expand its
presence in the occupied territories and beyond.

What can justify this Violence? The Palestinian
violence is merely a response to Israeli terrorism and
the ongoing occupation of Palestinian and Arab lands.
It is an expression of bitterness and frustration at many
years of waiting and expectation, which has made
Palestinians lose hope for a peaceful solution in the
face of Israel's stonewalling, reneging on its
commitments, and acts of repression, reprisal and
collective punishment, in flagrant defiance of Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), the
principle of land for peace and the many agreements
and accords it has concluded in this regard.

Israel's objective has been and remains to expel
the Arab people from Palestine and to occupy even
more Palestinian territory in order to establish an
exclusive State. That objective is the real foundation of
Israel's current policy and of all its programmes against
the Palestinian people, subjected to hateful occupation.
Israel's assassination of Palestinians is aimed at
eliminating an entire people motivated by the desire to
survive and to regain its rights. It is no coincidence that
Israeli forces are seeking to dam the sources of the
Palestinian people's resistance. They take Palestinian
women and children in an effort to prevent the creation
of new militants and, by precluding the emergence of a
new generation, to make Palestinians believe that they
have no future.

The current Israeli Government does not hesitate
to use any form of violence, which it justifies under
pretexts of legality. In this case, Israel cannot arrogate
to itself a legitimate right by monopolizing the
violence. Palestinian violence is a response to Israeli
violence and is recognized as resistance to occupation
under international law.

The events of the last 18 months have proven that
Israel's hope that military force can thwart Arab claims
is misplaced. History shows that no Power, whatever
its might, can dominate forever. Israel's domination
today contravenes the principles of the United Nations
Charter and international law. All peoples must enjoy
their rights and history confirms that no community,
whatever its military might, can monopolize peace,
security and sovereignty over other territories or usurp
the rights of others.

We cannot allow the current situation to continue.
If it does, the frustration and anger will only increase
and give rise to further violence and extremist actions
on both sides, making it impossible to obtain the final
objective of peace. The situation is explosive. Israel's
military terrorism and the reaction of the Palestinian
people have claimed numerous victims. Both parties
clearly need external assistance to break the cycle of
violence and to prevent this volatile situation from
deteriorating further. If we fail to bring the parties back
to the negotiating table, the situation may well spiral
out of control.

We fully agree with the statement of the
Secretary-General to the effect that the situation in the
region is extremely serious, that bitterness and mutual
distrust are being exacerbated every day and that the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict could deteriorate into total
war. We are truly at the edge of the abyss. We agree
that the fundamental problem lies in the Israeli
occupation, which has led to an escalation of violence
and terrorism in the region and to terrible economic
deprivation and suffering. All these problems are
related to attempts to identify the issue merely as one
of security. A solution defined on that basis cannot
succeed. Security cannot be sought independently of
other issues. It must be addressed side by side with
other basic political issues. If it is not, we will see a
renewed and even worse exchange of violence.

The deterioration of the situation in the
Palestinian occupied territories is fraught with serious
consequences of international scope. The situation
requires international efforts to restore peace and
security in the area to be stepped up. The parties must
settle the conflict through the rigorous implementation
of Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). The total
withdrawal of the Israeli forces of occupation from the
territories occupied in 1967 will ensure security and
stability and allow the Palestinian people to exercise its
right to self-determination and to create its own State,
with Jerusalem as its capital. A withdrawal from the
Sheba'a farmlands and the Syrian Golan Heights will
reinforce good-neighbourliness, security and stability.

The international community has an important
responsibility towards the Palestinian people as it seeks
to exercise its legitimate rights and a political
responsibility with respect to the maintenance of
international peace and security, especially in the
Middle East, and to the implementation of resolutions
of international legality.

