Mr. Fall (Guinea) (spoke in French): Madam
President, I should like to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of November. I know and admire your
diplomatic abilities, and I am convinced that the
Council will work effectively under your leadership. I
should also like to congratulate Ambassador Ryan on
the excellent work done under his presidency last
month.

My delegation would like to express its
appreciation for the excellent report of the Panel of
Experts set up pursuant to paragraph 19 of Security
Council resolution 1343 (2001), on Liberia. This report
is in document S/2001/1015, dated 26 October 2001.
Under its mandate, as set forth in page 20 of the report,
the Panel considered the following matters: violations
of the arms embargo; the Liberian Government's
ending of all support for the Revolutionary United
Front (RUF), whose destabilizing role in the subregion
has often been demonstrated; investigation of the
exploitation of natural resources and other economic
activities that feed the conflict in our subregion; the
illegal activities of some individuals relating to the
conflict; and all violations of the provisions of
resolution 1343 (2001).

In the light of the content of the report of the
Panel of Experts, my delegation would stress its
concern over the many flagrant violations of resolution
1343 (2001). We endorse the following
recommendations: first, that the arms embargo on
Liberia be maintained until it is determined that the
Liberian Government has complied with all the
provisions of resolution 1343 (2001); secondly, that an
arms embargo be imposed on the armed non-State
actors in the three countries of the Mano River Union;
thirdly, that investigations continue on the amount of
funds allegedly diverted from logging to buy arms, in
violation of the sanctions; fourthly, that a mandatory,
credible and transparent certification regime for
diamonds be established for Liberia, as has already
been done in the cases of Sierra Leone and Guinea; and
lastly, that a reliable system be established or
strengthened in the subregional airports to prevent the
movement of all persons under a travel ban, pursuant to
resolution 1343 (2001).

My delegation believes that the current calm
along the Guinean borders and the significant progress
made in Sierra Leone came about mainly because of
the following two factors: first, sanctions were imposed
under resolution 1343 (2001), which significantly
constrained the activities of the Monrovia authorities;
and secondly, the Guinean armed forces regained
control of the situation on the ground and were able to
contain and push back rebel troop attacks.

Finally, my delegation would like to report to the
Council on recent events in our subregion.

These positive events supporting the international
community's efforts to restore peace and security were
possible due to the clear-sightedness of the Mano River
Women Peace Network. Several ministerial-level
meetings have been held recently in Liberia, Sierra
Leone and Guinea, following its initiative. Important
questions were discussed during the meetings, relating
to the activities of armed bands in the subregion, the
situation of refugees, measures to rebuild confidence
and security in the region, and the need to reactivate
the various organs of the Mano River Union.

My country believes that the objective conditions
for making the Mano River basin an area of stability,
security and socio-economic integration essentially
depend on all its members respecting the conventions
and treaties linking the three countries, including the
Treaty on non-aggression and security signed at
Monrovia in 1986 and the 15th Protocol of the Union
Declaration, signed at Conakry on 8 May 2000.

In carrying out this undertaking, my country
would like to be assured of the full support of the
Security Council, whose fundamental role in the
maintenance of international peace and security is
clear.

