Mr. Juwayeyi (Malawi): Let me begin by
thanking you, Mr. President, for convening this open
meeting of the Security Council today and for
attending it personally. I wish also to thank the
representative of the United States, Ambassador
Holbrooke, for bringing the topic of AIDS to the
forefront of discussions here at the United Nations.

Let me also take this opportunity to thank the
Executive Director of the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), Dr. Peter Piot,
for his statement and in particular for highlighting the
case of Malawi. He could have gone on to mention the
devastation AIDS has wrought on Malawian society.

That brings me to a special section of the draft
resolution, which states that the spread of HIV/AIDS
can have a uniquely devastating impact on all sectors
and levels of society. If I had had my way, I would
have changed that to read: "The spread of AIDS has
had a uniquely devastating impact on society" -
because that is what is happening in sub-Saharan
African today. Having said that, let me now go to my
prepared text.

At the International AIDS Conference in Durban,
South Africa, last week, the whole world -
particularly those parts of the world where the
HIV/AIDS situation is very bad - was waiting for
good news. The hope was that since the previous
International AIDS Conference had come up with what
appeared to be promising and consoling research
results, this year's Conference would be an
improvement over the previous one. The world
expected to hear that a vaccine would be ready soon, or
that perhaps a cure was in the making.

If this was perhaps a tall order, sub-Saharan
Africa was at least expecting to hear that the so-called
cocktail drugs which have prolonged the lives of
infected individuals in developed countries would be
made available to the least developed countries at
prices which they could afford. But sad to say, even
that was not forthcoming from the Durban Conference.

I arrived at the United Nations in January of this
year, when the issue of AIDS was at the forefront of
discussions in the Security Council. At that time, I said
to myself that this was very good, because back where
I come from, I did not know of a single family that had
not been affected by AIDS. Back there, there is a real
decline in population growth. For instance, when the
national census was done in my country in 1998, we all
expected the population to be around 12 million. That
was what experts had been predicting for the 19905.
However, when the results were announced, we learned
that there were only 9.6 million Malawians. The
population growth rate, which had been believed to be
more than 3 per cent per year, had actually declined to
1.9 per cent per year. It became obvious that AIDS had
given Malawi a death sentence.

I do not want to be misunderstood. I consider
myself well informed regarding the benefits of low
population growth rates, particularly in the developing
countries. With the current adverse economic trends in
most of those countries, one would be perfectly happy
with a 1.9 per cent population growth rate if the rate
were due to informed family planning. Unfortunately,
this one was not.

This may sound strange, but Malawi may not be
alone in experiencing a low population growth rate due
to AIDS. Yesterday The New York Times quoted the
South African Minister of Welfare and Population
Development to the effect that if the AIDS trend goes
unabated, South Africa could eventually have a white
majority. This is serious business.

The Malawi delegation believed that the Security
Council discussions in January might produce fresh
ideas for combating AIDS, because it should have been
clear to all involved that the strategies that had
theretofore been adopted to combat HIV infection had
failed. Unfortunately, this was not to be. What emerged
was a reinforcement of the same old strategies, with
perhaps a little more vigour this time around.

Perhaps, Sir, you noticed this in the tenth
preambular paragraph of the draft resolution, which I
sawjust this morning:

"Farther recognizing that the HIV/AIDS
pandemic is also exacerbated by conditions of
violence and instability, which increase the risk
of exposure to the disease through large
movements of people".

You will have noted that this statement was put in
this draft resolution in good faith, but I hope that,
despite having put it in there, we will not lose sight of
the fact that the most severely affected countries -
Malawi, Botswana, Zimbabwe and South Africa -
have been stable countries. There has not been any
conflict in these countries for the past decade or two -
and, for some of these countries, since their
independence. We have to remember this. It is not just
violence and instability; AIDS must have certain other
characteristics that have promoted its wide diffusion.

The Durban conference has left us with little or
no hope that there might be a cure or vaccine any time
soon. My delegation wishes therefore to call for the
adoption of new strategies. There is a need to re-
evaluate past strategies, to find out how and why they
have failed.

For instance, why is that up until now no one has
died of AIDS in much of sub-Saharan Africa? What is
it in the African culture that makes it difficult to accept
that someone has died of AIDS? AIDS researchers who
go to such funerals in Africa always report that the
person has died of tuberculosis, meningitis, pneumonia.
No one mentions AIDS at all. This is a cultural
perspective.

Perhaps it is now time to let experts in culture,
instead of medical personnel, carry out in-depth
research into how societies can avoid being affected by
the HIV virus. For instance, it was only last week that a
possible link was revealed between circumcised males
and low rates of AIDS infection. Apparently, according
to the report, medical personnel have suspected this
connection for at least a decade, but it was made public
only last week. The ten-year delay in widely
disseminating this information is hard to understand. It
is clear to me that this problem was being looked at
only from a medical point of View, and not from a
cultural one.

However, the practice of circumcision, or the lack
of such a practice, is a cultural matter and often not a
subject of public discussion. That is why strategies
must change.

Since it is clear that a drug to cure AIDS or a
vaccine is in the remote future, let us in the meantime
allow new strategies to come into play. Let us for a
change invest in cultural experts to look at the root
causes of behavioural resistance to outdated strategies.

In conclusion, let me say that my country,
Malawi, also contributes peacekeepers. And Malawi
has always and will continue to ensure that adequate
training is given to all of our people in the field.
Actually, in my country such programmes are ongoing
in the army and in the police, because we realize that
people need to know these things before they take on
new assignments.

