Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg fully associates itself with the statement
delivered earlier on behalf of the European Union.

Allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President, for
having taken the initiative to convene this open debate.

Climate change is a challenge of global
proportions and it can be addressed only at that level. It
requires appropriate and effective international action.
The response to climate change must therefore include
all the relevant United Nations bodies, including the
Security Council, working in accordance with their
respective mandates.

The negative effects of climate change have clear
implications for the security and development of many
States, in particular small island developing States. As
noted by the Secretary-General in his report (A/64/350)
issued following the General Assembly's adoption of
resolution 63/281, on the possible security implications
 

of climate change, it is important that we see climate
change as a threat multiplier. Climate change not only
exacerbates the threats of persistent poverty, weak
institutions for resource management and conflict
resolution, fault lines and histories of mistrust between
communities and nations, but also gives rise to such
new threats as loss of territory leading to the
displacement of populations and statelessness, and
competition for shared or undemarcated international
resources, such as water.

Our understanding of climate change has become
considerably deeper since the issue was first brought
before the Council in April 2007 (see S/PV.5663).
Today, we are even better able to gauge the urgency of
the situation. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change has clearly indicated the need to act without
delay on various fronts.

Efforts must therefore be sustained in the context
of the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change in order to achieve a legally binding
international agreement. The impact of climate change
on the well-being of populations will indeed depend
primarily on the measures taken by the international
community to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and to
decelerate these changes.

As early as 2005, the Security Council stressed
the need to adopt a comprehensive conflict prevention
strategy addressing globally the underlying causes of
armed conflict and political and social crises. By this
logic, it is critical that the security implications of
climate change be factored into the Council's
reflections and mandates, and, in an enhanced and
comprehensive manner, into the activities of the United
Nations system as a whole and of regional and
international organizations.

There is no doubt that a vast spectrum of such
interdependent factors as ethnic tension, cross-border
disputes, deepening inequalities within societies and
failed States can contribute to armed conflict.
However, climate change, with its potentially tragic
consequences for security - such as the displacement
and transfer of populations, the former of which we
have already witnessed - will become an increasingly
critical factor in the underlying causes of conflict as
the climate continues to change at an ever-faster pace.

Climate change is not fair. It impacts primarily
the most vulnerable, who are the least responsible for
its causes but have to cope with its effects on a daily

 

basis. That is why Luxembourg's development
cooperation began several years ago to systematically
mainstream the issues of climate change mitigation and
adaptation into its development programmes. It also
provides fast-start financing to combat climate change.
These contributions are new and complementary to our
official development assistance, which reached
1.09 per cent of our gross national income in 2010.

We also view these contributions in the context of
conflict prevention as measures to ensure sustainable
development, since, as the Secretary-General has
indicated in his reports, climate change can endanger
countries' stability by slowing economic growth,
aggravating poverty and despair, and exacerbating the
vulnerability of populations.

