Mr. Gnehm (United States of America): The United
States believes that the ultimate test for our activities in the
Security Council must be whether our actions serve the
cause of peace. My Government doubts that Council
activity on this subject at this time is likely to pass that test.

The prestige and authority of the Security Council are
important assets. At critical moments, the Council has
exercised its authority to further international peace and
security, with a very lasting influence. Resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973) have long provided a basis for
negotiations and, as the foundation of the Madrid process,
are examples of the positive role played by the Security
Council.

The Declaration of Principles signed by the parties in
September 1993 represents an agreed approach to the
negotiating process. My Government believes it would not
be productive or useful for the Council to involve itself
now in a question that the parties have agreed to cover
when they address permanent status issues in their
negotiations. Our conviction on this point is reinforced by
the ability the parties have demonstrated to address difficult
issues and to resolve them, as demonstrated by their
agreements on the Gaza Strip and the Jericho Area, and on
the Preparatory Transfer of Powers and Responsibilities.

Israeli and Palestinian negotiators are currently
engaged in talks on an extensive and difficult list of issues.
A balance must be found that addresses both Israel's
security concerns and the Palestinians' political and
economic concerns. The parties are making serious efforts
to find that balance. They remain committed to their
agreements and to the process.

 

Surely at this sensitive time no member of this
Council would propose making it more difficult for the
parties to move forward in those talks. My Government
believes that debate here can only sour the atmosphere
and deflect the parties from the need to work together on
the path they have set for themselves.

The United States remains actively engaged with the
parties to help them work through these concerns.
Secretary of State Christopher will travel to the Middle
East next week to consult with key regional parties. He
will explore ways to consolidate agreements already
reached and to lay the basis for future progress.
Therefore, the United States delegation must oppose any
activity that would only complicate efforts to spur the
negotiating process.

My Government acknowledges and respects the
interest of the United Nations and the Security Council in
the peace process. We support the vital work of the
United Nations agencies and the United Nations Special
Coordinator to improve economic conditions. We must
disapprove, however, of any effort to redirect the
negotiating process agreed to previously by the parties.
The authority of the Security Council should be invoked
only wisely, sparingly and at the proper time.

