Mr. Moriko (cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation commends Mr. Said Djinnit, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region,
on his excellent briefing on the implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.

Cote d'Ivoire is pleased to note the positive signs
and progress made in the various peace processes
under way in a number of countries in the Great Lakes
region, which is suffering recurrent crises, in particular
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Central
African Republic and Burundi. Therefore, my country
welcomes the successful conduct ofthe electoral process
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, leading to a
peaceful presidential election on 30 December 2018. We
urge the Congolese authorities to build on that progress
to further strengthen the country's stability.

Similarly, Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the signing, on
5 February in Khartoum, of a peace agreement between
the Government of the Central African Republic and
14 armed groups. We call on the Central African
stakeholders to fully implement their commitments to
meet the aspirations of the Central African people for
peace, security and development.

With regard to Burundi, my delegation welcomes
the decision of President Pierre Nkurunziza not to run
in the 2020 presidential election and the opening of the
Burundian political playing field to a new opposition
party. We call on the Government, the opposition and
all the Burundian people to work together to put an end
to the political crisis and restore stability in Burundi.

My delegation notes, however, that this progress
should in no way make us forget that the Great Lakes
region continues to face multifaceted challenges that
require a collective response, including the activities of
illegal armed groups in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Central African Republic, intercommunal
violence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
clashes in South Sudan and the humanitarian crisis and
the resurgence of Ebola virus disease in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. cote d'Ivoire believes that the
strengthening ofbilateral and regional cooperation will
make it possible to effectively fight those threats to
peace and security.

In that regard, my delegation endorses the
conclusions of the ninth high-level meeting of the
Regional Oversight Mechanism of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region, which
recommends closer cooperation among the States of
the Great Lakes region to put an end to the activities of
armed groups destabilizing the region. In that respect,
we commend the exemplary cooperation among
Uganda, the Democratic Republic of Congo and Rwanda
in the repatriation of foreign former combatants, as
well as the cooperation among all the countries that are
signatories to the framework agreement with regard to
crimes against humanity.

For the countries of the region, regional
organizations and the international community,
the Addis Ababa Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region remains the frame of reference for
addressing, in a concerted manner, the structural
causes of instability and putting an end to the cycles
of violence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Great Lakes region. My country therefore calls
upon the entire international community to increase its
support to the States of the Great Lakes region with
a view to ensuring the full implementation of that
Agreement, which is essential to restoring peace and
stability in the region.

In conclusion, C6te d'Ivoire would like to warmly
thank Mr. Said Djinnit, the outgoing Special Envoy and
his team, for their outstanding work in restoring peace
and stability in the Great Lakes region.

