The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by the representatives of the three co-leads
of the Security Council mission to the Sahel from 21 to
25 March, that is, Cote d'lvoire, France and Germany.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of France.

The Security Council undertook a mission to
Mali and Burkina Faso from 21 to 25 March. It was
co-led by the representatives of C6te d'lvoire, France
and Germany. The trip focused on support for the
implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali, standing up the Group of Five
for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) Joint Force and following up
on the situation in Burkina Faso. The terrible massacre
at Ogossagou, which took place during our trip, deeply
affected us all. Along with all of our interlocutors, we
condemned that unspeakable attack in the strongest
possible terms and expressed our full solidarity with all
the people of Mali in connection with that very painful
event.

We were accompanied by the Chair of the European
Union Political and Security Committee, who had been
invited to observe the visit as part of the cooperation
between the Security Council and the relevant regional
organizations involved in supporting the countries of
the Sahel. The Chair of the Peace and Security Council
of the African Union, who had been similarly invited
was unfortunately unable to participate because of
conflicting commitments. In line with the arrangements
on the ground, I shall focus in particular on the visit
to Mali before giving the floor to my colleagues
from Germany and Cote d'lvoire, who will address,
respectively, the Burkina Faso and G-5 Sahel segments.

The goal of our visit to Mali was to take stock of
the state of the implementation of the priority measures
identified in the most recent mandate of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) against the backdrop of
the Security Council's ministerial-level meeting to be
held on 29 March, which will be an opportunity to take
important decisions on future international support
for the peace process in Mali as well as the future of
MINUSMA itself.

The Council met with President Keita, the
Prime Minister and other Government officials,
representatives of the opposition and members of civil
society, notably women's groups. We also took part in
a meeting of the Agreement Monitoring Committee,
which brought together the Malian parties and members
ofthe international mediation effort. A meeting was also
held with the various security presences in Mali and
the Sahel referred to in resolution 2423 (2018). Lastly,
a ceremony in tribute to the almost 200 MINUSMA
peacekeepers who died carrying out their duty was held
at the MINUSMA memorial in Bamako.

In the course of those meetings we took note
of the significant progress made since the latest
MINUSMA mandate renewal last June, namely, the
holding of the presidential elections with the support
of groups in the north of the country, the continuation
of the decentralization process, the launching of the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process
and the issuance of the decree on integration criteria
with regard to the future reconstituted army. We noted
that that initial progress was the outcome of the renewed
commitment on the part of the Malian parties following
the signing of the Pact for Peace, the daily efforts made
by the Prime Minister and Minister Bouare', among
others, and the establishment of a robust international
framework for supporting the peace process centred
around such tools as the benchmarks set out in 2423
(2018), as well as an independent observer and the
sanctions regime. All interlocutors stressed the
central role played by MINUSMA in their support for
these efforts.

We also emphasized our own firm expectations
in recalling, for example, that the Security Council
sees the continuation of the international community's
exceptional commitment to Mali only within the
framework of a true implementation of the peace
agreement. We therefore regretted that several priority
measures set out in resolution 2423 (2018) were not
implemented by the March deadline, in particular with
respect to the effective integration of 1,000 combatants
into the Malian armed forces, the operationalization of
interim authorities and building a special development
area in the north.
We insisted on the need to accelerate and prioritize
the implementation of the agreement. We stressed the
priority goals of the constitutional review process,
defining a comprehensive plan and a clear timeline for
the redeployment of the Malian armed forces to the
north of the country, and creating a special development
area for the North End. In that spirit, we encouraged the
Malian actors to present as soon as possible a new road
map that is realistic, binding and focused on a limited
number of priorities.

Of course, the situation in the centre of the country
following the attacks in the Bankass district was also
at the heart of our discussions with all actors we met,
including civil society representatives. We all agreed
that there was an absolute need to do everything
possible to break the terrible cycle of violence that
has prevailed in the centre for several months, with
tragic consequences for the local populations. We
encouraged MINUSMA to maintain its protection-of-
civilians mission there and its support for Government
efforts, which should probably be strengthened. We
also urged that everything possible be done to ensure
that the perpetrators of those heinous crimes do not
go unpunished.

Lastly, before yielding the floor I should like to say
a word about the G-5 Sahel. I simply wish to say that
the goal of our mission in that regard was to take stock
of the operationalization of the Joint Force and discuss
ways to strengthen the effectiveness of the tools the
Council has put together to support it. The G-S Sahel
leaders with whom we met underscored in particular
the idea of adapting the modalities of the technical
agreement without calling into question the heart of its
functions, in order to harmonize it with the needs of
the Joint Force. Tomorrow's ministerial-level meeting
on the Joint Force that is to be led by our Minister for
Foreign Affairs will be an opportunity to pursue our
thinking on this, in the prevailing cooperative spirit, in
the run-up to the preparations for the next report of the
Secretary-General and the upcoming Security Council
deadlines on this issue.

I should like, on behalfofus all, to offer our heartfelt
thanks to all the members of the Secretariat who worked,
in New York and on the ground, to organize and carry
out the mission. I refer in particular to the members of

the Security Council Affairs Division, the interpreters,
the security officers, the teams from the Department
of Peace Operations, the Department of Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, MINUSMA and the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel, the
country team in Burkina Faso and all the teams that did
such excellent work. Their work and commitment were
exemplary and played a fundamental role in ensuring
the mission's success. I thank them from the bottom of
my heart on behalf of us all.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to Ambassador Heusgen.

