Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I,
too, wish to thank Sir Kieran Prendergast for his
briefing at this meeting. We note with great interest the
important progress that has been made in the political
process and in the implementation of the Bonn
Agreement and other political aspects. We also wish to
highlight the importance of compliance with the
Agreement at each of its stages.

I should like to make special reference to the
emergency loya jirga, which is scheduled to take place
in a little over two weeks. We agree that the success of
that great event will depend largely on the work of the
local shuras in selecting representatives. In this
connection, we regret the assassination of Mr.
Mohammed Rahim after his election as representative
for Chaghcharan, in Ghowr province, and we express
our deep concern over the meaning and political
implications of this fact for the future of Afghanistan
and the success of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
The murder of Mr. Rahim is another warning
about the importance of security in the implementation
of the Bonn Agreement. We endorse the fundamental
principle that this is an area for which the Afghans
themselves should have basic responsibility. In that
respect, I must say that, in the international
community's struggle against terrorism, we must
ensure that the legitimate authorities of Afghanistan
gain control of their territory in order to guarantee,
inter alia, the eradication of terrorism from Afghan
soil. In a country with a recent and long-standing
history of conflict characterized by the existence of
regional militias, it is clearly necessary to establish a
national armed force that answers to the central
Government and consolidates its control. This will be a
very delicate task because it will involve the
integration into a unified force of personnel of different
ethnic groups who previously followed the orders of
various local leaders.

Notwithstanding this reaffirmation of the
responsibility of the Afghans themselves, we remain
regretful that it has not been possible to extend the
mandate of the International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF) to other regions in response to the repeated
calls of the Interim Authority, UNAMA
representatives, the Secretary-General in his most
recent report and, most recently, the World Bank.

Besides Sir Kieran's reaffirmation of this
necessity, it is obvious that it will take time, perhaps
considerable time, to establish the Afghan forces. The
resulting vacuum could be prolonged, creating
conditions greatly hindering implementation of the
Bonn Agreement, even bearing in mind the
considerable efforts and cooperation made in the
preparation and training of the Afghan forces.

Given the existing security conditions and having
seen the local and international inability to respond
appropriately to those conditions, the Security Council
is faced with the responsibility of contributing through
its actions to maintaining the political credibility of the
process and to protecting the legitimacy of the national
Government that will be installed following the
conclusion of the assembly.

We have expressed our support for the six-month
extension of ISAF's mandate. We welcome and thank
the countries that have contributed troops to ISAF, in
particular, the United Kingdom. We would also like to
thank the Government of Turkey for assuming
command of ISAF for the next six months.

With respect to the draft resolution, I would like
to mention that in the sixth preambular paragraph, we
welcome the letter from the Foreign Minister of Turkey
to the Secretary-General of 7 May 2002. It is
interesting to note that the resolution includes mention
of the relationship of coordination that should exist
between ISAF and the military operation that has been
conducted on Afghan territory since 8 October - over
10 months ago. It is interesting because the text of the
letter has elements which should, of course, be
recognized as of great importance to the ISAF
operation and to the simultaneous existence of the two
operations.

We are also very attentively following the
programmes to which important actors of the
international community have committed themselves,
such as programmes on the control of drug production
and of drug trafficking. We will wait for the reports on
this issue from the United Kingdom delegation, as they
are the leaders of the project.

I would like to conclude by saying that we must
support ISAF's programmes to demobilize and
reintegrate approximately 200,000 ex-combatants and
must support and encourage the hundreds of
humanitarian workers who contribute daily to
improving the living conditions of the Afghan people.

