Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): It is a
well-known fact that the issues with which the Security
Council deals vary in their nature and degree of
sensitivity. Sometimes members of the Council can
reach a consensus quickly; sometimes views diverge on
other issues, such as the draft resolution before us now
on the situation in Myanmar, which comes four months
after the issue was first placed on the agenda of the
Security Council following a procedural vote on 15
September 2006.

The position of Qatar is one of total respect for
the Charter of the United Nations and for international
law in a manner that promotes the maintenance of
international peace and security and the finding of the
best possible solutions to the problems that face
Member States, with no interference in their internal
07-20880

affairs. That should be done, ideally, when a problem
facing a given country has been properly diagnosed
and therefore must be dealt with through the competent
bodies of the United Nations.

The issue of Myanmar - a country that, we
admit, is facing several internal problems - is indeed
among the items that are being discussed by the United
Nations and that, before their inclusion on the agenda
of the Security Council, have been considered by the
Third Committee, the Economic and Social Council
and the Human Rights Council. My delegation strongly
believes that we should continue assisting Myanmar
through those competent organs so that it can
overcome all of the internal problems facing it. We
urge the Government of Myanmar to intensify its
efforts to complete its march towards democracy and
human rights.

At the same time, we should not ignore the views
of neighbouring countries such as the countries of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), the
Asian Group, the Group of 77 and China, and the Non-
Aligned Movement, which have clearly stated that the
issue of Myanmar is an internal problem that does not
pose any threat to international peace and security.

For our part, we note that it is an issue related to
internal problems, most of which are of a humanitarian
character. They are challenges that beset many other
countries, and they differ only in degree, not in kind.
We understand the efforts made by the sponsors of the
draft resolution, which is aimed at taking preventive
measures to resolve this situation.

At the same time, we also believe that there is a
need to deal justly, effectively and without any
selectivity with all of the other issues that do, in fact,
constitute threats to international peace and security.
The civilians concerned continue to look to the
Security Council and to wait for the Security Council
to help alleviate their suffering.

On the basis of the humanitarian situation and the
process of democratic reform in Myanmar and in view
of the latest report of the United Nations, the situation
there, although difficult, is indeed improving, though
improvement is limited. It is being reviewed by the
good offices of the Secretary-General, which we totally
support. It is also being reviewed by the competent
organs of the United Nations. However, we believe that
in order for those efforts to be fruitful, carried out
correctly and without duplication or starting from
5
scratch, an organ such as the Security Council should
not encroach on the competences of other organs, given
that it shoulders tremendous responsibilities in the area
of international peace and security. The Council's
resources should be directed towards resolving those
problems, and it should not create a precedent that
could have negative consequences for international
relations.

In the light of all those considerations, my
delegation cannot support this draft resolution and will
abstain in the voting.

