The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the United Arab Emirates.

Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates) : I thank
you, Mr. President, for holding this timely debate, and
we thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.

In order to provide more focused remarks, I will
confine the United Arab Emirates's comments to
the Middle East region, where there is a profound
perception that the United Nations is failing to
implement its primary purposes as defined in Article
1 of the Charter. As we have already heard today, the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and other violent
extremist groups are responsible for despicable crimes
throughout our region. There is no question that the
primary responsibility for these crimes lies with the
extremists.

Yet their emergence is also a consequence of the
failure of national Governments and the international
community - through the United Nations - to deal
promptly and effectively, within the international
legal framework, with these non-State actors and their
backers. In large part, this is because the instruments
available to the Security Council have not been able
to adapt rapidly enough to correspond to the specific
nature of the threat. What good are travel bans or asset
freezes when the culprits evade official documentation
such as passports and bank accounts?

This inability to check the rise of non-State
extremist actors means they now constitute an
existential threat to the entire Middle East as we know
it, and specifically to the United Arab Emirates model
of moderation, tolerance and respect for religious
freedom. Increasingly, they also pose a global threat
in the form of the tragic and violent attacks they have
perpetrated worldwide. These threats will continue to
grow and evolve, and the international community's
response must keep pace or risk becoming ever more
outdated and ineffective.

A further central cause ofinstability in our region is
the rise in the rampant use of force against the territorial
integrity, sovereignty and political independence of
States. To be clear, these detrimental acts are taken
by State actors, and we note the growing cynicism at
play - a divergence between what States claim to be in
the international arena and what they actually do. We
therefore need a more robust response to State drivers

of instability.

In one example, the United Arab Emirates like
others welcomed the nuclear agreement reached with
Iran last year. However, the hope that the nuclear
agreement promised a more constructive role for Iran
in the region failed to materialize, as demonstrated
by the country's actions across the Middle East to
date. Iranian forces continue to occupy three islands
in the Arabian Gulf that are part of the United Arab
Emirates, in contravention of Article 2 of the Charter.
In accordance with its obligation to the peaceful
settlement of disputes, the United Arab Emirates has
been calling on Iran to resume bilateral negotiations,
refer the matter to the International Court of Justice
or submit to international arbitration. These calls have
gone unheeded so far.

States throughout the region remain alarmed by
the Iranian Constitution, which calls for the export
of its revolution to other countries. The principles
of the sovereign equality of Member States and of
non-intervention as outlined in Article 2 of the Charter
are continually violated by Iran's successive attempts at
destabilization across the region. Their proxy militias
are provocative, destabilizing and dangerous - yet
they go unchallenged. We believe that Iran must make
a serious commitment to joining the community of
nations as an accountable member and to stopping its
arming, funding and enabling of radical, violent and
extremist entities. We see no censure of such actors at
the United Nations.

In the United Arab Emirates's view, the legitimacy
and effectiveness ofthe United Nations can be restored.
Some recommendations for doing so include the
following. First, we call for better implementation of,
and greater efforts to hold States accountable for, their
obligations under existing Security Council resolutions.
In our region, examples include the failure to enforce
resolution 2216 (2015) on Yemen or to implement
numerous resolutions on humanitarian access in Syria,
as well as the large number of resolutions calling for
the withdrawal of Israel from the occupied Palestinian
territories. If States fail to uphold these existing
responsibilities, we must question what value further
resolutions might have. The very credibility of the
Security Council is at stake today.

Secondly, we welcome the Secretary-General's
focus on prevention. The United Nations must expend
more and better quality resources on prevention as a
key instrument of peacekeeping, and on mediation,
negotiation, arbitration and judicial settlement, as well
as in support of Chapter VI interventions. Additionally,
greater use by the Secretary-General of the prerogative
under Article 99 of the Charter would be welcomed, not
instead of Council engagement, but alongside it.

Thirdly, the Security Council must coordinate with
regional organizations and affected States earlier and
engage in transparent consultations, especially when
the Council is considering taking action. Not only does
Chapter VIII require the Security Council to encourage
efforts undertaken by regional organizations towards
the peaceful settlement of disputes, it is also in the
strategic interests of the Security Council to do so.
Regional States have the closest history and political
background to the conflicts themselves, as well as
the greatest interest in resolving them. In the face of
intransigence and disunity in the Security Council,
regional actors will be left no choice but to respond
assertively to protect legitimate authority and continue
to guarantee regional stability for their peoples.

Finally, the Security Council must apply a single
standard to all actors, all States and all perpetrators of
occupation, State terrorism and foreign interference.
Efforts must be redoubled to strengthen accountability
by sovereign States, protect those living in conflict and
end injustice.

This is a watershed year for the United Nations.
Nothing will reflect the intention of the Security
Council to reengage with the Middle East more than its
choice of candidate for the next Secretary-General. The
United Arab Emirates, with many other States, hopes
that the Council will take into account the views of the
full membership as it approaches this decision.

I would like to conclude by wishing Venezuela
continued success in its presidency of the Security
Council this month.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.


