Mr. Sithole (Swaziland): I wish at the outset to
join all those who have spoken before me in
congratulating South Africa on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the current
month. I also wish to commend the initiative that your
delegation has taken, Madam President, in convening
this very historic meeting. We fully support you in this
initiative.

The Swaziland delegation welcomes the report of
the Secretary-General on the relationship between the
United Nations and regional organizations, in
particular the African Union, in the maintenance of
international peace and security (S/2008/ 186).

The preparation of the report signifies the
importance of the subject matter. Over the past few
years, experience has shown that regional
organizations play a significant role in the maintenance
of international peace and security. The importance of

that role emanates from the fact that regional
organizations have a comparative advantage over the
Security Council when it comes to understanding the
nature of the conflicts obtaining in a particular region,
by reason of proximity. Even the Charter of the United
Nations recognizes the importance of regional
organizations, in its Chapter VIII.

While it is recognized that it is the primary
responsibility of the Security Council to maintain
international peace and security, the Council cannot
carry out that mandate in isolation. That highlights the
importance of the need to strengthen and deepen the
relations between the United Nations and regional
organizations in order to effectively maintain
international peace and security.

Close collaboration between the United Nations
Security Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council can significantly improve the
handling of the conflict situations in Africa. The
challenges faced by the African Union in its efforts
aimed at conflict prevention, management and
resolution are daunting. All too often, the African
Union has had to initiate its own missions in conflict
areas because the United Nations has not been able to
deploy peacekeeping missions there. Even after
peacekeeping operations have been authorized by the
Security Council, the United Nations has been slow in
operationalizing such missions.

The frustration experienced by the African Union
emanates mainly from a lack of the resources it
requires to operationalize its initiatives. It is therefore
imperative to establish a mechanism that would
provide funding in a predictable, flexible and
sustainable manner for the long-term planning of
peacekeeping missions. In that regard, we welcome the
timely proposal contained in the report of the
Secretary-General that a high-level panel be
established to study the funding situation and to come
up with modalities for how it should be done.

Swaziland wishes to align itself with the
statement of the Chairperson of the Commission of the
African Union, which we fully support. We urge that
the exercise by the high-level panel be conducted
expeditiously. We believe that it would not be an
academic exercise, because we are talking about
human lives here. We also welcome the progress made
in the operationalization of the peace architecture of
08-30700
the African Union. We look forward to the continued
support of the international community in that regard.

The importance of strengthening relations
between the United Nations and the African Union
cannot be overemphasized. Let us look forward to its
success.

Finally, I wish to join colleagues who have
spoken before me in saying the following. Let us keep
our eyes on the problems that we are currently facing.
The food prices that continue to escalate every day
have the potential to cause problems and uprisings in
our countries.

