Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcome the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2363 (2017) today. I thank all members of
the Security Council for their support over the past
week since we began work to update the mandate of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID).

This resolution makes important changes to the
mission. We have done that because the Council has
a responsibility to respond to changes on the ground.
Whether in Darfur or anywhere else, our missions must
be mandated to work in the world as it is today and not
just how it once was, and that is what this resolution
achieves. We recognize that the Council must make
changes sensibly and responsibly. That is why the text
of the resolution ensures that UNAMID will remain
able to deliver the core task of its mandate - protecting
civilians from harm. In the coming days and weeks,
we will be monitoring the impact of those changes
to UNAMID's mandate. The resolution increases the
frequency of reporting from 90 to 60 days and includes
an assessment after six months, which must consider
the impact of the changes on the ground.

This is a joint endeavour. The Government of
the Sudan also bears responsibility in making these
changes work. It is vital that they step up, that they let
the mission operate and that they fill the gaps following
UNAMID's withdrawal. Cooperation between the
Government and the mission has improved. We now
need to see that positive trajectory continue. The
Council will be monitoring that closely as the changes
are implemented.

In conclusion, let me assure those outside this
Chamber that we recognize that the situation in Darfur
remains fragile. Nevertheless, we cannot shy away from
the fact that the situation has evolved and that it is right
that UNAMID be adapted so as to reflect the current
reality. We will not be taking our eyes off Darfur.
The continuation of UNAMID under a new mandate,
with more oversight from the Council, demonstrates
our commitment both to the people of Darfur and to
the region.

