Mr. Mawe (Ireland): I would like to thank you, Sir,
for having organized today's debate on this important
subject. I would also like to align myself with the
statement delivered earlier on behalf of the European
Union and its member States.

In the concept note for this debate (S/2015/87, annex), it is rightly stated that the United Nations is
the result of humankind's long struggle for peace and
development. It goes on to restate one of the primary
objectives of the United Nations - to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war. Over the past 70
years, the United Nations has played its role in ensuring
the avoidance of another global cataclysm on the scale
of the two major wars of the last century. But the past
70 years have not, unfortunately, been marked purely
by peace and development. There have been too many
conflicts that have claimed the lives of millions of
people across the globe, more and more ofthem entirely
innocent civilians.

Mr. Cai Weiming took the Chair.

At the same time, we have witnessed an unprecedented
rise in global development. The global population of
2.5 billion of 1945 has today grown to some 7 billion.
Global life expectancy has increased dramatically,
from an average of 46 years in the post-war period to
nearly 70 today. A larger population, married to new
technology, scientific development and free trade, has
also led to huge economic growth, providing much
higher living standards across the globe.

Overall, as we reflect on the history of the past
70 years, what other lessons can we draw? Much of
the period was overshadowed by the Cold War and
the existential threat of a nuclear conflict, which
would have devastated the world and its inhabitants.
The imminence of that danger may have receded, but
Ireland, along with many fellow Members, continues
to work for a world free of nuclear weapons and the
dangers they pose, along with other disarmament
objectives. The end of the Cold War was not the end
of history, as some had foretold. A complex multipolar
world has emerged. It is one where even the largest and
best-resourced nations struggle to deal with threats
from much smaller and dispersed enemies.

We recognize that in the 70 years of the United
Nations and the 60 years ofour membership, a great deal
has changed. However, for Ireland, our values remain
unaltered. We stand for a fairer world, a just world,
a secure world and a sustainable world. In defending
these values, we are, like you, Sir, firmly committed to
the multilateral framework and the rule of international
law for the conduct of international relations. As such,
we are guided by the following principles: dialogue
and compromise as the solution to conflicts between
peoples; respect for the rule of law and solidarity within
the international community when a democratic State
is threatened; a strong commitment to peacekeeping
while preserving Irish military neutrality; the critical
importance of development; and the promotion of
human rights, in particular the rights of minorities and
of women and girls.

The current threats to international peace and
security, and those which occupy this Council on a
daily basis, are manifold. The principle of dialogue
and compromise as the solution to intractable conflicts
between peoples is one that guided my Government
during the lengthy peace process in Northern Ireland.
The Irish Government, working closely with the British
Government, endeavoured to keep the focus on the
ultimate goal of peace during the many difficulties and
setbacks that threatened to derail the entire process.
I would hope that others engaged in promoting peace
benefit from a similar focus and approach.

If the Security Council is to uphold its responsibilities
for the maintenance of peace and security, it must
be fit for purpose. Along with our colleagues in the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group,
with whose statement we align ourselves, Ireland
continues to press for a Council that is more open, more
transparent and more accountable. We acknowledge the
improvements made in the past year but reiterate that
there is much more that can be done if the will is there
to do so.

Separately, we will participate actively in the
intergovernmental negotiations on reform of the
composition of the Security Council. Bringing the
composition of the Security Council into line with
the realities of today's world is long overdue and it is
our earnest hope that this work, under Ambassador
Rattray's guidance, can be brought to a conclusion this
year as the United Nations celebrates its seventieth
anniversary.

Finally, the United Nations continues to critically
reflect on how it can best serve its Members and meet
its objectives. Ireland, as a significant and longstanding
contributor to peace keeping missions, looks forward
to this year's review of peace operations, led by Jose
Ramos-Horta. We equally look forward to the review of
the peacebuilding architecture and the global study on
the implementation ofresolution 1325 (2000) on women
and peace and security. These three reviews reflect the
reality that maintaining peace and security is complex
and requires longer-term engagement in addition to
responding to immediate crises.

Placed alongside the agreements being pursued
on sustainable development and climate change, we
can make 2015 a landmark year in the United Nations,
which will enhance the global significance and impact
of the Organization and the way in which the goals of
the Charter are fulfilled. Let us have the courage and
the will to see each of these processes to a successful
conclusion.

