Mr. Okio (Congo) (spoke in French): I too would
like to thank Ambassador Holmes, Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordination, for his accurate briefing, which
brings us to the heart of the tragedy that is affecting the
three countries that he visited. The futures of those
countries depends, more than ever before, on the
constructive engagement of the international
community. In that region, as has been stressed so
many times before, the various situations are so closely
interlinked that successes in one country could be
ruined by the failure - or negligence - in another.

My delegation would like to express its full
support to Ambassador Holmes and his team and to
encourage them to maintain useful contacts at the very
highest level with the authorities of the countries
visited. This will help to effectively accomplish the
tasks at hand, including ensuring the protection of
humanitarian workers, the provision of humanitarian
assistance and, of course, the presence of humanitarian
workers on the ground. In the view of my delegation,
humanitarian workers are often the only lifeline for
these desperate people. It is very important that our
actions to help these workers be as robust as possible
and that we ensure that the countries in question
protect them, in line with humanitarian law.

We were very concerned to hear about the
situation in Somalia and in Darfur - to which my
delegation has drawn the Council's attention on several
occasions. With regard to Somalia, more than ever
before, it is important that the efforts of the African
Union (AU), through the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), be supported before it is too late.
The current situation in Somalia poses so many risks
for Somalia itself and for the whole of the subregion
that it obliges the international community and the
Security Council to act. As Ambassador Holmes has
said, there can be no military solution to this conflict.
We must therefore encourage the parties to try to find a
political solution. In this context, there is no doubt that
the first step must be to bring about a cessation of
hostilities.

With regard to the Sudan, we can only reconfirm
our previous position: the Government of the Sudan
must fully cooperate with a View to the deployment of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID); sufficient pressure must be put on
the rebel movements to bring them on board in the
political process; and there must be unanimous and
firm action by the Security Council - but, above all,
balanced action. The humanitarian situation cannot be
improved without the necessary political progress.
Therefore, we need to create favourable conditions for
the deployment of UNAMID without further delay.

We share the concerns expressed by Ambassador
Holmes with regard to the danger of famine in
Ethiopia, in particular in the Ogaden region. The same
is true of the deterioration of the security situation in
eastern Chad, where intense fighting is preventing
humanitarian workers from gaining access to affected
populations.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to
reiterate its call to the international community to
support the efforts of Ambassador Holmes, and, above
all, to support the 2008 workplan to address the
humanitarian needs and the economic development of
the Sudan, and in particular of Darfur.

