Mr. Antonio (African Union): On behalf of the
African Union Commission and myself, I would like
to congratulate you warmly, Mr. President, on your
country's presidency of the Security Council this
month. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
and Ms. Leila Zerrougui, his Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict, the Executive Director
of UNICEF and the representatives of civil society
from Save the Children and Paix pour l'enfance,
the latter represented by my dear brother and cousin
Nzita. I should not pass up this opportunity to express
my appreciation and gratitude for their worthy efforts
and commitment to the comprehensive and lasting
protection for our future nation builders.

The choice of "Child victims of non-State armed
groups" as the theme for our debate today is both timely
and relevant. Coming as it does after the ceremony on
12 February marking the International Day against the
Use of Child Soldiers, today's meeting highlights how
essential it is we give this issue a special place on our
political agenda and study it thoroughly in order to
identify the challenges involved and the responsibilities
that must be met at the international level.

The fact is that this dangerous phenomenon,
which is partly the result of post-Cold War intra-State
conflicts, often brings with it abuses and violations
of human rights, and particularly those of women and
children, the most vulnerable groups. In Africa more
than anywhere else, this conflict dynamic continues
to produce tragic situations, with disastrous effects
on children's development and survival. They have
become a breeding ground providing fighters for the
terrorist groups operating on the continent that are
major exploiters of child soldiers, such as Boko Haram,
Al-Qaida, the Mouvement pour l'unicite et le jihad en
Afrique de l'Ouest and Al-Shabaab, and for malicious
groups in other regions, such as the Lord's Resistance
Army. Forced conscription, abduction, rape and other
forms of sexual violence, killing, maiming and the
creation of refugees are the main direct consequences
of the barbaric acts that such groups commit against our
children. The effects on children's physical and mental
health, education and general welfare are extremely
dangerous.

The African Union (AU), whose diplomatic,
judicial and political commitment to children is
eloquently expressed in its actions, has continued its
efforts to resolve conflicts and ensure the protection
of human rights, particularly of children. The legal
arsenal we have developed for that purpose includes
the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights and
its Protocol on the Rights of Women in Africa, and the
African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child.
Taken together, those instruments add up to a chain of
standards, some of them highly innovative, that exceed
international requirements and place children at the
centre of the challenges and imperatives of peace,
development and progress.

Furthermore, the African Union's critical role
in maintaining peace and security and promoting
transparent governance at every level has made a
significant contribution to the protection of civilians,
including children. The peace operations deployed
by the AU in response to situations of conflict on the
continent, particularly in Burundi, the Darfur region
of the Sudan, Mali, the Central African Republic and
Somalia, have played a key role in that regard. Here, I
cannot fail to stress the importance of the agreement
signed on 17 September 2013 between the Peace and
Security Department of the Commission of the African
Union and the United Nations Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict. The agreement enables us to back
the ongoing efforts designed to put the protection of
children at the centre of every issue related to peace
and security in Africa. We welcome the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union in
this area, including the support from UNICEF.

The concept note that frames today's debate
(S/2015/ 168, annex) makes eloquent mention of the
effect that precarious economic situations have on the
recruitment of children into armed groups. Unaware of
the possible dangers, our children are sometimes forced
to go to enter the ranks of armed groups simply in order
to feed or clothe themselves. That is why it is vital that
we support Africa's efforts to bring about a positive
and inclusive socioeconomic transformation benefiting
every sector of the population, including children.

For their part, Africa's leaders are more determined
than ever to work to build a more just and prosperous
future. The adoption of Agenda 2063 at the twenty-
fourth Summit of the Heads of State and Government of
the African Union in Addis Ababa on 30 and 31 January
is in fact an expression of their willingness to inject
the necessary momentum with the goal of achieving a
strong, united, prosperous and peaceful Africa.

