The Secretary-General: I commend Colombia's
initiative to convene this timely debate, and I thank the
Foreign Minister of Colombia for taking the time to
preside over this meeting.

The international community has long recognized
the challenging and multidimensional character of
the transition from conflict to sustainable peace
and development. Security Council mandates have
grown in scope. Our field missions now perform an
unprecedented variety of tasks. We have increasingly
integrated the various efforts carried out under the
United Nations flag, and we have come to understand
that we can succeed only if we work in close partnership
with other key international actors, in support of
nationally owned priorities.

The Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), the
Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) and the Peacebuilding
Support Office were established in 2005 to reinforce
ongoing efforts on the ground in conflict-affected
countries. Yet questions remain as to the focus and
effectiveness of these bodies. Two years after the
mixed review of the peacebuilding architecture, we
are seeing signs that it has begun to come of age and
is making a difference. This is the case particularly in
those instances when the Peacebuilding Commission,
Fund and Support Office reinforce each other and work
hand in hand with the United Nations presence on the
ground.

In Liberia, for example, the Peacebuilding
Commission and Fund have worked closely with United
Nations actors on the ground to strengthen existing field
efforts in the area of security sector and justice reform.
This collective engagement is helping to establish the
first of five regional justice and security hubs, which
are critical elements of our transition strategy for the
United Nations Mission and Liberia.
In Sierra Leone, the PBC and PBF have been
supporting efforts to deepen democracy. Over the course
of five years, this work has evolved from strengthening
State institutions, through the establishment of
anti-corruption and human rights commissions, to
empowering non-State actors.

In Guinea, after more than 50 years of dominance by
the military, the country has moved towards democratic
rule and we are supporting the crucially important
step of conducting a military census and providing a
retirement programme for 4,000 military personnel.

But of course, much remains to be done. Let me
highlight three areas in which we can enhance the
impact of our peacebuilding tools.

First, the PBC should do more to leverage its unique
membership and collective ability to mobilize resources.
Through distinct messages that complement those of
others, the Commission can reinforce the efforts of
national actors, Member States, and the United Nations
family at Headquarters and on the ground.

Secondly, the PBC should sustain the focus
on longer-term peacebuilding. The Commission's
contribution can be particularly valuable in galvanizing
international commitment beyond the limited lifespans
of United Nations missions on the ground.

Thirdly, the PBC may be able to add significant
value in some non-mission settings, where national
authorities and Resident Coordinators would benefit
from the intergovernmental support that the Commission
can bring to bear. In order for the PBC to fully meet
its potential, the Security Council should offer greater
clarity on what type of advice it would like from the
Commission in its deliberations and in the definition
of mandates. That would help lead United Nations
departments and actors in the field to coordinate with
the Commission, and reduce the risk of duplication.

The United Nations is committed to maximizing
the potential of the Peacebuilding Commission and
the wider peacebuilding architecture. Assisted by the
Support Office and in synergy with operational lead
entities, the Commission's impact in the field can be
further amplified. The United Nations is also working
to enhance our cooperation with the international
financial institutions, including the World Bank and the
African Development Bank. We are also committed to
supporting the new model ofpartnership between fragile
and conflict-affected countries and their development
partners, as envisaged last year by the g71L countries
and their partners in the New Deal on Engagement in
Fragile States.
But we need the support of Member States,
including for the Peacebuilding Fund. The PBF
has proven itself as a timely and flexible financing
instrument when peacebuilding needs are most acute
and when few other resources are available for early
post-conflict interventions.

As I outlined in my action agenda for my second
term, supporting nations in transition is a top priority
and generational opportunity for the United Nations. We
have much work ahead of us. But if the United Nations
family, Member States and the wider multilateral
system work together in support of nationally owned
strategies, we can have an impact far greater than any
single entity could achieve on its own. That is what we
owe the peoples we serve. We look forward to deepening
that work together.

