Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I come before the
Security Council on behalf of the leadership of the
State of Palestine and the Palestinian people - a long-
suffering, yet proud and dignified people who remain
steadfast and fully committed to the achievement of
their inalienable rights, justice and their legitimate
national aspirations, including to self-determination,
freedom and independence, and who remain committed
to the pursuit of political, diplomatic, peaceful and
non-violent means for the achievement of those
objectives, for which there is overwhelming and long-
standing global support.

We have endured the passage of yet another year
that has inflicted on the Palestinian people more
loss and tragedy and seen the deterioration of the
situation on all fronts due to the illegal, destructive and
oppressive actions of Israel, the occupying Power. It
has been a year that has witnessed the breakdown of yet
another political process, despite the genuine efforts of
the United States, with the full support of the League
of Arab States and all other major stakeholders and the
good faith efforts and cooperation of Palestine, and the
deepening of another political impasse due to brazen
Israeli intransigence, creating a totally unsustainable
situation, as roundly acknowledged by all.

Despite all of that, the Security Council has once
again failed to uphold its Charter duties to address
those crises and to meaningfully contribute to a
peaceful and lasting solution in accordance with its
own resolutions. As the Security Council has looked
on this year, our people under Israeli occupation have
endured the further theft and colonization of their land,
the demolition of their homes, daily military raids, the
arrest and detention ofthousands of civilians, including
children, rampant settler terrorism, constant affronts to
their human dignity, repeated incursions at our holiest
sites in occupied East Jerusalem, in particular, and
extreme provocations and incitement, raising tensions
to an all-time high and threatening to ignite a religious
war and completely destabilize the situation on the
ground.

The brutalization of the Palestinian people
reached a new apex of savagery with the Israeli
military aggression waged against the besieged and
blockaded Gaza Strip in July and August. The Israeli
occupying forces launched tens of thousands of
missiles, bombs, artillery shells and live ammunition
against the defenseless Palestinian civilian population
in an inhumane, barbaric and criminal onslaught that
killed more than 2,200 Palestinians, the majority of
whom were civilians, including children and women;
injured and maimed more than 11,000 people; displaced
hundreds of thousands; terrorized the entire population;
and caused the vast destruction of homes, vital civilian
infrastructure and hospitals and schools, including
more than 100 United Nations facilities, the majority of
which were United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East schools, as well
as mosques and churches, agricultural properties and
industries.

All of this was perpetrated wantonly and
willfully by Israel, creating widespread devastation,
human trauma and a massive humanitarian disaster.
Gross human rights violations and grave breaches of
international humanitarian law - war crimes - were
undoubtedly committed by Israel, the occupying Power.
And in the diaspora, the millions of Palestine refugees
who remain exiled from their homeland continue
to endure instability and vulnerability due to crises
and conflicts in the region that have inflicted further
displacement and loss on them, with the tragedy in
Syria, in particular, engulfing the lives and futures of
so many Palestinians.

This was the year that has brought us to this day - a
year that has deepened the decades-long suffering and
injustice borne by the Palestinian people and that has
taken us farther and farther away from the realization
of the just, lasting and comprehensive peace we have
long sought on the basis of international law and the
relevant United Nations resolutions.

It was in that grave context that the Palestinian
Government, under the leadership of President Mahmoud
Abbas, undertook in early September the initiative that
has now been brought before the Council. The initiative
was meant to mobilize the Security Council to act to
defuse the volatile situation and reaffirm the basis for
justly resolving the conflict, redressing that historic
injustice and providing a forward political horizon that
could restore hope to our people that the 47-year Israeli
military occupation of their land and their oppression
would soon be ended by the delineation of a time frame
to that purpose, and that justice, freedom and peace
were within reach.

We sincerely thank all of the countries that took a
principled stand and voted in favour of draft resolution
S/2014/9l6. We thank Argentina, Chad, Chile,
China, France, Jordan, Luxembourg and the Russian
Federation, as well as all of the friendly countries that
supported us throughout the long process. We express
special gratitude to the States members of the Arab
Group for all of their support, and thank Jordan for its
efforts on behalf of the Group, in its capacity as the
Arab representative on the Security Council, including
its submission and sponsorship of the draft resolution
and its call for the vote. We also thank France for its
serious efforts and responsible engagement throughout
the process and for its support. I also wish to thank His
Excellency Mr. Jean Asselborn, Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Luxembourg, for his
presence at today's meeting and his country's support.

We deeply regret, however, that the Council was
unable to adopt the draft resolution, despite four months
of efforts, patience and flexibility and our serious
attempts to engage, and despite the fact that the draft
reflected the long-standing international consensus
on a solution for the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. In
clear terms, firmly rooted in the relevant Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions, this draft
resolution reaffirmed the well-known parameters for a
just and lasting solution and set forth a clear timeline
for negotiating a final peace agreement, with strong
support by major stakeholders, including the concept
of an international conference, as well as a timeline
for bringing the illegitimate Israeli occupation to a
complete end and for achieving the independence of the
State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
on the basis of the pre-1967 borders, living side by side
with Israel in peace and security, and just solutions for
all core issues, including the plight of the Palestine
refugees.
Yet the result of today's voting shows that the
Security Council as a whole is clearly not ready and
willing to shoulder its responsibilities in a way that
would allow for the adoption of a comprehensive
resolution and allow us to open the doors for peace and
for a just and lasting solution based on international
law. It also shows that the Security Council is out of
step with the overwhelming global consensus and the
calls for an end to the Israeli occupation, an end to this
prolonged conflict, and the achievement of the long-
overdue the independence of the Palestinian people in
their own State.

In contrast to the result of today's voting, it is clear
that both inside and outside of the Security Council
there is a global consensus on the two-State solution on
the pre-1967 borders and on the fact that the annexation
of East Jerusalem is illegal and not accepted by any
single country. There is also a global consensus on
the illegality of Israeli settlement activities in all their
manifestations and the illegality of the Israeli blockade
of the Gaza Strip and the need for their immediate
end. And there is clearly a global consensus on the
legitimacy of the national aspirations and rights of
the Palestinian people and the responsibility of the
international community in helping to bring them to
fulfilment.

So we must ask the Council: why is it so difficult
for the Security Council to act on this global consensus
and demand an end to illegal Israeli actions and an end
to the Israeli occupation - which the Council has called
for repeatedly, from resolution 242 (1967) on - and the
implementation of the two-State solution in accordance
with the relevant United Nations resolutions, the
Madrid principles and the Arab Peace Initiative? Why
have the efforts of the Arab Group, with the full support
of the Non-Aligned Movement, the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation and all other friends worldwide, to
legislate this consensus through the Security Council
as a contribution towards putting an end to this conflict
through peaceful, political, diplomatic, civilized and
non-violent means, been repeatedly blocked? Why
are we facing another Security Council failure as the
situation unravels and international peace and security
are further threatened?

Considering the unsustainable and precarious
situation that now prevails and the need to act responsibly
on behalf of our people to address their needs and
national aspirations, the Palestinian leadership must
now consider its next steps. They will meet tomorrow
and decide on those next steps.

We are grateful for the support of all brotherly
and friendly countries in support of the just cause of
Palestine and in support of this continuing journey to
fulfil the inalienable human rights of our people and
make peace a reality, despite the many challenges and
obstacles.

Accordingly, we reiterate in this Council Chamber
the absolute imperative to hold Israel, the occupying
Power, accountable for its violations of international
law, including humanitarian and human rights law,
and its violations of United Nations resolutions. Such
contempt must not continue to be excused or tolerated.
There can be no excuse for denial of the right to self-
determination of another people, as loudly reaffirmed
in the General Assembly this month with the vote on
the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination
receiving the overwhelming support of 181 States
members of the Assembly.

The message is clear worldwide: it is high time to
end this abhorrent Israeli occupation and the impunity
that has brought our people so much suffering and
caused so many crises, sown so much instability and
anger throughout our region, and that continues to
seriously undermine regional and global peace and
security. This message has been strongly conveyed in
the numerous resolutions adopted once again this year
by the General Assembly on all aspects of the question
of Palestine. It has also been strongly reaffirmed at
the recent Conference of High Contracting Parties
to the Fourth Geneva Convention convened by the
depositary, Switzerland. And it has been and continues
to be reaffirmed in the motions by numerous European
parliaments calling for recognition of the State of
Palestine and in the fact that 135 countries already
recognize our State, with the most recent recognition
affirmed by Sweden, which we salute from this
Chamber. This message continues to be conveyed
loudly by civil society the world over, with massive
displays of support for the just cause of Palestine and
the rights of the Palestinian people and the calls for a
just and lasting solution.

It is thus most regrettable that the Security Council
remains paralysed and unable to act to uphold its
own responsibilities in this regard, with all of the
implications this has for peace and security in the
Middle East and beyond. It must be understood that
the repeated requests for us to wait, and wait, and
wait while our people are suffering, while our people
are besieged, while our land is being colonized, and
while the two-State solution is being destroyed and
the prospects for peace are evaporating, are not viable
under these circumstances and unsustainable.

Those eager to save the two-State solution must
act and cannot continue to make excuses for Israel
and to permit, and thus be complicit in, its immoral
and illegal behaviour. The Security Council must act.
We will therefore continue to call on the Council to
uphold its Charter duties and will spare no effort in this
regard in the coming year. The time has come for the
international community to act collectively and firmly
to end the occupation that began in 1967 and to allow
for the independence of the State of Palestine, with
Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, and a just solution
for the plight of the Palestine refugees on the basis of
resolution 194 (III), and for the ultimate realization of
justice, freedom and peace. The Palestinian people and
the world can no longer wait. That message, despite the
regrettable outcome today, is especially clear.

In closing, I wish to thank you personally,
Mr. President, and the friendly delegation of Chad
for your speedy response to the call to convene
this meeting and vote, and to reiterate our deepest
gratitude to all Council members who righteously and
honourably supported the draft resolution. We also
take this opportunity to express our appreciation to the
non-permanent members of the Security Council that
will end their tenure tomorrow - Argentina, Australia,
Luxembourg, the Republic of Korea and Rwanda - and
congratulate them on their efforts and service on the
Council over the past two years.

