Mr. Perera (Sri Lanka): Allow me to congratulate
the Dominican Republic, not only on assuming the
presidency of the Council for this month but also for
convening this open debate on one of the most pressing
issues of our time - climate change. As an island nation
severely impacted upon by natural disasters, Sri Lanka
understands the challenges faced by all nations affected
by climate change. We also thank all of the briefers for
their valuable contributions here this morning.

The World Meteorological Organization has
observed that the past three to four years were the
warmest on record. Carbon dioxide levels in the
atmosphere continue to rise, increasing the risk of
heat waves, floods, droughts and wild fires. Rising sea
levels and coastal degradation threaten the viability of
lives and livelihoods in low-lying areas. More frequent
flooding and the risk of the loss of territory to the sea
increase the prevalence of displacement, migration
and social unrest. Island nations like Sri Lanka
are particularly vulnerable to the impact of ocean
environments and climate change. In the past decade
or so, Sri Lanka has been devastated by nature-driven
tragedies such as floods, landslides, the massive
tsunami of 2004 and other disasters.

For Sri Lanka the ocean and its resources are
inextricably interwoven with the lives of our people.
The Indian Ocean, in which we are located, provides
employment, food and avenues of trade and commerce.
Our large coastal communities survive at the ocean
level. For us the rise of the seas, the pollution of
the oceans, the depletion of fish and good coastal
ecosystems are not abstractions, they are the core of
our existence.

Only a global vision implemented through
commitment and multilateral cooperation, in keeping
with the principles of sovereignty, territorial integrity
and the national unity of States, will halt the degradation
of this planet and the resulting threat to peace and
security. Therefore, solidarity in international relations
is Vital, not only in addressing this issue at all levels
and stages - from prevention to post-disaster
management - but also in providing disaster relief,
both in the long and short term. The United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, the Paris
Agreement on Climate Change and the Sustainable
Development Goals, among other instruments,
constitute the fundamental normative framework for
systematically addressing climate change. Sri Lanka
continues to strongly endorse the Paris Agreement.
Indeed, we stand behind every significant international
environmental agreement. It is our hope that the
collective interests embodied in those instruments will
be the basis for global consensus on climate change and
its global impact.

The nexus between climate change and international
peace and security becomes evident in several areas.
Among them is the multiplication of threats. Climate
change multiplies threats, as it creates a scarcity of some
of the most essential natural resources. If resilience is
low, then communities may be internally displaced,
increasing exploitation by extremist elements. The
added tension of competition over diminishing natural
resources could add fuel to existing conflicts. With
regard to increasing migration, refugee movements
and internal shifts in population. Environmental
degradation, together with political, economic and
social insecurity, is also one of the main drivers of
migration and refugee movements. That phenomenon
has caused panic, leading some States to double down
on anti-immigrant rhetoric and resort to sealing off
borders, exacerbating international tensions. With
regard to local competition over resources, according
to media reports, global warming claims approximately
400,000 lives each year worldwide - many due to
extreme weather events, but most due to climate
change-induced hunger and disease. Natural resource
competition and food shortages can contribute to
regional instability or civil conflicts.

As to the international response to extreme weather
events and disasters, the way in which Governments
and the international community respond to natural
disasters could increase or mitigate the risk of conflict.
The need to respect inherent human dignity and
the principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality
and non-discrimination in providing disaster relief
embodies the underpinning of third-State conduct
regarding a natural disaster that takes place in another
State. A departure from those principles could
lead to international tension and possible threats to
international peace and security. The principle of
impartiality is of particular importance to ensure that
those providing disaster relief carry out their activities
with the sole aim of responding to the disaster in
accordance with humanitarian principles, and not for
the purpose of interfering in the domestic affairs of an
affected State.

Against that background, it is essential to keep
in mind that international cooperation must not
diminish the primary role of the affected State in
the direction, control, coordination and supervision
of relief assistance. International cooperation must
always be complementary to the overriding duty of
the affected State to persons within its jurisdiction. If
those principles are not adhered to, in the worst case it
may create grievances and increase the risk of conflict,
while in the best case Government action can be a
springboard to build peace and increase resilience.

In that context, the recent work accomplished by
the International Law Commission on the topic of the
protection of persons in the event of disasters reflects the
careful balance that must be struck in recognizing the
primary role of the affected State in providing disaster
relief assistance to its people and, at the same time, in
underlining the value of international solidarity and
cooperation in providing disaster relief to an affected
State as a genuine humanitarian measure.

