Mr. Terzic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina) (spoke in Bosnian; English text provided by the delegation): This
is the third and last time that I shall address the
Council in my capacity of the Chairman of the Council
of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina under my
current mandate, which is coming to an end. My
statement will cover not only the reporting period, but
also the past four years of my mandate. I want to share
with the Council all that has been done and all that
took place in my country during that time, as well as
some of the lessons that we have learned.

This is something that I consider to be significant
for the positive development of the situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, as well as for the Security Council's
experience in international intervention. I will not go
over the issues that the High Representative covered in
his report, but I will try to offer a different approach
and different interpretations of the events that have
taken place in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Four years ago, the Office of the High
Representative was the sole body preparing and
controlling laws and political processes in my country.
It had the power to suspend or dismiss any individual
who was found to be obstructing the implementation of
the Dayton Peace Agreement. The electoral victory of
the nationalists, as we were called - or rather
stigmatized - by the international community,
triggered disappointment and a huge disinclination
among international stakeholders. Despite that, and on
the basis of electoral promises of all parties, it proved
possible for us to come together around a single
platform for action. That platform consisted of the
Euro-Atlantic prospects for Bosnia and Herzegovina -
our future membership in the European Union (EU)
and NATO. That is the top priority for the Government.
As the first-ever Chairman of the Council of Ministers
not subject to rotation, I offered that programme to the
Government and to the citizens, as well as to
international stakeholders, represented through the
Office of the High Representative.

One of the greatest obstacles we faced back then
was the overwhelming scepticism regarding our ability
to be a part of such a process. Soon afterwards, our
decisiveness was rewarded at the EU Thessaloniki
Summit. That was a historic event for us, as the EU
confirmed the existence of the European perspective,
both for us and for other countries in the region. That
green light was an enormous incentive for us in all of
our efforts to come.

Any attempt to achieve reform is bound to
encounter resistance as soon as the Government
announces it. Reforming the defence sector, the
intelligence services and the customs and taxation
departments, and corporate restructuring et cetera, are
a true nightmare for any prime minister, the number-
one thing you wish did not have to happen during your
mandate. However, what we in Bosnia and
Herzegovina have done has no precedent anywhere in
the world. We stepped up to the plate without giving it
a second thought, and opened a Pandora's box. The
entity governments joined the State Government in this
"mission impossible", and we started off by adjusting
our laws to international norms and standards,
especially those of the EU and NATO.

Our dedication was recognized. First, an EU
feasibility study at the end of 2003 gave us a positive
evaluation. The feasibility study defined the conditions
that we had to fulfil in order to launch negotiations on
the Stabilization and Association Agreement. After
receiving the study, we first shortened the period
envisaged for securing compliance from 12 months to
six months. During that time, we passed 46 new laws
and established 27 new State-level institutions, so as to
meet EU requirements in 16 designated areas.

I am especially proud of the fact that none of
those laws was either proclaimed or imposed by the
High Representative - which had been the case
before. The number of laws adopted was remarkable.
However, in order to fully comprehend the degree of
success achieved, one should know that the real
success was making the State bodies function so that
the State could exercise its jurisdiction and powers in
key areas.

Just to give Council members a feel for what was
accomplished: we set up a single economic space, and
as of 1 January, we introduced one rate of value added
tax, thereby eliminating much of the "grey economy".
Our budget went through the roof. Over the past two
years, foreign direct investment has continued to
increase and our gross domestic product is a regional
record-setter, with an incredible growth of 6 per cent.
Furthermore, we united the existing intelligence
services so that now, for the first time in history, they

function under strict parliamentary control, in
accordance with European standards. We also fulfilled
all the technical criteria required for joining NATO's
Partnership for Peace. The political condition,
however, was not included.

With regard to defence reform, we managed to
merge the armies and ministries of defence of the two
entities and to introduce a single chain of command
and parliamentary control over them. Furthermore, we
had to reduce the number of troops by one third.

Through a process of judicial reform, we
established the Office of the Prosecutor and the Court
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We formed a body called
the High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council, which is
in charge of securing the rule of law throughout the
entire country. We are the first country in the region to
satisfy international standards for processing war
crimes cases. The War Crimes Chamber operates in
line with the best of international standards and
practices, and has already taken over several cases that
were originally to be tried at The Hague.

To cut a long story short, Bosnia and
Herzegovina managed, in three and a half years, to
transform itself from a country struggling with
conflict- a country with a clouded future that was
occupied with the slow and inadequate implementation
of the Dayton Peace Agreement - to one with credible
capacities that is in the process of defining its
contractual relationship with the EU.

My Council of Ministers has enabled the citizens
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and all of the international
community, to commemorate 2005 not only as the
tenth anniversary of the biggest massacre on European
soil - the genocide in Srebrenica - or as the tenth
anniversary of the end of the war in Bosnia and
Herzegovina through the signing of the Dayton
Agreement, but also as the year when, on
25 November, we closed the door on the
claustrophobic era of Dayton and began a new door,
the Brussels era for Bosnia and Herzegovina, by
officially launching Stability and Association
Agreement negotiations with the EU.

The processes that we undertook over a period of
more than three years had their ups and downs. But the
key leverage, which maintained progress throughout,
was the cooperation between the State Government and
the two entity governments. Now the biggest challenge
is the third government - that of Republika Srpska.

Instead of joining the ongoing momentum in fulfilling
the Stability and Association Agreement criteria, it has
blocked every single reform process. It has unilaterally
decided to withdraw all previously achieved
agreements, and keeps threatening that it will take all
the entity jurisdictions that have been transferred to the
State back into its hands. Their obstructionist
behaviour, their lack of respect for already assumed
and agreed obligations, and their arrogant and
aggressive campaign to get rid of all who do not think
like them, which, by the way, most often takes place in
blatant violation of countless laws, have brought about
a radical change in the political atmosphere in the
country. They challenge and mock the international
community and those who represent it. At the brink of
success, on the verge of the grand finale, after years of
maintaining a proper course, it took them less than a
couple of months to jeopardize everything that had
been done.

The report presented by Mr. Schwarz-Schilling
was a very detailed one, but I must say it has been
shaded in too diplomatic a manner. All the positive
processes in the country have been blocked by the
Government of Republika Srpska. I am very reluctant
to say all of this, as my previous experience tells me
that the Council will not take my words as seriously as
it should, had it not heard the same message from the
High Representative himself. Nevertheless, I feel
obliged to share this frustration with you. It is my duty
as Prime Minister. It seems that the international
community and the Office of the High Representative
have decided to shut their eyes to these threats. They
consider obvious separatist intentions to be merely
"harmless" rhetoric.

It is unconceivable for me that the international
community did not recognize that this "scenario" was
drafted in Belgrade and that it coincided neatly with
Bosnian elections. The Government of Republika
Srpska and its Prime Minister are trying to block the
progress of Bosnia and Herzegovina until Serbia is
again ready to reopen the Stabilization and Association
Agreement negotiations and fulfil its obligations. Even
though I sincerely wish our Eastern neighbours every
success in democratization and European integration,
as that will be good for my country, it is very unclear at
this moment when Serbia will make a crucial step
forward.
The international community is obviously ready
to tolerate this type of rhetoric, since it is just rhetoric,

they say, neglecting the fact that rhetoric creates an
atmosphere, which leads to an environment where it
will be harder and harder to undo the damage it causes.
Every day counts for the future of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and I strongly oppose any further wasting
of time. The Government of Republika Srpska and its
political sponsors are aware of this fact and they are
trying to steal every single day they can. Nowadays,
after the absolute victory of the Alliance of
Independent Social Democrats in the elections in
Republika Srpska, their obstructions continue and their
President Dodik is now introducing the vocabulary of
threat and blackmail - something I had hoped was left
behind for good in the 1990s.

At the risk of losing the Council's attention here,
I must add one final note. The policy of silent
sympathy for Serbia, which has allegedly "lost"
Montenegro and is about to "lose" Kosovo, directly
enables the destruction of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
This situation is soon to be further complicated by the
Peace Implementation Council decision to close the
Office of the High Representative. The processes of
reform described previously and the real possibility of
signing the Stabilization and Association Agreement
with the European Union had in fact caused us to start
thinking about the transformation of the mandate of the
Office of the High Representative into the mandate of
the Special Representative of the European Union,
which will not be based on the flawed and
claustrophobic Dayton framework, but on the platform
of the Agreement and eventual European Union
accession.

The Council knows that I was one of the loudest
voices demanding that domestic officials assume
responsibility. I also called for adjustments to
international mandates in my country so that they
would not exceed the actual need for foreign
intervention. Therefore, please take my words as
unbiased and unprejudiced. This is a serious matter and
the future of my country is at stake. The developments
over the past few months have proven, and they
continue to prove, that the timing for the abolition of
the Office of the High Representative was a fatal
misstep.

The transformation of the Office of the High
Representative into the Office of the Special
Representative of the European Union must not start
until we are certain that Bosnia and Herzegovina and
its new Government are completely ready to sign the

Agreement, namely that we are ready to fulfil the
expected conditions.

This phase will be the final test of political
maturity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and her actual
readiness to run important processes on her own. If we
are unable at this time to comply with those criteria, is
it not clear that the political situation in the country is
so precarious that the presence of the High
Representative is still necessary? We must not allow
mistakes like this to happen. If we do, the mistake will
blow up in our faces, and we risk jeopardizing the
entire mission and previous achievements of the Office
of the High Representative.

I would also ask the Council to consider the fact
that signing the Agreement will provide the legal
background and framework for the presence of the
Special Representative of the European Union and for
the execution of his mandate on our soil. Without it, we
will put the Special Representative in a situation where
he has to operate from within a legal vacuum, just as
we did back in 1990s with the European Commission
Monitoring Mission. This situation is not one we would
like to see happen again.

Elections are always a challenge for a democracy.
They are a test of political maturity and of a society as
a whole. For the first time, this October, the State of
Bosnia and Herzegovina single-handedly financed and
organized general elections. We derive great
satisfaction from that fact.

Keeping in mind some of the challenges I
mentioned previously, it is crucial that a new
Government be formed as soon as possible with a view
to moving speedily along the path of Euro-Atlantic
integration. That is the wish of all citizens of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and all countries in the region. I think
the messages sent by our international allies should
also reflect this fact.

I cannot finish my statement without returning to
the issue we have already discussed many times before,
namely, the mistake and injustice that was done to
Bosnian police officers by the United Nations
International Police Task Force (IPTF) mission. These
officers were deprived of an elementary human right
when they were not allowed to appeal the IPTF
decision against them before a court or other relevant
body. Based on the activities undertaken so far and
supported by the High Representative, I believe we all
agree that depriving people of their human rights is a

dangerous precedent that compromises the
international community in its overall commitment to
ensure the rule of law and its principles in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, particularly in the light of principles
promoted by the United Nations for more than
60 years. I believe, however, that we are now close to
finding a solution. All I can do is ask the Council to
facilitate the quick resolution of this matter.

I hope that the Security Council will take my
address today into consideration, and that you will
allow me, Mr. President, to express my appreciation for
the energy Mr. Christian Schwarz-Schilling is investing
in the implementation of priorities, and to thank you
for the cooperation we have seen during the last four
years of my mandate.

