Mr. McCully (New Zealand): I would like to start by
thanking the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
and realistic briefing.

Next Saturday, it will be two years since negotiations
between Israel and the Palestinians were suspended. In
the meantime, violence has escalated, the settlements
have continued and trust between the two parties has
been further eroded. And the Council has been largely
a spectator.

It has been accepted wisdom in the Council, and
in the eyes of the international community, that a two-
State solution is the only path forward for resolving
this matter. Yet today it is becoming increasingly
apparent that such a solution may be moving beyond
reach and that, if matters continue as they have for the
past two years without action from the Council and
others, the two-State solution will be dead. Against
that background it is difficult to understand why the
Security Council has not adopted a single resolution
on this question in more than seven years, and that
it could be a silent witness to the demise of the two-
State solution.

What does the international community therefore
expect of the Security Council in the difficult
circumstances of today? First, it expects the Council to
reassert a two-State solution as the only pathway to a
secure and lasting peace. And it undoubtedly expects it
to condemn the violence on both sides and the ongoing
settlements programme as unacceptable obstacles to
such a solution. Secondly, they expect the Council to
support and give momentum to the work taking place
outside the Council in the Quartet, among the members
of the Arab League, and through the proposed French
international conference. That work is necessary
to rebuild confidence and trust and to prepare the
parties for negotiations. And, thirdly, at the right
time, they expect the Council to endorse a pathway
back to negotiations, potentially through a resolution
on parameters.

Opinions differ as to how some of those elements
should be sequenced. In particular, there is debate as
to whether a Council resolution focused on preserving
a two-State solution, ending the violence and rhetoric
and halting the settlements might best precede the
proposed French conference or whether it might follow
it. But I believe there is broad agreement on the content
of those three phases.

When New Zealand proposed a draft text last year,
in the absence of any alternatives, we were persuaded
through the process of consultation that there was
not enough support for it to succeed and that other
processes in play might have been affected if the
Council had acted at that time. However, the situation
has deteriorated further and the threat to a two-State
solution has become greater. Over the coming weeks,
therefore, New Zealand will resume the conversation
about the sequencing and content of a focused draft
resolution as the views of the French representatives
and the Quartet take greater shape. The efforts of
those parties are vital, but they are not sufficient, and
they cannot absolve the Council of its responsibility
to lead. It is our absolute conviction that a Council
resolution is an essential ingredient in the steps that lie
ahead. The only issue is its timing and relationship to
external processes. New Zealand would find it hard to
understand how a draft text with the limited purpose
and focus 1 have outlined could be too strong to be
acceptable to other Council members.

Conversely, some others may be underwhelmed and
want a more wide-ranging resolution. However, based
on the careful soundings we have taken, our conclusion
is that, in the current dire circumstances, maximalist
positions would almost certainly fail and would serve
only to consign the Council to continuing to preside in
silence over the demise of the two-State solution. Our
immediate task must be to preserve that ultimate goal
and put the Council's weight behind the first steps on
the path. I know that there are those who would rather
the Council played no role and others who will assert
that there are risks around a resolution at this time.
But the greater risk by far is that the Council might
do nothing at all as a two-State solution is pronounced
dead and buried. New Zealand is therefore committed
to seeing the Council decide on a clear plan over the
coming weeks.

Between the work of the Quartet, the Arab League,
the French initiative and others, there is a vitally
important role for the Security Council. We will work
with others to determine whether a draft resolution can
best support the work of the Quartet, the French and the
Arab ministers by being finalized before or after the
other initiatives that are under way. However, whether
a Council initiative is concluded imminently or a little
later in the year, we believe it will be useful to start
discussions as soon as possible on a draft text and on
synchronizing the Council's consideration with other
parties and external initiatives.

We hope that by the time of the next Middle East
debate in the Council, there will be greater clarity and
unity about a way forward.

