Mr. Aden Moussa (Djibouti): At the outset,
Djibouti aligns itselfwith the statement made on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

Djibouti wishes to extend a warm welcome to
Ms. Margot Wallstrom, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Sweden, and to express its gratitude to the Head
of Delegation for taking the lead in organizing this
important debate of the Security Council on the theme
"Conflict prevention and sustaining peace" under
the agenda item "Maintenance of international peace
and security".

We have keenly followed the preparatory process
for today's important open debate through the Swedish-
style digital diplomacy, which the delegation has used
as a tool for creating a conducive environment for what
we hope will be a focused, rich and action-oriented
discussion. We are also grateful for the quality of the
insights provided by previous speakers.

(spoke in French)

Albert Camus, the French thinker, described the
twentieth century as the century of fear, referring to
the terrible wars of the previous century, which led
to the birth of the United Nations. In Camus, there
was also the hope that the next century would be a
century of peace and harmony among peoples and of
development. Although much has been done to silence
the weapons, we have continued to experience a great
number of conflicts and the emergence of new threats
in the current century. The African continent in
particular continues to face complex challenges, which
are manifold. Among the most worrying are the threats
of terrorism, intra-State conflicts, unconstitutional
changes of Government, transnational organized crime
and maritime piracy. While we can easily diagnose the
problems, can we say that the solutions adopted have
been clearly identified and have produced the expected
results? The answer must be qualified.

We welcome the African Union's efforts aimed
at developing promising instruments in partnership
with the United Nations. We particularly welcome
the effort to develop a continental framework for the
structural prevention of conflicts as a tool to facilitate
a coordinated approach to structural prevention at
the level of the African Union Commission. We also
welcome the instruments on the structural assessment
of countries, whose objective is to facilitate the early
identification of a country's structural vulnerability to
conflict and the formulation of strategies for reducing
structural vulnerability. Thanks to those instruments,
we are confident ofthe continent's ability, in partnership
with the United Nations, to significantly improve its
security situation.

While the devastating impact of conflicts on human
lives and the untold suffering that they engender is well
known, the long-term cost to regional infrastructure and
the economy is much less well known, as shown in the
recent report of the Institute for Economics and Peace.
That report, which is entirely devoted to the economic
impact of violence and conflict on the global economy,
provides an astounding estimate of the cost of conflict
and violence. For 2015 alone, the figure is $13.6 trillion,
or 13.3 per cent of the global gross domestic product. In
order to put that in perspective, one can compare that
figure with the 0.7 per cent commitment of funds for
development assistance, which is one twentieth of that
amount. That observation alone dictates the need for
us to mobilize our efforts so as to better use the tools
of preventive diplomacy at our disposal and set out in
Articles 33, 34, 35 and 99 of the Charter of the United
Nations, as well as the recommendations of the 2015
report of the High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations (see S/2015/446). The message of the new
Secretary-General, Mr. Antonio Guterres, echoes those
recommendations and should give a decisive impetus to
our collective action.

Djibouti is convinced that we must invest in peace.
That is why wejoined the Group ofFriends of Sustaining
Peace. The policies implemented by His Excellency
Mr. Ismael Omar Guelleh, President of the Republic of
Djibouti and Head of Government, are entirely guided
by the need to promote peace. Prevention is an ongoing
undertaking that requires constant vigilance. We
understand in Djibouti the importance of prevention
and of an appropriate response in the face of the violent
extremism, which threatens to undermine our societies.
That is the goal ofthe Horn and Eastern African Counter
Violent Extremism Centre of Excellence and Counter-
Messaging Hub, which has its headquarters in Djibouti.
In conclusion, if the past century was one of fear,
we must do all we can to ensure that this century does
not lead to the proliferation of a civilization of fear and
terror, which is the goal of terrorists. In the absence
of continued peace, we should mobilize our efforts and
invest in lasting peace throughout the world.

