Mr. Escovar-Salom (Venezuela) (interpretation from Spanish): Allow me first to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of December.

It is a pleasure for my country to be a sponsor of the
draft resolution now before the Security Council for
adoption.

We are linked to Haiti by history and by geography,
which has led us to play an active role in its process of
stabilization and democratic consolidation.

Venezuela commends and praises the United Nations
Support Mission in Haiti for the considerable progress it
has made in fulfilling its mandate to lend assistance to the
Government of Haiti in maintaining a secure and stable
environment. The Mission faced its most difficult test
earlier this year, on 7 February, with the peaceful transfer
of power from one democratically elected President to
another President who had also been democratically elected.
Ten months have passed since that event, and we have
noted that the process of democratization has not been
halted. We have continued to see progress, and successful
steps continue to be taken.

The reduction in numbers of the military component
has demonstrated that the Mission has borne tangible and
concrete fruit, and we expect that, gradually but firmly,
Haiti will advance towards the reconstruction of the country
and the creation and stabilization of free and permanent
institutions.

In this connection, I must take this opportunity to give
well-deserved credit to the work of the International
Civilian Mission to Haiti and to point out that its
consolidation will make possible the long-term success of
the educational and institutional process in Haiti. We have
confidence in the work being carried out jointly by the
United Nations and the Organization of American States in
this sphere.

We all know that the Government and the people of
Haiti bear ultimate responsibility for the political, economic
and social reconstruction of their country, for the Haitian
people are the fundamental actors and interlocutors in the
country's democratization process. However, we also know
that in order to achieve lasting peace and stability we need

 

the sustained commitment of the international community.
Without the support and solidarity of the international
community, it is impossible to achieve effective progress
in the world, whether in the democratization process or in
the protection of human rights and the environment.
In this regard, we welcome the new extension of the
mandate of the Support Mission, for the sudden
withdrawal of forces would be ill advised, and we must
make provisions to end the operation in a satisfactory
manner.

In conclusion, and in keeping with paragraph 7 of
the draft resolution before the Council, I wish to express
Venezuela's political determination to continue to lend its
support to this cause. As Ambassador and Permanent
Representative of Venezuela to the United Nations, I am
especially pleased to support and endorse this draft
resolution.

