Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I thank Under-
Secretary-General Izumi Nakamitsu and the Head of
the United Nations-Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism (JIM), Mr. Edmond Mulet, for their
briefings on the issue of Syrian chemical weapons. We
particularly welcome the submission of the seventh
report of the JIM. (S/2017/904, annex), which contains
crystal clear conclusions regarding the perpetrators of
two chemical weapons attacks in Syria, namely, those
in Umm Hawsh and Khan Shaykhun.

Ukraine commends the J IM's efforts in conducting
impartial, objective and independent investigations.
We are acutely conscious of the great difficulties
encountered by the Mechanism in its work, given
the abundant political sensitivities and concerted
efforts by some to defend those responsible for having
organized and committed horrible crimes with the use
of chemical weapons.

We also take note of the forty-ninth monthly report
(S/2017/9l6, annex) of the Director General of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) regarding the status of the implementation of
resolution 2118 (2013). Ukraine endorses continuous
constructive interaction between the OPCW missions
and the JIM, and has full confidence in their expertise
and professionalism.

After 20 years since its entry into force, the
Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) is widely
recognized as the first multilateral instrument that
bans an entire class of weapons of mass destruction
and subjects them to strict international control and
compliance mechanisms. The Convention has made
a major contribution to strengthening international
peace and security by setting new standards for global
disarmament and non-proliferation and providing
assistance and protection against chemical weapons.
There used to be a broad international consensus that
the use of chemical weapons could not be tolerated,
whatever the circumstances might be. That seems not
to be the case anymore. We continue to see efforts to
undermine the role and status of the CWC, which is
a unique example of synergy between political will
and common sense. Justice for the victims of chemical
attacks in Syria has been denied so far.

I wish to recall that impunity for breaching the
Chemical Weapons Convention undermines the
credibility of the Security Council, which has at its
disposal all the necessary tools to respond decisively
to such crimes. The potential risks and threats that
may arise from the Council's inaction on the issue are
very high and may trigger very serious consequences
beyond Syria. We must remain vigilant against those
who do not hesitate to use weapons ofmass destruction.

Those who defend the perpetrators of the use of
chemical weapons through the manipulation of clear
facts attempt to discredit independent international
entities and create purely artificial obstacles that
obstruct the continuation of the work of those entities.
All of that has become a hallmark of the Russian
Federation's position on this issue. Indeed, the Council's
continuous inability to respond to the use of chemical
weapons inadvertently aggravates the situation on the
ground, which remains deeply worrying.

First, it has been confirmed that the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant already possesses and has used
chemical weapons on several occasions. Secondly, the
Syrian Government has so far failed to provide full
and credible information on its chemical-weapons
programme, which is a clear violation of both the CWC
and resolutions 2118 (2013) and 2235 (2015). Thirdly,
there are numerous allegations of the possible illegal
possession, movement and use of toxic substances as
weapons in Syria.

That is why the continued threat of the use of
chemical weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic has to be
dealt with decisively and in the shortest time possible.
Against a backdrop of such dangerous developments,
it is extremely reckless and utterly irresponsible to
undermine the reliability and veracity of both the Fact-
finding Mission and the JIM's reports. The priority
issue today relates to the confirmed blatant violations
of the Chemical Weapons Convention and several of the
Council's resolutions. The question ofthe responsibility
of those who are proven to be responsible for the use of
chemical weapons is of vital importance for the whole
international community.

Given the Security Council's strong position that
the use of chemical weapons is a flagrant violation of
international law, we are of the view that the Council
should be similarly united in ensuring accountability,
thereby preventing more such crimes and eradicating
the chemical threat in the region. We are convinced that
in order to achieve that goal we have to allow the Joint
Investigative Mechanism to continue its important job.
We must therefore extend the Mechanism's mandate
without any further delay. In that regard we fully
support the relevant draft resolution submitted by the
United States as a balanced compromise document.

