Mr. Timmermans (Netherlands): Today, the
subject of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) is brought before the Council once again. I want
to thank the United States for taking this timely and
important initiative.

It is a hopeful sight to see this many nations
represented in this Chamber. Today, we gather with a
rare unity of purpose. The brutality of ISIL shocks and
disturbs us all. The violence it inflicts on the people
of Iraq and Syria and the wider region deeply offends
our shared values and our common humanity. Acts
too gruesome to fathom, with no place in any religion,
continue to profoundly vex us. Minorities are executed
for the crime of being different. Women and children
are raped and enslaved and remain the most vulnerable
victims in this conflict. Those agents of death and
destruction thrive on local fear, national sectarianism
and international apathy.

Too long have we stood on the sidelines of
unacceptable violence in the region. We witnessed
inaction in the Security Council that made us bystanders
to the horrors committed in Syria over the past three
and a half years, a fact the most recent report by the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry on
Syria reminds us of once more. We should not ignore
the killing of over 190,000 people in Syria; inaction
leads parties to operate with impunity and nourishes
the violence that has consumed both Syria and Iraq.
Now, when we are faced by a global enemy, which is
active across borders, a great responsibility lies upon
this global Organization, the United Nations.

Too long, moreover, has Iraq been devoid of unity.
Herein lies a pivotal role for the new Iraqi Government.
The first steps we have seen are in the right direction,
and I thank the Iraqi Government for that. I strongly
encourage them to maintain a credible, inclusive course
all the way. The justified grievances of Sunni Arab
populations should be addressed if we want to achieve
a durable solution. Too long have people in Iraq and
Syria lived in fear, while only the absence of such fear
can bring them the peace they so deserve.

If we want to defeat the obscurantist, nihilistic
ideology embodied by ISIL, a holistic approach will
be necessary. Military steps are necessary, but not
sufficient. We will need to invest in security, justice and
long-term political stability, with a key role for women,
and in accountability for those who have committed
their heinous crimes. They need to be brought to
justice, preferably in Iraq or, if not, in the International
Criminal Court. We have to go beyond the borders that
ISIL has rendered futile. ISIL cannot be defeated in
Iraq alone and should be confronted in Syria as well.

ISIL constitutes a direct and imminent threat to the
region and countries around the globe, including mine.
ISIL is an insult to humanity, and it is mind-boggling
to see young people in my country, young men and
women, being attracted to that nihilistic ideology. It
is mind-boggling to see, this summer in the streets of
The Hague, a young boy of 10 years old wearing the
national soccer jersey of the Netherlands and waving
the black ISIL flag. How is that possible? How did that
happen in our societies? What went wrong? So what we
confront is not just the terrorists in Iraq and Syria. We
also confront an ideology that is destroying part of the
best people we have - our youth. So much is at stake.

Earlier today, Turkey opened up its border to
refugees from Kobani, Iraq. I really want to praise
Turkey for its display of humanity and underline the
importance of regional cooperation and more efforts.
We will contribute to looking after the refugees in that
region as well.

Today, the Netherlands renews its support for
the international fight against ISIL. We welcome the
participation of our regional partners in that effort, as
well as the recent outcomes of Jeddah, Saudi Arabia,
and Paris. The Netherlands supports the Iraqi and
Syrian people with humanitarian, political and security
aid and is actively considering a military contribution
as well.

