Mr. Kamau (Kenya): I would like to thank the
delegation of China for convening this very important
debate on Somalia. I also recognize the presence here
of the Prime Minister of Somalia. Kenya also wishes to
thank the Secretary-General and the African Union
(AU) representative for Somalia for their briefings.

At the outset, my delegation wishes to extend its
condolences to the families of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) peacekeepers who lost
their lives while defending the lives of ordinary
Somalis. We also wish to pay tribute to the
Governments of Burundi and Uganda for their valuable
contributions to peacekeeping efforts in Somalia.

Somalia is a perplexing conflict ~ on the one
hand so dangerous and devastating in its implications
and, on the other, seemingly neglected and undeserving
of a concerted international response commensurate
with the magnitude of the problem. Many in the region,
however, and especially Kenya, simply cannot afford
this level of ambiguity. Somalia is Kenya's neighbour.
We share a long and porous border, and over 1 million
Somalis live in Kenya, half of whom are in refugee
camps. We have no other option but to continuously
strive for solutions to the conflict, which has for so
long ravaged our neighbour and placed a very heavy
burden on our society and our social and economic
development.
Continued fighting in Somalia and the lack of an
effective central Government has resulted in rapid
growth in the number and size of Somalia's diaspora,
from which Al-Shabaab - among others, I am sure -
is determined to recruit for extremist activities
overseas. In addition, thousands of refugees have fled
from Somalia to neighbouring countries, thereby
worsening the humanitarian situation in those countries
and consuming scarce resources meant for other
sectors of the economy.

The Daadab refugee camp in Kenya, now
notoriously the largest in the world, was built to
accommodate only 90,000 refugees. It now hosts
almost 600,000. The refugee influx has caused
enormous challenges, including competition among
refugees and local communities for scarce resources,
and has resulted in environmental degradation.
Regrettably, some of those entering our countries under
the guise of refugees are also hardcore criminals and
extremists who are ready to cause trouble in the entire
region, and even further afield. Their presence in the
Horn of Africa is a major cause of worry. No efforts
should be spared in dealing with those terrorists.

International partnerships should include
agreements on the need to change AMISOM's mandate
from peacekeeping to peace enforcement, to ensure
that AMISOM. not only secures Mogadishu but also
reclaims areas under the control of Al-Shabaab. In
addition, United Nations peacekeeping troops should
be deployed in the rest of Somalia in order to secure it.

The issue of funding in support of AU
peacekeeping operations has been a concern of the
Council for a long time. In the specific case of the AU
Mission in Somalia, Kenya supports the call made by
the AU summit to the Council to provide greater
support to AMISOM. and to fully assume its
responsibilities towards Somalia, including through
increased funding from United Nations assessed
contributions.

Furthermore, we should support the
implementation of the Djibouti Peace Agreement,
which remains the basis through which reconciliatory
efforts should be undertaken in Somalia. It is important
to note that the Agreement envisages progress in three
key areas, namely, security, political cooperation and
reconstruction and development. We must support all
of these areas, as they are mutually reinforcing.
11-25878

The issue of piracy has also been discussed here
and, as has been rightly pointed out by many, it has
real linkages with the ineffectual governance in
Somalia. The quicker that we provide effective
governance in Somalia, the quicker we will eliminate
the piracy menace. I believe that point was made this
morning by the Prime Minister. The Secretary-
General's Special Adviser, Mr. Jack Lang, also made a
passionate plea to the Council barely two months ago
(see S/PV.6473) to act urgently and decisively on the
question of piracy. We in Kenya consider the issue of
piracy incredibly complex. In many ways, it has put in
place a quasi-blockade on our eastern coast.

In conclusion, let me say that the situation in
Somalia will continue to fester until the Council, which
is charged with the mandate of ensuring the
maintenance of international peace and security,
decides to act decisively in favour of adopting a
comprehensive strategy to establish a functioning State
in Somalia. That strategy should include first,
enhanced support to AMISOM. as we have described;
second, support to Somali security institutions and
other institutions of governance; third, assistance in
economic and social development; fourth, securing
peace through the creation of job opportunities,
especially among the Somali youth; fifth, investment in
the reconstruction of infrastructure; sixth, increased
access to basic services for all people, including
education and health; and seventh, but not the least, the
possibility of encouraging Somalia's further integration
into the East African Community. Anything short of
that will not secure sustainable security and
development for Somalia and will not eliminate the
threat to the region and countries further afield.

