Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): I wish
first to say that Bulgaria fully endorses the statement to
be made by the representative of Spain on behalf of the
European Union. I have a few brief comments to make
in my national capacity.

Bulgaria joins in expressing profound concern at
the escalation of violence in the Middle East. The
recent attacks clearly demonstrate that we are
witnessing an unprecedented deterioration of the
situation on the ground. The spiral of violence has
resulted in the loss of human life, which we deplore
most deeply. The urgent necessity of stopping this
spiral of death is evident.

As we have already had the occasion to say
before the Council, Bulgaria believes that the conflict
between Israel and the Palestinians should be resolved
through direct negotiations between the parties
concerned on the basis of resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973) and on the basis of the principle of land for
peace.

My country calls for the immediate cessation of
any further acts of terrorism. We also call for the
cessation of the often disproportionate and useless
reprisals. We fully support the Secretary-General's
appeal to the parties to the conflict to put an end to
confrontation and mutual accusations and to return to
the negotiating table. It is absolutely crucial that the
parties begin to implement without delay the
recommendations of the Mitchell Committee and the
Tenet plan in order to arrive at a lasting ceasefire. This
would help to reduce violence and restore the
conditions for reviving the peace process - conditions
which have substantially deteriorated. The greatest
priority among these conditions is undoubtedly that of
security. Even a minimum of security will allow the
political process to succeed. It is unnecessary to point
out the importance of economic conditions in the
occupied territories, which are currently deplorable and
must be markedly improved.

Bulgaria fully supports the efforts of the
"quartet", and we call upon the parties to make an
effort to follow the recommendations of the
representatives of those countries and organizations
that are working tirelessly for a solution to the Middle
East problem. My country attaches special importance
to the efforts of the European Union aimed at finding a
solution to this complex and dangerous situation. In
this respect, we fully support the European
Presidency's statement on the Middle East issued on 20
February 2002.

Bulgaria welcomes the willingness of the Israeli
Government to discuss with Saudi Arabia its ideas for a
peaceful settlement of the Middle East conflict. In this
respect, the information just given to us by
Ambassador Negroponte on the contacts with President
Bush seems to us of particular interest.

Bulgaria is prepared to work within the Council
so that all members of the Council can find a common
ground of understanding on the question of the Middle
East. As Ambassador Greenstock has just said,
Secretary-General Kofi Annan's statement to the
Council as well as the statements of all the delegations
thus far allow us to hope that a common ground of
understanding can be found within the Council.

