Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): The
Jordanian delegation welcomes the initiative of the
United Kingdom that has led to the Council's adoption
of resolution 2170 (2014) today. It aims to counter the
terrorist threats represented by the Islamic State in Iraq
and Syria (ISIS) and the Nusra Front in Syria and Iraq.
It also condemns the recruitment and financing ofthose
terrorist groups. Through it we are sending a significant
political message from the Security Council to the
effect that the international community is determined
to confront the terrorist activities of those and every
other terrorist group. We are also resolved to counter
those groups' military threat and their crimes in Iraq
and Syria. The resolution also enables us to add several
individuals and entities in ISIS and Jabhat Al-Nusra
to the sanctions list. The crimes against humanity
committed recently by ISIS against innocent civilians
underscore the importance of showing determination in
confronting their barbarous acts, which go against every
standard of acceptable human behaviour. Such crimes
against humanity are an outrage to our consciences and
our cultures.

We cannot overemphasize the importance of
ensuring that the political process in Iraq includes
every group of Iraqi society and excludes none. It is also
vital that the Government adopt policies that respect
human rights and put Iraqi national interests first. That
will benefit Iraq, its people and the region. It is also
the best possible way to combat terrorists, including
those of ISIS. In that context, we stress that ISIS and
other extremist groups do not represent Sunnis in Iraq.
We reaffirm that the Sunni community in Iraq must
be an essential part of any inclusive political process,
which should include all sectors of Iraqi society. Jordan
welcomes the latest positive political events in Iraq,
that is, the announcement of a new President, Prime
Minister and Speaker of Parliament.

We reiterate that terrorism in Syria is one factor in
this crisis and not its cause, because it is the policies of
the Syrian regime and the security methods it uses to
respond to the legitimate aspirations of its people - not
to mention its marginalization and suppression of the
moderate opposition - that are the main causes of the
crisis in Syria. We therefore reaffirm how important
it is that the efforts to combat terrorism in Syria be
accompanied by efforts to put an interim Government
in place.

Jordan is well aware of the regional and international
threat posed by terrorist and extremist groups in Syria
and Iraq. Like the rest of the international community,
we are also very worried about the geographic expansion
of such groups. That demands that we work together
and pool our efforts at the regional and international
levels in order to confront this scourge. Jordan will
also continue to make every possible effort to promote
cooperation with all the parties concerned at the
regional and international levels to combat terrorism.

