Ms. Moglia (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): We
should like to join other delegations in thanking
Mr. Petritsch for his detailed written report, as well as for
the very important information that he has just presented to
us in this Chamber.

While there can be no doubt that, since the signature
of the Dayton Agreement, progress has been made in a
number of areas, it is also undeniable that such progress has
largely been due to the constant pressure exerted by the
international community to overcome obstructionist
activities and the lack of political will on the part of those
who, for ethnic reasons, continue to oppose the existence of
a single, multi-ethnic State, thereby sacrificing the efficient
functioning of the institutions. In this context, we, like other
delegations, believe that it is disappointing that the New
York Declaration has not yet been fully implemented, as
can be seen, for example, with regard to the question of the
single passport, and that in other cases, such as that of the
law on the State Border Service, it has been necessary to
resort to strong measures in order to ensure implementation.

Among the events to which Mr. Petritsch referred in
his report, we cannot fail to mention the 8 April municipal
elections. The participation of 66 per cent of the electorate
was an important phenomenon, as was the even higher
participation in the Republika Srpska in spite of the call by
radical Serbs for an election boycott. In our View, whatever
the actual results of the elections, the election of municipal
officials is a valuable way to familiarize the population with
the functioning of democratic institutions.

With respect to the rule of law and judicial reform,
matters to which Argentina attaches high priority, we were
encouraged to see in Mr. Petritsch's report that there has
been considerable progress in the establishment of an
independent and impartial judiciary. We must also stress
the great effort being made in the war on corruption.

We note that a considerable part of the report is
devoted to economic matters. To be sure, economic
reforms of various kinds are crucial to ensure that Bosnia
and Herzegovina can be a State that is self-sustaining and
hence less dependent on outside assistance.

We are pleased that throughout Bosnia and
Herzegovina a greater number of members of minorities
returned in 1999 than in 1998. But the conduct of some
officials - who for ethnic reasons or to further their own
interests thwarted the right of refugees and internally
displaced persons to return to their homes - was
unacceptable. Here, we would be interested to know
whether, despite the difficulties that persist for those who
wish to return to Croatia, there has been progress in
relations between the two countries since the new
Government took power in Croatia.

