Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I want
to especially thank Mr. Darusman, Chairperson of
the independent international fact-finding mission on
myanmar established by the Human Rights Council. It
is critically important that he be with us in the Security
Council today for this briefing. One question that I
would like to ask him at some point - or when we can
get an answer - is: What is the status of the quality of
life for the Rohingya who remain in Burma? What is
the Government doing to protect them to make sure that
this does not happen to them, as well?

United States President John Adams famously said
that facts are stubborn things. Nowhere is this more
true than the facts of the atrocities committed by the
Burmese security forces against Rohingya children,
women and men. The last time that the Security Council
met to consider the situation in Burma (see S/PV.8333),
I discussed the United States State Department's report
on the ethnic cleansing of the Rohingya at the hands of
these security forces. The accounts were first-hand and
the details were stomach-turning, including women and
girls raped, villages razed and babies tossed into fires.

Today, the source of the information is the United
Nations fact-finding mission. The Government of Burma
unfortunately refused to cooperate with the mission.
The events reported by the fact-finding mission parallel
those of the United States State Department report.
Once again, we are hearing about torture, mutilation,
repeated massacres, gang rapes and the obliteration of
entire villages - all perpetrated against the Rohingya
minority by the Burmese security forces. And once
again, there are those in this Chamber who have
repeatedly attempted to block the Security Council and

the world from hearing about what is happening to the
Rohingya in Burma. But facts are stubborn things, and,
despite the best efforts of the Burmese Government and
its allies, the awful facts of the atrocities against the
Rohingya cannot be avoided by those who deny them.

I want to thank the members of the Security
Council that voted for this briefing and this meeting
to be transparent. I also want to address the concerns
of some members of the Security Council that feel that
transparency about the crimes detailed in the report
(A/HRC/39/64) will somehow set back the cause of
peace in Burma. They argue that being open and
honest about the vicious treatment of the Rohingya
will increase the Burmese people's resentment of them.
They argue that what is needed in Burma is time and
space. We do not accept this logic. In fact, not only is
it wrong, but its backward. Time and space alone will
not heal the wounds that have been opened in Burma,
and covering up the crimes of the Burmese military
and security forces will not allow that country to move
forward. Only accountability for the crimes against the
Rohingya will serve the cause of peace and Burma.

This is not about finger-pointing. It is about
accepting the realities of what happened so that healing
and accountability can occur. We have all heard the
excuses offered by those who have fought this briefing.
They argued that the Security Council is not the
appropriate place to discuss those atrocities. Our work,
they say, is peace and security, not human rights, but the
forcible movement of more than 700,000 people across
borders is undeniably a matter of international peace
and security. - just ask the Bangladeshi Government
or the Rohingya themselves.

We are grateful to the Government of Bangladesh
for its generosity hosting a total of more than 1 million
Rohingya refugees, but this is not just Bangladesh's
problem. This is the region's problem. This is our
problem. All of us - the United States, the United
Kingdom, France, Cote d'Ivoire, Kuwait, the
Netherlands, Peru, Poland and Sweden - have worked
closely to keep the Security Council's continued
spotlight on the horrible atrocities in Burma. We will
work to hold the Burmese security forces accountable.
Now is the time to move on from focusing on the abuses
to focusing on the abused.

Despite the security forces' claims to be acting
against "terrorists", the root cause of the crisis is
the second-class status of the Rohingya in Burma.
In addition to the atrocities they have suffered, the
fact-finding mission's report details the systematic
repression of the Rohingya by the Government of
Burma. As noted during the briefing, security forces
have detained Rohingya men and abducted Rohingya
women. The Rohingya were subject to especially
tight restrictions on freedom of movement, as well as
freedom of religion. Some refugees have reported that
the military threatened those who prayed - even at
home - with beatings, arrests and death. They also
detailed cases of the military's desecration of sacred
texts, and some saw soldiers burning and urinating on
copies ofthe Qur'an. It is the Burmese Government that
has both the power and the moral obligation to end that.

The burden falls on it. Restrictions imposed upon
the Rohingya, including on freedom of movement and
religion, must end. The Burmese Government must
create a direct and credible path to obtaining citizenship
for ethnic Rohingya. The Burmese military must accept
civilian rule. Its refusal to do so puts Burma at further
risk of conflict and stunts its growth as a modern
nation. As the world rightly condemns the murder of a
journalist in Turkey, we must not forget the outrageous
imprisonment of the Reuters journalists in Burma. The
United States continues to call for their immediate
release. There must be accountability for the crimes
of the Burmese military and security forces - crimes
that have been thoroughly and credibly documented.
And the same energy that has been put into fearing and
isolating the Rohingya should be put towards educating
and training them so that they can lead productive lives,
for their families and for the future of Burma.

Thanks to the work of the fact-finding mission, we
all know what was done to the Rohingya and we know
who is responsible. We must now take the next steps
to ensure that this never happens again. Justice is due
for the people who fled Burma in fear. Justice is due
for those whose lives have been forever transformed by
violence. Justice - not vengeance, not payback - is
necessary for Burma to heal. The United States will
continue to issue the call forjustice, here and elsewhere,
until all of the people of Burma are able to live in safety
and dignity in their own country. That is the case for
justice in Burma.

Before I end my remarks, I would like to say a final
thing about how we do our jobs here at United Nations.
There are many ways we can choose to make our
arguments to each other and the world. We can be civil
or we can be uncivil. We can choose to make a scene
or we can choose to treat the issues we care about with
dignity and respect. We are all aware - and none more
so than you, Mr. President - of the way discussions
of justice and human rights have been conducted in
recent days, and especially your behaviour, that of your
mission and of the Cuban mission. It was a very poor
reflection on the President of the Security Council.
We are grateful that this afternoon, at least, you have
chosen the path of civility and respect.

