Mr. Yel'chenko (Ukraine): At the outset, we feel it
is absolutely fair and necessary to commend the United
States delegation for the great efforts they have made in
coordinating the draft resolution before us.

Exactly one month ago my delegation expressed its
optimism that the "week of the Democratic Republic of
Congo" within the "month of Africa" in the Security
Council would produce very concrete results contributing
to the restoration of peace and security in the Central
African region. Shortly, the Security Council will make a
bold step toward meeting the long-held expectations of
African countries and of the whole international
community. There is every reason to consider the
resolution of the Security Council to initiate the second
phase of the United Nations presence in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo as the first momentous decision of
this organ in the new century.

In this connection, it is essential to recognize that
our decision will confer a heavy responsibility on all
those concerned. Both the restoration of peace in the
region and the credibility of the United Nations in conflict
resolution in the years to come will be at stake after the
deployment of the expanded United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC). Yesterday at their summit in Lusaka the
parties reaffirmed their strong commitment to the
Ceasefire Agreement and reiterated their determination for
its full and expeditious implementation. We expect strict
adherence to that commitment, which is the most
fundamental prerequisite for ensuring the success of the
collective endeavor to bring peace and stability to the
Great Lakes region.

Clearly, the MONUC expansion represents the core
of the draft resolution before the Council. At the same
time, Ukraine attaches particular significance to the fact
that this decision is accompanied by the explicit
reaffirmation of the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations. The emphasis on the obligation of
all States to refrain from the threat or use of force against
the territorial integrity or political independence of any
State, or in any other manner inconsistent with the
purposes of the United Nations, is more than relevant in
respect to the situation which on 24 January 2000 was

 

described by the President of the Security Council as
Africa's first world war.
Ukraine supports the current draft resolution and will
consider making a substantive contribution to assist in its
implementation.

