Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): We convey our
appreciation to the Chinese presidency for convening
today's open debate.

Bangladesh aligns itself with the statements to
be made by the representatives of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries, and of Uzbekistan on behalf of
the Organization of the Islamic Conference.

We thank the Secretary-General's Special
Representative for his comprehensive oral report,
pursuant to resolution 2234 (2016), and would like to
join other delegations in underlining the need for a
written report.

We express our deep concern about the escalation
of tension surrounding the illegal closing of the
Al-Aqsa Mosque in East Jerusalem and impeded access
to the mosque by Muslim worshippers. We share the
views of the Special Representative that the situation
surrounding the mosque can have potential catastrophic
costs well beyond the walls of the old city, and stress
the need for respecting and maintaining the historic
status quo at the holy sites, with the freedom to worship
guaranteed for all concerned.

In this fiftieth year of the Israeli occupation of the
Palestinian and Arab territories, the Security Council
must demonstrate its resolve to address the Palestinian
question as a matter of urgency. The continued breaches
of international humanitarian law and systematic
human rights violations in the occupied Palestinian
territories have given rise to an egregious culture of
impunity. In the absence of any effective international
accountability, the occupying Power continues killing
Palestinian citizens, including youth and children,
imprisoning and abusing scores of Palestinians in its
detention centres and dispossessing and displacing
thousands of Palestinian families through its
construction and expansion of illegal settlements.

We share concerns about the recent Israeli
decision to construct 1,800 illegal settlement units
in occupied East Jerusalem, which would lead to the
further eviction of Palestinian civilians, in flagrant
violation ofresolution 2234 (2016). It is obvious that the
settlements, as well as the wall in and around occupied
East Jerusalem, are being deliberately pursued in order
to fundamentally change the character, status and
demography of the occupied Palestinian territories.

The Council has a moral obligation to prevail
upon Israel to immediately halt its illegal settlement
regime in the occupied Palestinian territories, lift the
blockade in the Gaza Strip and put an end to all forms
of occupation. Immediate priority must be given to
ensuring international protection for the Palestinian
people suffering for decades from Israel's policy of
collective punishment. The hunger strike recently
observed by thousands of prisoners in Israeli detention
centres underscores the need for the international
community's sustained efforts to address their
grievances and plight.

Under the guidance of our honourable Prime
Minister, Sheikh Hasina, the Government and people
of Bangladesh remain steadfast in our support for the
just and legitimate struggle of the Palestinian people
for their inalienable rights, including their right to self-
determination and the establishment of an independent,
viable, contiguous and sovereign Palestinian State,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, in the framework of
a two-State solution.

We continue to urge all key actors to remain seized
of their efforts to pursue a comprehensive solution to
the Palestinian question, consistent with the relevant
Security Council resolutions, and in accordance with
the Arab Peace Initiative, the Quartet road map and the
principle of land for peace. We also add our voice to the
need to ensure enhanced, predictable and sustainable
funding for the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East in order
for it to effectively carry out its humanitarian mandate
in support of the Palestinian refugees.

