The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
that most helpful briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Secretary of State of the United States.

I am grateful for this opportunity to address the
Security Council
According to resolution 2321 (2016), the stated
objective of the Council is North Korea's abandonment
ofits nuclear weapons and ballistic-missile programmes.
For the past 20 years, well-intentioned diplomatic efforts
to halt those programmes have failed. It is only by first
dismantling them that there can be peace, stability and
economic prosperity for all of North-East Asia.

With each successive detonation and missile test,
North Korea pushes North-East Asia and the world
closer to instability and broader conflict. The threat
of a North Korean nuclear attack on Seoul or Tokyo
is real. It is likely only a matter of time before North
Korea develops the capability to strike the United
States mainland. Indeed, the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea has repeatedly claimed that it plans
to conduct such a strike. Given that rhetoric, the United
States cannot idly stand by, nor can other members of
the Council that are within striking distance of North
Korean missiles.

Having for years displayed a pattern of behaviour
that defies multiple Security Council resolutions,
including resolutions 2321 (2016) and 2270 (2016), and
erodes global progress on nuclear non-proliferation,
there is no reason to think that North Korea will change
its behaviour under the current multilateral sanctions
framework. For too long, the international community
has been reactive in addressing North Korea. Those
days must come to an end. Failing to act now on the
most pressing security issue in the world may bring
catastrophic consequences. We have said this before,
and it bears repeating: the policy of strategic patience
is over. Additional patience will mean only acceptance
of a nuclear North Korea. The longer we bide our time,
the sooner we will run out of it.

In the light of this growing threat, the time has
come for all of us to put new pressure on North Korea
to abandon its dangerous path. I urge the Council to
act before North Korea does. We must work together to
adopt a new approach and impose increased diplomatic
and economic pressure on the North Korean regime. The
new campaign that the United States is embarking upon
is driven by our own national security considerations
and is welcomed by many nations that are concerned for
their own security and that question why North Korea
claims nuclear capabilities for which it has no need.

Our goal is not regime change, nor do we desire
to threaten the North Korean people or destabilize the
Asia-Pacific region. Over the years, we have withdrawn
our own nuclear weapons from South Korea and offered
aid in North Korea as proof of our intent to de-escalate
the situation and normalize relations. Since 1995, the
United States has provided more than $1.3 billion in
aid to North Korea. We look forward to resuming our
contributions once the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea begins to dismantle its nuclear weapons and
missile-technology programmes.

For its own sake, the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea must dismantle its nuclear-missile programmes
if it wants to achieve the security, economic development
and international recognition that it seeks. North
Korea must understand that respect will never follow
recklessness. North Korea must take concrete steps to
reduce the threat that its illegal weapons programmes
pose to the United States and our allies before we can
even consider talks.

I propose that all nations take the following three
actions beginning today.

First, we call on States Members of the United
Nations fully to implement the commitments that they
have made regarding North Korea. This includes all
measures required and resolutions 2321 (2016) and
2270 (2016). Those nations that have not fully enforced
those resolutions discredit this body.

Secondly, we call on countries to suspend or
downgrade diplomatic relations with North Korea.
North Korea exploits its diplomatic privileges to fund
its illicit nuclear-missile technology programmes, and
constraining its diplomatic activity will cut off a flow
of needed resources. In the light ofNorth Korea's recent
actions, normal relations with the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea are simply not acceptable.

Thirdly, we must increase North Korea's financial
isolation. We must levy new sanctions on Democratic
People's Republic of Korea entities and individuals
supporting its weapons and missile programmes and
tighten those that are already in place. The United
States also would much prefer the countries and
peoples in question to own up to their lapses and correct
their behaviour themselves, but we will not hesitate
to sanction third-country entities and individuals
supporting the Democratic People's Republic of Korea's
illegal activities.

We must bring maximum economic pressure to
bear on the Democratic People's Republic of Korea by
severing the trade relationships that directly fund its
nuclear-missile programme. I call on the international
community to suspend the flow of North Korean guest
workers and to impose bans on North Korean imports,
especially coal.

We must all do our share, but China alone, which
accounts for 90 per cent of North Korean trade, has
economic leverage over Pyongyang Yang that is
unique, and its role is therefore particularly important.
The United States and China have held very productive
exchanges on this issue, and we look forward to further
actions that build on what China has already done.

Lastly, as we have said before, all options for
responding to future provocation must remain on the
table. Diplomatic and financial levers of power will be
backed up by willingness to counteract North Korean
aggression with military action, if necessary. We would
much prefer a negotiated solution to this problem, but
we are committed to defending ourselves and our allies
against North Korean aggression.

This new pressure campaign will be swiftly
implemented and painful to North Korean interests. I
realize that some nations for which a relationship with
North Korea has been in some ways a net-positive may
be disinclined to implement the measures of pressure
on North Korea. But the catastrophic effects of a North
Korean nuclear strike outweigh any economic benefits.
We must be willing to face the hard truths and make
hard choices right now so as to prevent disastrous
outcomes in future. Business as usual is not an option.

There is also a moral dimension to this problem.
Countries must know by now that helping the North
Korean regime means enabling cruelty and suffering.
North Korea feeds billions of dollars into a nuclear
programme it does not need while its own people starve.
The regime's pursuit of nuclear weapons does not serve
its own national security or the well-being of a people
trapped in tyranny. I ask the community of nations to
help us preserve security and protect human dignity.

In one of my first trips as America's Secretary
of State, I looked across the demilitarized zone at the
haunted land of North Korea. Beyond the border is a
nation of sorrow, frozen in time. While the world sees
the gleaming buildings of Pyongyang, the blight of
oppression and starvation has swept this land for more
than 60 years.

But even though the present condition of that country

is bleak, the United States believes in a future for North
Korea. These first steps towards a more hopeful future
will happen most quickly if other stakeholders in the
region and the global community join us.

For years, North Korea has been dictating the terms
of its dangerous course of action. It is time for us to
retake control of the situation. We ask the members of
the Council and all other partners to implement a new
strategy to denuclearize North Korea.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

