The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Bangladesh,
Brazil, Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt, Indonesia, Iraq, the
Islamic Republic ofIran, Israel, Japan, Jordan, Lebanon,
Malaysia, Maldives, Morocco, Namibia, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, South Africa,
Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey, Uruguay, Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela and Viet Nam to participate in
this meeting.

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in this meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and previous
practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process and Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General, and Mr. Hagai El-Ad, Executive
Director of B'Tselem.

Mr. Mladenov isjoining us via video-teleconference
from Jerusalem.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the
following individuals to participate in this meeting:
His Excellency Ms. Joanne Adamson, Charge d'Affairs
a. i. of the European Union to the United Nations; His
Excellency Mr. Cheikh Niang, Chair of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People; and His Excellency Mr. Maged
Abdelfattah Abdelaziz, Permanent Observer, League
of Arab States to the United Nations.

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

I give the floor to Mr. Mladenov.

