Mr. Djedje (Cete d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation would like to thank the Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, for her biannual briefing on the Court's
activity on cases relating to the situation in Libya.

The difficulties encountered by the Prosecutor in
executing various arrest warrants show the complexity
of the situation in Libya, as well as the need for
continued support from the international community
for the ICC's efforts to combat impunity following the
events in 2011, the negative effects ofwhich continue to
destabilize the entire region. For its part, Cote d'Ivoire,
as a State party to the Rome Statute, reaffirms its full
support for the efforts of the International Criminal
Court to promote international justice and combat
impunity both in Libya and throughout the world.

Seven years after the official end of the Libyan
conflict, the proliferation of armed groups throughout
the country has led to a situation in which abuses and
other serious human rights Violations have become
recurrent. These armed groups, which continue to be
the main perpetrators of the violations, act with total
impunity, including for the most serious crimes, such
as abductions, torture, extrajudicial executions and the
sale of slaves in Libyan markets, which constitutes a
crime against humanity. In that regard, my delegation
welcomes the Prosecutor's decision to consider the
possibility of extending the ICC's jurisdiction to
crimes committed against migrants, and we continue
to support the inclusion of persons or entities engaged
in such trade on the sanctions list of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) on Libya.

In View of the alarming situation, the international
community should support the efforts of the Libyan
Government to disarm armed groups and re-establish
State authority throughout the country in order to
restore peace and stability to Libya. Strengthening
Libyan institutions' capacities should be a major
priority so that they can honour their commitments
in terms of promoting and protecting human rights
and, ultimately, as part of the fight against impunity,
establish a system of accountability for perpetrators
of serious violations of those rights. In that regard,
Cote d'Ivoire reiterates its full support for Special
Representative Ghassan Salame's action plan for Libya,
with the aim of advancing the national reconciliation
process and laying the foundations for lasting stability
and peace through an inclusive democratic process. We
also welcome the broad public consultations conducted
by the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
throughout the Libyan territory to enable the people to
become involved in the peace and reconciliation process.

My delegation urges all actors in Libya to overcome
their differences and to commit resolutely to a credible
political process that will lead the country to free,
transparent and democratic elections, which are a
prerequisite for the establishment of the rule of law in
the country.

Despite the extremely precarious security situation,
as demonstrated by the most recent suicide attack
on the headquarters of the High National Elections
Commission on 2 May, which killed approximately
10 people and injured several others, my country
encourages the Prosecutor to continue her efforts to
successfully complete the various investigations under
way in Libya. In that respect, my country welcomes the
cooperation of the Libyan authorities, which facilitated
the Prosecutor's Office first mission to Libyan territory.
This cooperation is important in order to follow through
on the various arrest warrants issued by the Court and
thereby put an end to the long period of impunity in
Libya by enabling the Court to fulfil the mandate
conferred on it by the Security Council.

In conclusion, my country wishes to reiterate its
encouragement to the Office of the Prosecutor with
respect to the work that it is carrying out despite the
many difficulties that the Prosecutor has just described
to us. We urge the international community to provide
the Prosecutor all the support necessary to the success
of her mission.

