I too thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Haiti, Ms. Helen La Lime, for her briefing, as well as Mr. Jacques Letang, who has drawn up a clear assessment of the challenges facing Haiti. First, I wish to express France's support for, and solidarity with, the Haitian people and Government in their efforts to fight the coronavirus disease pandemic and mitigate its socioeconomic and humanitarian consequences. The health crisis in Haiti, more than anywhere else, is compounding existing vulnerabilities, specifically the humanitarian crisis already affecting millions of Haitians. The international community has shown that it is ready to lend its support. In 2020, France will contribute to the work of the United Nations Humanitarian Air Service in Haiti so as to facilitate humanitarian access. The European Union has announced the redirection of €165 million in aid. In return, the Haitian authorities must provide guarantees as to the proper use of those funds. Unfortunately, this pandemic has not brought an end to the violence or human rights violations, on the contrary. The increase in insecurity and violence due to gang- related activity since the beginning of 2020 is a source of deep concern. The Haitian National Police is committed to tackling this issue, and it must do so responsibly. No human rights violations can be tolerated. If they are to rebuild confidence, the Haitian authorities must tackle impunity, first and foremost in symbolic cases such as the La Saline and Bel Air massacres, which have given rise to damning United Nations reports. Finally, we call on the Haitian authorities to protect human rights defenders, who play a crucial role in that context. Faced with the multidimensional crisis in which Haiti finds itself, we all know that the only solution lies in ensuring political dialogue among all Haitians. We regret that efforts towards such a dialogue in February, with the support of the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH), did not lead to the formation of an inclusive Government. France calls on President Jovenel Moise and all political forces in the country, in particular the opposition, as well as on civil society and the private sector, to resume an inclusive national dialogue in preparation for the elections and the revision of the Constitution, if that is indeed the path that the Haitian people choose. Eight months after its establishment, BINUH has been working tirelessly with the United Nations country team to support Haiti in its response to the pandemic. The Council must remain fully vigilant and take appropriate measures, particularly if the situation in Haiti continues to deteriorate.
