Mr. Derbez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Mexico
recognizes the valuable initiative by the presidency of
the Security Council to discuss and analyse the role of
the concepts of justice and the rule of law in the work
of the United Nations, in particular the work of the
Security Council.

In its work in the United Nations, in particular in
the Security Council, Mexico has always favoured the
strengthening of the rule of law. In addition, when, as a
result of the events of recent years, the Council has
debated the scope of the use of force, there has been
increased reflection on reform of the Organization as
one of the principal items on the agenda. We therefore
feel that the present initiative could not have been more
timely.

This meeting provides an opportunity for more
thorough reflection on what is particularly implicit in
the work and decisions of the Security Council
throughout the last decade. This has to do with the way
the provisions of the Charter have been interpreted and
applied.

My Government will take as its base the ideas
that you, Sir, suggested for this meeting: the role that
justice and the rule of law play in the mandate of the
Security Council and their promotion in conflict
prevention and post-conflict situations.

That first function necessarily leads to an analysis
of the influence those ideas have on the actions taken
by the Council. Indeed, we can observe a tendency
over the last 14 years in which the focus of the
Council's action has shifted from maintaining
international peace and security to combating impunity.

While that flexibility may be positive, we must
not lose sight of the fact that, in carrying out this
process, the Security Council interpreted the Charter's
provisions in order to be able to deal with what it, at
the time, considered to be threats to international peace
and security. Should that tendency continue, we should
have clearer rules in keeping with the purposes and
principles of the Charter. Under what modalities and
what circumstances should the Council act? What
degree of proportionality should be observed in its
actions with respect to what may be considered a threat
to international peace and security? In any case, for the
sake of justice and the rule of law, the Security Council
must continue to act on the bases of legality that
provide support for its mandate.

Mexico believes that we should also highlight the
need to make more intensive use of measures for the
peaceful settlement of disputes, contemplated in
Article 33 of the Charter of the United Nations. They
could be used within the framework of a preventive
focus by the Security Council in order to peacefully
resolve disputes conducive to international friction that
might endanger international peace and security.

No provisions exist in the Charter that authorize
delegating the powers conferred on the Security
Council under Chapter VII to a State or to a group of
States. Nevertheless, the Council has delegated those
powers through the establishment of multinational
forces and has relied on the support of competent
regional bodies in carrying out its mandates.

If justice and the rule of law are to play an
important role in the Security Council, we should begin
by promoting greater clarification of the framework
within which it acts. In that connection, the work of
codifying the Council's practice and its analysis by the
General Assembly could prove to be very useful tools.
Similarly, as a complementary part of that aspect, we
should highlight the need to achieve greater
compliance with the Council's resolutions themselves.

The work of the Security Council in promoting
justice and the rule of law in conflict prevention and
post-conflict initiatives should be oriented towards two
objectives: the reconstruction, the re-establishment of
institutions and the national reconciliation of States
emerging from conflict; and the strengthening of
coordination between the Council and other organs of
the United Nations system.

In that connection, it is important to work
towards the establishment of institutions that work on
judicial responsibility and reparation to victims,
incorporating the political and institutional dimensions
of the theme of justice and the rule of law. Likewise,
we need to build institutions that will contribute to
obtaining reliable information with regard to the facts
and whose work will focus on securing the necessary
evidence to prosecute those responsible for crimes
against humanity. In parallel, we must highlight the
need to facilitate States' access to international justice
mechanisms.

The establishment of international institutions,
such as the International Criminal Court, guarantees
objectivity and impartiality in trials conducted against
criminal defendants. Its Statute incorporates general
principles of law. In addition, it reflects the obligation
of any State to bring to justice individuals accused of
committing crimes against humanity.

In a stage of transition towards independent
national judicial bodies, the Security Council should
promote and facilitate the resort to international legal
bodies of a permanent nature, avoiding the
establishment of ad hoc tribunals every time a situation
or conflict arises that threatens international peace and
security. That would provide both the international
community and post-conflict societies a greater degree
of certainty in the quest for justice.

The International Criminal Court is emerging as
an affirmation of the common conviction that justice
and peace are indispensable for human development.
The establishment of a Court of this nature is a lasting
contribution to the principal mandate of the United
Nations and of the Security Council: the maintenance
of international peace and security and the promotion
of the rule of law and respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms throughout the world.

Mexico believes that, in the framework of the
work carried out by the Security Council -
particularly in post-conflict situations - justice and
the rule of law, in addition to being a security issue, are
a development issue. That fact highlights the need for
greater coordination with other organs of the United
Nations system, including the General Assembly, to
make consolidating the rule of law a genuine strategy
of conflict prevention through a framework of access to
opportunities, social development and economic
growth.

Finally, in the context of this debate, and in the
light of the discussions that will take place on 30
September in an open meeting of the Security Council,
we believe that it would be advisable to request the
Secretary-General to identify proposals made during
the discussions and to link the Council's experiences
with those of other organs of the United Nations
system with regard to action proposals formulated by
States. Those would be elements of great value in
promoting a coordinated strategy for promoting justice
and the rule of law that responds to the ideals of
universality and transparency, which are the basis for
the very idea of a more just international community.

