Mr. Liden (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). Croatia, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Albania,
Montenegro, Armenia, Iceland, the Republic of
Moldova and Ukraine align themselves with this
statement.

This is a critical time for Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Political divisions are blocking necessary
reforms. The economic challenges are significant, and
ordinary people are struggling to make ends meet.
While the rest of the region is moving forward towards
European integration, Bosnia and Herzegovina is at
risk of falling behind. The European Union shares the
High Representative's concern about the nationalist
agendas that continue to dominate Bosnia and
Herzegovina's politics and hamper efforts of progress
and reconciliation. The immediate challenge is not the
security situation, although that continues to require
international engagement, but changing the negative
political dynamic.

The European Union supports the continued
efforts of the High Representative to ensure
compliance with the Dayton-Paris accords and
encourages Bosnia and Herzegovina to move ahead
with crucial reforms in a difficult political climate. The
European Union-led peacekeeping force (EUFOR ALTHEA) remains an important part of the EU's
efforts to support a political process aimed at enabling
Bosnia and Herzegovina to make progress in the EU
integration process. We welcome the Security
Council's adoption of resolution 1895 (2009),
extending the Chapter VII mandate of EUFOR for
another 12 months.

EUFOR ALTHEA continues to provide
reassurance and remains ready to respond to possible
security challenges throughout the country. A decision
on the possible evolution of Operation ALTHEA will
need to take political developments into account. The
European Union also remains engaged through the
European Union Police Mission, which is helping
Bosnia and Herzegovina to focus on the fight against
organized crime and corruption.

The European Union is deeply concerned about
the ongoing challenges to the stability and
constitutional order of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Other
parts of Europe are taking steps to enhance cooperation
and integration. The Lisbon Treaty, which enters into
force on 1 December, will bring the European Union
and its members even closer. The path chosen by
Bosnia and Herzegovina's leaders in the coming period
will be of great importance for the European future of
their country and its people.

In October, the European Union, together with
the United States, proposed a way forward. The
proposal includes two main elements needed in order
to advance Bosnia and Herzegovina's prospects for

European integration. First, the proposal seeks to
achieve progress to meet the five objectives and two
conditions set by the Peace Implementation Council for
the closure of the Office of the High Representative. It
sets out a model for the local political leadership to
reach a necessary compromise on the issues of State
and defence property, which is necessary for achieving
a transition from the Office of the High Representative
to the reinforced presence of the European Union. The
EU would not be able to consider an application for
membership by Bosnia and Herzegovina as long as the
Office of the High Representative is in place.

Secondly, the proposal indicates a necessary set
of modest constitutional changes to allow Bosnia and
Herzegovina to meet the obligations of the European
Union integration process. It focuses on efforts to
increase the functionality of the State, without
changing its basic features. It also seeks to ensure
compatibility with the European Convention on Human
Rights. This proposal represents our best advice, but
the responsibility for reaching the necessary
compromises and taking them forward rests with the
local political leaders.

The Peace Implementation Council's meeting in
Sarajevo on 18 and 19 November was an important
occasion to take stock of developments. The European
Union shares the Peace Implementation Council's
concern over the insufficient progress that Bosnia and
Herzegovina's authorities have made in preparing the
ground for the closure of the Office of the High
Representative. The Peace Implementation Council
communique also welcomed the current engagement of
Bosnia and Herzegovina's leaders in discussions on
constitutional change and encouraged them to remain
seriously engaged and to reach lasting agreements. We
echo those sentiments.

The political process is in a decisive phase. We
urge the parties to reach the necessary compromises in
the coming period. Momentum needs to be built before
the spring, when Bosnia and Herzegovina will enter a
period dominated by the election campaign, which may
be less conducive to reform and compromise.
The recent progress made by Bosnia and
Herzegovina in meeting the benchmarks of the
European visa liberalization road map is a source of
optimism and an example that Bosnia and Herzegovina
can implement difficult and demanding reforms once
there is sufficient political will. This is encouraging.

The European Union has provided Bosnia and
Herzegovina with significant development and
humanitarian assistance over the years. We hope that
our future assistance will focus exclusively on
facilitating EU integration, not least through the
reinforced EU delegation tasked to advise Bosnia and
Herzegovina's authorities on all aspects of the
European Union accession process. To be in a position
to accede to the EU, Bosnia and Herzegovina has to
take all necessary measures to reach full sovereignty. It
is for the leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina - and
ultimately for its people - to decide what kind of
future they want.

