Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation fully aligns itself with the
statement to be made by Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed
on behalf of the African Union.

First of all, our delegation congratulates the
People's Republic of China on having included this
very important topical issue for an open debate in its
programme of work.

We followed with great interest the important
statement made by Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres, as well as those made by Ambassador Alya
Ahmed Saif Al-Thani, Ms. Inga Rhonda King and
Judge Abdulqawi Ahmed Yusuf.

I would like to begin this statement on behalf of the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea by stressing that modern
international relations must make the effort to track the
transformations of the contemporary world, adopting
strategies that allow us to assimilate the daily changes
in the international community that are occurring. The
bilateral system that previously dominated the world,
although it has not entirely vanished, feels irremediably
incapable of addressing today's global problems.
Therefore, coming to its aid and as a new edifice in
the global architecture, multilateralism has appeared
as an international political system that, in addition
to showing its capacity to coordinate national policies
among more than two countries, is required to preserve
dialogue, non-interference in the internal affairs of
others, international equality of States, mutual respect,
fair distribution of the benefits brought by joint tasks
and respect for biodiversity, inter alia.

The goal of multilateral organizations should
therefore be the achievement of global agreements in
relation to issues of interest that affect the majority
in different aspects of international affairs, such as
climate change, trade, peace and security, biodiversity,
the Sustainable Development Goals and so on.
Accordingly, we must strive to allow the entire United
Nations system, the International Monetary Fund,
the World Bank, the World Trade Organization and
regional and subregional governmental organizations,
inter alia, to function in a democratic and transparent
manner, each within its sphere of competence.

With this reform and shift in outlook with
respect to multilateral institutions, many of the
challenges posed in today's international system,
which itself is facing significant changes that in turn
have structural consequences, will be responded to
and made effective. Some of the changes include the
reconfiguration of military forces and their Vital
missions, the rearrangement of the world economy, and
the respective weights that the different nations have
in various institutions, including the United Nations,
where the power of the veto continues to have an impact
on all the important decisions that are necessarily
taken within the Organization, which, among other
things, allows for a growing body of evidence that the
United Nations and its agencies and programmes have
a limited role, with the decisions taken being relegated
to a status subordinate to the underlying interests of
some countries that have special privileges within the
Organization.
Accordingly, reform is urgently needed if the United
Nations is truly going to fulfil objectively and effectively
its role as the core of the system of international relations
based on a principle of multipolarity. A similar exercise
should be carried out in all the other international
organizations I mentioned, in order to adapt them and
make them more transparent, thereby guaranteeing the
equality of all their members - in short, to work to
democratize multilateral institutions.

In that regard, a plan for profound modifications
and reforms to multilateralism is recommended, taking
as points of reference the serious problems that currently
plague the international community, thereby allowing
for the creation of a strong multilateral international
system. We note with much regret that, in recent times,
we have been seeing not a true multilateralism, but
rather a disguised unilateralism in a number of major
Powers that have always tried to manage matters of
international interest on the basis of their own national
interests and through a process of coalition-building,
consequently provoking more regional conflicts and
armed struggles, to the point of leaving world peace to
hang on a very slender thread.

It has been suggested that those countries, aware of
their military and technological capacity, should opt for
peace and base their international coexistence on the
friendly, objective, egalitarian and peaceful character
that should be the foundation of the multipolar system
that we support in the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
and in the United Nations. Such an approach would
undoubtedly benefit the international community,
because with that mere gesture alone many conflicts
would be resolved, either as a result of a lack of arms
supply or through achieving justice.

Another challenge facing multilateralism is the
great divergence of interests and positions within the
international system. Defining the terms of action
within the organizations that are dedicated to the topic
under discussion has proved to be a rather difficult
task, especially when we consider what is at stake. That
strong contrast of interests has meant that the success
of those organizations is measured by their ability
to reach an agreement, and not by the true impact of
their decisions.

For the Republic of Equatorial Guinea, the world
of the twenty-first century is too interdependent and
complex, to the extent that modern multilateralism
requires a new framework of cooperation that, in
addition to the inevitable balance of power, takes into
account the diversity of the challenges and the need
to reaffirm a normative model on a democratic basis.
As a firm believer in multilateralism and international
cooperation within the framework of the United Nations
and other international, regional and subregional
organizations, His Excellency the President of the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea, Mr. Teodoro Obiang
Nguema Mbasogo, has always focused his actions on
solidarity within a multipolar spirit, as evidenced by
the UNESCO-Equatorial Guinea International Prize for
Research in the Life Sciences, our support for countries
that have suffered natural disasters, assistance in the
area of food security, support for countries that have
fallen victim to pandemics and the fact that Equatorial
Guinea has hosted, on several occasions, international
and regional forums and international and regional
sports competitions.

It is within that same vision and approach that
the Republic of Equatorial Guinea, as an elected
non-permanent member of the Security Council,
consistently advocates for consensus, the peaceful
negotiation of conflicts, the total eradication of weapons
of mass destruction, respect for the sovereignty of
States and respect for humanitarian and human rights,
and strongly supports the ongoing multilateral efforts
towards peace on the Korean peninsula among the
States that are directly involved - the United States,
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and the
Republic of Korea - with the support of the People's
Republic of China.

To conclude, allow me to quote the Ecuadorian
political analyst Camilo Zambrano J auregui, who stated,

"Definitively, the focal point for strengthening
multilateralism is to generate greater legitimacy
of the decision-making processes, be they by
procedures or mainly by those institutions called
upon to safeguard international peace and security."

