Mr. Matussek (Germany): Germany welcomes
the unanimous adoption of resolution 1851 (2008) as a
clear message and a common endeavour of the
international community to fight piracy. The European
Union is making an important contribution to that end,
and my country, Germany, intends to take part in the
European Operation Atalanta, which began last week.
We very much appreciate the fact that such a
substantial commitment by the European Union and its
member States for the protection of humanitarian aid
and civilian maritime trade has been explicitly
welcomed by the Security Council in resolution 1851
(2008).

With many actors involved in the fight against
piracy, the need to coordinate all actions off the coast
of Somalia will dramatically increase. Germany
welcomes the new coordination mechanism provided
for in the resolution. We will actively participate in that
mechanism and suggest that the following priorities be
focused upon: first, sharing information about
anti-piracy measures and ensuring that they are
executed in a coordinated manner - we must avoid
duplication of efforts - and, secondly, finding
adequate judicial arrangements for the prosecution of
pirates. Piracy is a heinous crime that must not go
unpunished. The capacity of law enforcement in the
regional context must be strengthened. We should also
consider establishing new international tribunals for
the prosecution of pirates.

While Operation Atalanta will exclusively
combat piracy off the Somali coast, we note that the
Security Council provides the international community
with further options for combating piracy onshore. We
appreciate the fact that such land operations can be
conducted only within the specific framework of
resolution 1851 (2008) and in agreement with the
Somali Transitional Federal Government, thus
respecting the sovereignty of Somalia.

While focusing on the immediate urgency of
combating piracy with the utmost priority, we must not
lose sight of longer-term perspectives for Somalia. It is
only by re-establishing and strengthening State
institutions that we will be able to combat the root
causes of piracy. Germany is committed to supporting
international efforts in that respect. We need a viable,
inclusive political process in Somalia and a functioning
Transitional Federal Government as a partner in our
engagement.

In that context, I would like to express our
appreciation for the relentless efforts of the Secretary-
General and his Special Representative, Mr. Ould-
Abdallah, in bringing together the various parties in
Somalia. We urge all actors within and outside the
Transitional Federal Government to commit or
recommit themselves, in a spirit of compromise and
reconciliation, to a durable political solution within the
framework of the Djibouti Agreement.

