Mr. Skoog: I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this timely debate on the review of the
peacebuilding architecture. I also want to thank you for
the invitation to briefthe Security Council this morning.

I have been a firm supporter of the report (see S/2015/490) of the Advisory Group of Experts from
the start, and I wish to pay tribute to Ambassador Gert
Rosenthal and his colleagues for their excellent work on
that Review. I am confident that the review can bring
real change to the Organization.

In your concept note (S/2016/104, annex),
Mr. President, you remind us of the fact that the notion
of peacebuilding was introduced by former Secretary-
General Boutros Boutros-Ghali in his report "An
Agenda for Peace" (S/24111). I would like take this
opportunity to express our recognition of his services
to world peace and international order.

Equally important, the concept note reminds us of
the conceptual shift in our thinking on peacebuilding,
acknowledged by both the Council and the General
Assembly. Peacebuilding can no longer be confined to
post-conflict recovery. Sustaining peace encompasses
activities aimed at preventing the outburst, resurgence
and continuation of conflict. Validating and solidifying
this shift in mindset and endorsing a corresponding
change in the way the United Nations system is set
up to respond to conflict is the single most important
outcome of the peacebuilding review. That is why this
debate is so timely, as we Member States are in the midst
of defining how to turn the normative developments
and the political momentum into concrete reforms for a
better operational response.

Today, I would like to focus my remarks on the
following areas. First, I will share some conclusions
from my chairmanship of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC). I will then touch upon what I
believe are key areas in the review, namely, conflict
prevention, financing for sustaining peace and the role
of regional organizations.

I have had the great fortune and honour to chair
the Peacebuilding Commission during a dynamic
year. The review of the peacebuilding architecture
provided a stimulating backdrop to our work. It gave
the Commission an opportunity to test in practice
how we can improve delivery and become more
useful - because, as the review rightly pointed out,
the Peacebuilding Commission has yet to fully deliver
on the expectations as conceived at its establishment.
The Commission is quite a unique structure at the
United Nations, as well as a flexible body. I believe
there are inherent opportunities for the Commission
to keep evolving and to adopt new approaches, and
thereby to come closer to fulfilling its original vision
of bridging the gap between crisis response and long-
term development and sustainable peace.

At the outset of our chairmanship, we set out a
number of objectives for the work of the Commission,
including adopting more transparent and strategic
working methods, a more flexible agenda, increasing
inclusivity and improving partnerships with regional
and subregional organizations. We convened several
regional and country-specific discussions concerning
situations outside of the PBC regular agenda.

I have also come to appreciate that the mandate
of the Commission has never been more relevant or
important. Only by addressing the root causes of
conflict, investing in socioeconomic development and
building national capacities will there be lasting peace.
The Peacebuilding Commission has a fundamentally
important role in championing those long-term
and comprehensive approaches. I believe we have
a collective duty to make the PBC as effective as it
can be, especially as the demand for more effective
international response to conflicts remains high.

That brings me to my first message, concerning
the prevention of conflict. There are no excuses for
not heeding the call coming out consistently across the
three reviews on United Nations peace operations. We
must move the prevention of conflict to the centre of
our work. To do so, we must better equip all parts of
the United Nations system to contribute to sustaining
peace, including the United Nations development
system. That entails recognizing that peacebuilding
is an inherently political process that requires sound
political analysis and corresponding conflict-sensitive
programming. Above all, it requires adequate political
and financial support within the Organization, which
brings me to my second message.

If we are serious about sustaining peace, we
need to make sure there are resources to back up our
priorities, as the Chair just said. It is a tragic irony
that, while resources available for peacekeeping and
humanitarian response amount to billions of dollars,
conflict-prevention initiatives, which could save
so many lives and significantly lessen the need for
peacekeeping in the first place, has to scramble for a
fraction of those amounts. I understand that there are
sensitivities around some of the recommendations
pertaining to increased financing, related to assessed
contributions. In my view, we need to look at every
option. But no matter what we agree on in a particular
resolution, we should simultaneously look beyond
United Nations mechanisms and find innovative
ways of adequately resourcing peacebuilding efforts.
Part of that involves strengthening national capacity
for domestic revenue-regeneration. We can help
decrease dependence on external resources, which in
turn strengthens national leadership and ownership
of development.

The United Nations does not operate in a vacuum and
is not always the best-placed actor to address threats to
peace. My third message today is therefore that we need
to create stronger partnerships with regional actors and
to strengthen their capacity, since they are often first
responders to conflict. By partnering with regional and
subregional organizations, the United Nations response
will be better informed by local perspectives and better
able to bring such understandings and approaches to
peacebuilding to the fore.

Before concluding, let me add a final thought on
a very positive development recently, namely, the
recognition ofthe role ofyoung people in peacebuilding.
This agenda is not an add-on, an optional tick-in-the-box
exercise. It is about tapping into and drawing upon the
tremendous potential of young people as a positive
source for peace, in particular in conflict-affected
countries, where youth often make up the majority of
the population and where risk factors around youth
unemployment tend to overshadow the notion of youth
as making potential contributions. By taking forward
resolution 2250 (2015), stewarded by Jordan, and by
adopting more inclusive approaches, we will make sure
that their voices are heard.

I am very grateful to have been invited to address
the Council on several occasions during the past year.
I can only encourage the Security Council to reach out
to the Peacebuilding Commission more actively and to
look to the Peacebuilding Commission as a body that
can complement and add value to the Council's work
through a comprehensive approach to sustaining peace.

Lastly, while I might have stepped down from the
chairmanship of the PBC, my commitment and, more
important, the commitment of the Swedish Government
to sustaining peace, to multilateralism and to the
United Nations remains as strong as ever. The Council
can count on us, as we together take the necessary steps
to implement these reforms aimed at building a more
effective United Nations.

