The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
France.

Nearly every day, we consider crisis situations
that are almost always real human tragedies as well.
But the recruitment of children in armed conflicts or
their use as combatants and the many forms of
exploitation that they suffer in conflict zones are
particularly intolerable. Such zones are often lawless.
To enlist children in armed or paramilitary forces, to
take them away from their families, to wound them, to
mutilate them - in other words, to raise them in fear
and hatred - is, first and foremost, to attack their
rights as children. But it is also to attack their future as
adults.

Therefore, I am gratified to note that the Security
Council remains fully committed with regard to this
problem and that today's debate has aroused
remarkable interest. By adopting resolution 1379
(2001), on children and armed conflict, on 20
November 2001 - the anniversary of the adoption of
the Convention on the Rights of the Child - the
Council carried out just and necessary work. One of
that resolution's most innovative aspects was the
establishment of a monitoring and follow-up
mechanism. Its paragraph 16 requests the Secretary-
General to attach to his report a list of parties to armed
conflict that recruit or use children in violation of the
international obligations applicable to them.

Today, we have an opportunity to consider the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2002/1299) for the
first time. It cites some encouraging progress. First of
all, at the normative level, there is the entry into force
of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child and that of the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court. The latter text contains
specific provisions regarding the recruitment or use of
child soldiers, which is described as a war crime. Then,
on the more operational level, there is the integration
of the protection of children into the definition of
peacekeeping or peace-building operations. But despite
that progress, how many intolerable situations are
mentioned in the report of the Secretary-General?

Of course, France agrees with those States that
believe that we cannot fail to respond to the
overwhelming report of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, Mr. Olara Otunnu. For that reason, we believe
that it is a good idea for a follow-up resolution to
prepared by the Security Council in order to provide
clear guidelines for the next stage. In such a resolution,
we must firmly express our will to act.

Without providing an exhaustive list of what we
might do, I should like to mention three examples.
First, we must ensure that the demobilization and
reintegration of child soldiers is for the duration and
that such children are effectively monitored. That way,
we will avoid the phenomenon of reconscription, which
we see in some conflict zones. Next, we must end the
scandal of the sexual exploitation of children in refugee
camps. Finally, and in general terms, we must go
further in analysing, following up and monitoring the
most troubling situations, whether or not they are
included in the list in the annex to the report. With
regard to this last point, we obviously must display a
certain flexibility in the interpretation of paragraph 16
of resolution 1379 (2001). The criteria defined by that
paragraph for drawing up the list must not hinder our
determination to tackle the situations that arouse the
greatest concern.

I believe that Member States cannot fail to
support these guidelines, even though there may be a
few differences regarding the practical implementation
of actions to be undertaken. We therefore believe and
hope that it will be possible to reach a rapid agreement
on the text of the follow-up draft resolution with a view
to its adoption by the end of the week.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

As there are a number of speakers remaining on
my list, and in accordance with the announcement I
made at the beginning of the meeting, I propose, with
the consent of the Council's members, to suspend the
meeting now and to resume it at 3 pm.

The meeting was suspended at 1.10pm.
