Mr. Okio (Congo) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to thank the President for having
organized this important meeting on the most recent
events on the situation in Afghanistan.

We also wish to thank Mr. Tom Koenigs, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan and head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), for the complete
and detailed presentation of the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2007/555), which describes a complex and
unstable situation which can only be a source of
justified concern, even if there are reasons for hope.

Congo would like to express its sincere gratitude
to the personnel of UNAMA and of the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) for the efforts they
are making in the field to complete their highly
dangerous tasks.

As was noted by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in his statement, significant progress
has been made in certain areas, which he cited, but the
security issue is an ever growing problem with the
rebellions of the Taliban and other extremist groups.
According to the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2007/555), their attacks have increased by 20 per
cent as compared to the year 2006. My delegation
therefore has questions regarding the mobilization
capacity of the Taliban, given the heavy losses that
they have incurred. Most of the victims of this terror
are, above all, the rebels themselves: but there are also,
and we deeply regret this, numerous casualties in the
ranks of the Afghan security forces and innocent
civilians, as well as ISAF soldiers, as was shown by
the recent attack in Kabul.

As Mr. Koenigs pointed out during his statement,
more than 1200 civilians have died as a result of these
attacks since January 2007. The revival of the Taliban
rebellion and that of other extremist groups, the
barbaric methods including suicide attacks against
civilians and international and Afghan forces, the
abductions of civilians and campaigns of intimidation
have destabilizing affects on the general situation in
Afghanistan.

The capacity for inflicting harm by the Taliban
and other extremist groups is therefore a genuine
subject of concern, because it not only exacerbates the
deteriorating security situation, but also increasingly
affects the living conditions of the Afghan population.
It is therefore necessary and urgent to strengthen the
capacity of the Afghan armed forces and the police,
within the framework of an anti-insurrection strategy,
as underscored by the Secretary-General in paragraph 9
of his report (S/2007/555).

My delegation notes with concern the
continuation of poppy growing, as well as the
production and trafficking in opium, both important
sources of financing for the Taliban. Trafficking poses
a significant danger, not only for the Afghan nation
itself, but also for the entire international community,
as indicated by the study of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime (UNODC).

In that connection, my delegation supports the
recommendation of the Secretary-General on the
creation by Afghanistan of a pilot plan to combat
drugs, with the support of the international community
and in particular of UNODC. However, if it is to be
effective, the campaign must fully address the
imperative need for a substitution economy to allow
those who depend on growing poppies and dealing in
opium to find other sources of income and well-being.

It is equally necessary to strengthen the
institutions participating in the advancement of the rule

of law. Although progress has been made in the quest
for a comprehensive approach to security, governance
and development in Afghanistan on the basis of the
Afghanistan Compact, the Afghan Government
continues to suffer from certain weaknesses, in
particular in fighting corruption, which could be
readily exploited by the Taliban and other extremist
groups. The difficulties encountered by the Anti-
Corruption Commission established by President
Karzai reveal that this scourge has infected several
levels of Afghan society. As the Secretary-General
notes in his report, the impact of Government action in
this field remains unclear. The patronage system
undermines such efforts all too often.

My delegation therefore endorses the Secretary-
General's recommendations on reforming the police,
the National Army and the judicial sector, with the
support of international donors, in order to establish
the rule of law in Afghanistan. We note with
satisfaction the creation of the International Police
Coordination Board, under Afghan authority, and the
deployment of the European Police Mission.

The creation of the Good Performers Initiative to
promote the development of the provinces, and in
particular the eradication of all activities linked to drug
trafficking, is a very positive move that deserves
support. However, it is important for the Afghan
authorities to consider easing administrative and
financial procedures in order to assist access to the
fund by several categories of recipients.

My delegation also notes with interest that
Afghanistan is acting to promote peaceful relations
with its neighbours in a turbulent region where myriad
situations are often inextricably intertwined. The
commitment of the Afghan and Pakistani Governments
to addressing such joint problems as opium production
and trafficking and terrorism and to coordinating their
efforts to limit opposition raids in Afghanistan is also a
positive factor to be encouraged. The Congo therefore
urges the two countries to ensure the implementation of
the joint declaration on promoting cooperation and
assistance through collaboration and understanding,
including projects pursued in such fields as the
repatriation of refugees and economic development on
both sides of the border.
Moreover, the general agreement on bilateral
cooperation signed with the Islamic Republic of Iran
indicates a favourable attitude to good-neighbourly
relations, which Afghanistan so badly needs to ensure
its own stability. The Congo therefore supports all such
initiatives, which are helping to stabilize the internal
situation in Afghanistan and the region.

The Congo also welcomes the initiatives of the
international community that are helping to improve
security, stability and reconstruction in the country.
The Conference held in Rome on 2 and 3 July, the
high-level meeting held in New York on 23 September
and previous meetings also emphasized the common
resolve to seek a lasting solution to the Afghan crisis.

It should be noted that millions of Afghans
remain in exile in Iran and Pakistan. The situation
requires intensive consideration and consistent
commitment on the part of the international community
in regard both to voluntary returns and to finding
alternative solutions for some groups of Afghans who
cannot return to their country.

The Congo supports the effective commitment of
the United Nations in the role of central and impartial
coordinator that it has played to date.

In conclusion, I recall that, in seeking
successfully to accomplish its task of reconciliation
and expand its territorial reach, the Afghan
Government expects a great deal from the varied
contributions of the Security Council. The Council
should make A substantive effort in that respect when it
considers requests made by the Afghan Government, in
particular concerning former Taliban, because the
strengthening of institutions remains a key factor in
achieving lasting peace and stability in the country.

