Mr. Kebe (spoke in French): Allow me to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month and to express
our high appreciation for the competent manner in
which you have guided the Council's work. We also
thank you for having convened this meeting and for
having allowed the African Union to speak in this
debate.

My organization is here today to bear witness and
to add its voice to those of earlier speakers, who,
together are endeavouring to avert the dangers that
threaten Palestine, the Middle East and the entire
world.

My organization has on several occasions
addressed the Council in order to sound the alarm -
every time the spiralling violence and the political
stakes have exceeded what is tolerable and acceptable.
Again today the Council must urgently debate the
events in Palestine. Thanks to television, we can see, in
real time, how the headquarters of the Palestinian
Authority are being demolished. We know that that
action is not just an attempt to intimidate or a response
to suicide attacks, but a well-orchestrated plan, carried
out with great care, to try, in one way or another, to
eliminate President Yasser Arafat from the political
scene, as the Israeli authorities have repeated again and
again.

The current situation is extremely dangerous. If
nothing is done immediately to put an end to this spiral
of confrontation and to bring the two parties to the
negotiating table, the international community, through
its inaction, will have become complicit in one of the
greatest tragedies in history. We will therefore continue
to be a prophet of doom in an attempt to prevent a
repetition of history in Palestine - a repetition of the
tragedies that have occurred, century after century,
because of the silence and cowardice of those who
could have taken decisive preventive action.

I should like to take this opportunity to recall the
principled position of my organization on the
Palestinian question. The African Union unreservedly
supports the just and legitimate struggle of the
Palestinian people, under the guidance of the Palestine
Liberation Organization, to exercise its inalienable
national rights, including the right to recover homes
and property, as well as the right to self-determination
and the right to an independent State on its national
land, with East Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance
with international law and the relevant resolutions of
the Security Council.

My organization reaffirms its full solidarity and
unreserved support for the elected President of the
Palestinian Authority, Mr. Yasser Arafat, the leader
whom the Palestinian people freely chose in exercise of
their sovereign right.

The African Union also supports all the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council, in particular
resolution 1397 (2002) of 12 March 2002, which, inter
alia, reaffirms the vision of a region in which two
States - Israel and Palestine - live side by side,
within secure and recognized borders.

Likewise, my organization supports all the
initiatives aimed at bringing about a comprehensive,
just and lasting peace in the Middle East. Here I am
thinking of the Mitchell report and the Tenet plan on
security, which is designed to put an end to the cycle of
violence, as well as of the Arab peace plan published at
the Beirut Summit. Finally, and more specifically, I am
thinking of the initiatives of the Quartet, which call for
an immediate cessation of hostilities, a ceasefire and a
return to the negotiating table with a view to bringing
about a comprehensive settlement that covers political,
economic, humanitarian and institutional aspects of the
conflict.

Just as the African Union supports the settlement
plan of the Quartet, it also firmly supports the
Secretary-General's proposal to set up a multinational
force, under Chapter VII of the Charter. The Union
believes that the presence of a robust and credible
United Nations force would make a positive
contribution to the implementation of the Quartet
initiatives.

But let us make no mistake: by destroying
infrastructures, disrupting structures and institutions
and arresting and assassinating Palestinian leaders,
Israel is aiming at nothing less than rendering any
peace plan inoperative. How can Palestinians possibly
fulfil their part of the bargain under the current
conditions of massive destruction?

The Palestinian and Israeli peoples have already
paid too high a price for a conflict that has lasted far
too long. The time has come for the various parties to
allow men of goodwill to try to give peace a chance. It
is not with tanks, political assassinations or suicide
attacks that solutions can be found. We believe that the
solution is waiting for us at the negotiating table.

