Mr. Salame: Allow me to congratulate Sweden on
its presidency of the Security Council this month. I am
grateful for this opportunity to brief members of the
Security Council on our work in Libya.

For the first few months of this year, Libya
enjoyed relative quiet from military actions. The
United Nations helped create that lull. By reviving the
political process with the delivery of the action plan
for Libya, we provided a peaceful means to be heard
and the prospect of obtaining official positions. With
that has come increased dialogue and fluidity between
the localities and the political camps. The number of
civilians killed during the exchange of fire fell to only
four in March, and five in April. We capitalized on that
positive environment. Let me share four examples.

First, we provided a platform for reconciliation
agreements and discussion, opening our good offices
to all. We have hosted meetings on the most contentious
issues - for example, meetings on land property
grievances and consultations between internally
displaced persons and those from the areas from which
they have been displaced.

Secondly, we supported the conduct of local
elections, which took place in Zawiya on 12 May. Voter
registration is currently ongoing for similar elections in
the towns of Bani Walid and Dirge. Dozens of additional
municipal elections are expected to be held this year.

Thirdly, we have re-established the United Nations
in Libya - in Tripoli where most of the Mission now
resides and in Benghazi where our office will open in
the next few weeks.

Fourthly, - and I am particularly proud of
this - we have concluded the consultative phase of the
national conference process. Over the past 14 weeks, we
have held, thanks to our dedicated partner the Centre
for Humanitarian Dialogue, more than 75 meetings
in Libya and abroad. More than 7,000 Libyans - a
quarter of them women - participated. Two thousand
submissions were received online. One hundred and
thirty thousand followers joined the consultative
process on social media, while generating half a
million comments. Digital messaging has reached over
1.8 million persons. Furthermore, the proceedings were
covered in great detail by the Libyan media.

That bottom-up process is an integral part of the
action plan. It puts the Libyan people at the heart of
the political process, whoever or wherever they may
be. For many communities, that was the first time that
they were actively engaged in the political process and
consulted on the future of their nation. Specific events
were held for women, internally displaced persons
and young people, while others targeted far-away
communities in the south, abroad and constituencies
previously excluded. The local national conference
consultations have provided tremendous insight into
the hopes, fears and vision of the Libyan people for a
way forward. The next phase of the national conference
is the distillation of the thousands of pages of reports
into a full and final one, with national conclusions and
recommendations to support the next steps to complete
the transition. The date and the venue of the final event
will be determined soon.

Any political progress is linked to the absence of
military activity on the ground. Regrettably, the past
two months have been marked by military actions and
violent developments, thereby diverting attention and
losing some of the momentum we had gained. First, in
the eastern city of Derna, the Libyan National Army
move to take control of the city led to two months of
battle. The conflict ignited divides across the country,
and though the Libyan National Army is now in control
of the city, small-scale fighting continues. We then
witnessed the events in the oil crescent. On 14 June, a
coalition of armed groups, reportedly including foreign
mercenaries, attempted to seize control of facilities
in the oil crescent region. They successfully captured
them, entailing numerous casualties and significant
damage to critical infrastructure. The Libyan National
Army recaptured the area within a week in a move
most expected to re-establish the status quo, where
management of the fields would have reverted to the
internationally recognized National Oil Corporation,
which operates under the Government of National
Accord. However, on 25 June the Libyan National Army
announced that it would transfer management of the oil
facilities in the oil crescent and of other areas under its
control to a non- recognized national oil corporation
that exists in the east under a parallel authority.

Subsequently, the official National Oil Corporation
declared force majeure on the oil terminals of Sidra,
Ra's Lanuf, Marsa Al-Hariga and Zuetina. As a result,
850,000 barrels per day of crude oil were prevented
from being exported. It is estimated that Libya lost
more than $900 million. The course of events drove
a wedge through the middle of the country, thereby
deepening division between institutions and regions.
The Secretary-General released a statement on the
matter and recalled all of the relevant Security Council
resolutions, while offering the good offices of the United
Nations. I have spent the past two weeks reaching out
to the various Libyan actors, while shuttling back and
forth to find a solution to the misguided crisis. I was not
alone in that. The efforts and support of many Libyans
and numerous Member States were invaluable.

On 11 July, control reverted to the National Oil
Corporation, and production resumed. The end of the
immediate crisis has brought a collective sigh of relief,
but it is not the end of the matter. Events have brought
to the fore the underlying issues that are plaguing
the country and that I have repeatedly outlined to the
Council, namely, frustrations over the distribution of
wealth and the endemic plundering of resources. If
those matters are not expeditiously addressed, I fear
that the agreements made to resume oil production
will not hold, and it will be difficult to advance the
political process.

The Mission will redouble its efforts to push for
economic reforms, as the very stability and unity of the
country are at stake. If there has been a silver lining to
events, it is the fact that various authorities in Libya
now accept that they need to take action to protect the
country's wealth. The request submitted to the Council
by the Government of National Accord for a review
of the official Central Bank of Libya and the parallel
central bank in the east is a welcome first step to bring
transparency to the finances of Libya. I encourage
Council members to consider the request in a positive
light. If the economy of predation is to be broken, its
methods must be laid bare, and, for that, Libya needs
all our support.

Libyans long to be rid of their current patchwork
of institutions. The national conference consultations
taught us that the Libyan people want clear and
effective leadership by legitimate bodies, brought about
by elections. It is telling that, although only 600,000
people voted for the House of Representatives in 2014,
already 1 million have recently registered to vote in the
next elections. However, a handful of people defy that
popular desire. The few who benefit from the status quo
will, if left unchecked, do whatever they can to hinder
elections. Unfortunately, they can do much, especially
as they hold crucial, and too often lucrative, official
positions. Without the right conditions, it would be
unwise to hold elections. Without sending clear and
firm messages to those who would attempt to stall or
disrupt elections, such conditions will not be met.

To the leaders of Libya, I say that it is time to
return control to the citizens. At the international
meeting in Paris on 29 May, the Prime Minister, the
Heads of Libya's House of Representatives and High
State Council and the Head of the Libyan National
Army committed to engage constructively to enable
elections to take place by the end of the year. That
deadline is congruent with the action plan. I urge them
to stand by their commitment and for others to join
them. Furthermore, the deadline that they agreed on
for the adoption of legislation necessary for elections is
fast approaching.

Although we welcomed the resumption of
deliberations by the House of Representatives on 25 and
26 June, and once again today, on necessary legislation
for a referendum on the constitutional draft, that is not
enough. It has been evident that many members of the
House of Representatives, who last month completed
their fourth year in office, have not demonstrated any
enthusiasm in terms of their attendance or of adopting
viable electoral legislation. Members of the House
of Representatives should take notice. Libyans are
demanding the holding of elections and becoming
impatient with those who are finding multiple ways
and means to postpone that moment. I recently met
with the Speaker of the House. He promised a vote on
a law for the referendum of the Constitution within the
next two weeks and that electoral legislation would be
voted on immediately thereafter. I truly hope that that
pledge will be honoured this time. I urge the members
the Council to pressure the House of Representatives
to deliver on its historic responsibility and achieve that
goal in a timely fashion.

A constitutional framework is required to hold
elections and end the transition. Since my last briefing
(see S/PV.8263), I have engaged in broad consultations
on the matter of how and when to establish a new
Constitution for the country, while speaking with senior
Libyan judges and constitutional experts from every
side, as well as with the Libyan people. Both experts and
the public agree that a clear constitutional framework is
a national priority. However, they are divided on how
to proceed. Many would like to see a referendum on
the current draft constitution, while others completely
reject the text. It is a complex issue with no easy options
or straightforward solutions. It is exactly because
of that complexity that the international community
must show unity. Once we reach a reasonable level of
conformity of views among the Libyans, which we are
working on, the international community must stand
together behind that Libyan vision. If even a single
Member State chooses to act alone, the process will
not advance.

Technical preparations are under way for elections
that are scheduled to be held at the end of the year.
Officers are preparing and the planning process is
moving along swiftly. Electoral security arrangements
are being worked on, including by the newly
established unit for those matters in the Ministry of
the Interior. While the terrorist attack against the High
National Elections Commission devastated much of its
headquarters, I am pleased to report that on 12 June,
the Commission was granted a new compound. There
is much work to be done to refurbish the premises and,
accordingly, concerted efforts are being made by the
Government, the United Nations and international
partners to renovate the buildings and replace the many
items destroyed during the attack. I am happy to report
that yesterday the Government of National Accord
approved 66 million Libyan dinars to fund the elections.

The decision of the Security Council to impose
sanctions on six leaders of human trafficking networks
was a positive step towards accountability for
exploitation and human rights abuses. Such progress
notwithstanding, impunity continues to reign in Libya.
Civilians continue to bear the brunt of the escalation
of fighting and violence, as witnessed over the past
two months in Derna and elsewhere in the country.
Concerns remain about human rights abuses, including
summary executions and extrajudicial arrests. I
reiterate the call on all parties to the conflict to fully
respect international humanitarian law, including
by taking all feasible precautions to protect civilians
and ensure that the wounded and sick * civilians and
those who participated in the hostilities - are cared
for, including through medical evacuations. As in other
areas in Libya where conflict has erupted, the United
Nations Humanitarian Coordinator and partners are
providing humanitarian assistance. Despite impeded
access, life-saving materials have been delivered, such
as medicine by the World Health Organization and
assistance to displaced persons, including 1,000 kits
for children. Additional assistance will be required, in
particular in the areas of health, shelter and mine action.

With regard to the city of Tawergha, only a small
number of people have returned. The conditions for a
safe and dignified return remain insufficient, as basic
infrastructure and services are lacking. At the start
of the month, demining teams were finally allowed to
enter the area and commence work. The current plight
of internally displaced persons is unsustainable from
a political and financial perspective, given the lack of
available resources to support them. They should be
given the right to integrate in their host communities as
efforts are made to facilitate their return.

Libya must urgently reverse the deterioration
in public service delivery. The United Nations is
working with the Libyan authorities, in particular
with municipalities across the country, to address
the challenges. However, without a resolution to the
country's underlying economic problems, the situation
will remain an uphill battle. The human rights situation
and the humanitarian needs of migrants, refugees and
asylum-seekers remain dire. While some improvements
have been made in official detention centres, there
are many unofficial installations to which we do not
have access.

I am grateful for the continued support of the
members of the Council and of key Member States
actively engaged in supporting an end to the crisis in
Libya. I warmly note the arrival of the new Deputy
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Libya, Stephanie Williams, as a further reinforcement
of our efforts. The status quo in Libya cannot be
sustained. The country is in decline. The crisis in the
oil crescent gave us a glimpse of what is in store if
tangible progress is not made now: economic collapse,
the breakdown of public services and more frequent
and intense outbreaks of violence. In a country where
terrorists lurk; where criminals are waiting to engage in
the trafficking in migrants; where foreign mercenaries
are increasing in numbers; and where the oil industry
hangs in the balance, this situation should be of concern
to all. In order to help the Libyan people chart a course
to the future they deserve, the unified support of the
Council, Member States involved in Libya and our
regional partner organizations is vital.

