Mr. Keating (New Zealand): Let me start out, Sir,
by conveying to you my congratulations: congratulations,
first, on your initiative to put this item on the agenda of
the Security Council; and secondly, congratulations on
your assumption of the presidency. It is a great honour
and privilege for me to sit here at this table with you as
President. In that sense, I would also like to convey our
thanks and congratulations to Ambassador Dejammet and
all the French delegation on the work they accomplished
for the Council last month.

The scale of the problem caused by land-mines is
immense. It presents a huge challenge to the international
community. The devastation which mines wreak on the
lives of thousands of people is one of the greatest
outrages of our time. These same mines also undermine
the efforts of local populations to realize the potential for
economic development that peace brings.

New Zealand therefore gave strong support to the
action taken by the General Assembly in its resolution
49/215, to convene in 1995 the International Meeting on
Mine Clearance. We all learned at that conference in
Geneva that there are now more than 110 million land-

 

mines in the ground of more than 60 countries, and even
worse, that although we remove some 100,000 land-mines
annually, millions of new ones are still being laid.

That is a dreadful legacy for civilian populations
around the globe. Hundreds of people are killed or maimed
each week, most of them innocent civilians, many of them
defenceless children.

Given the scale of the problem, and its international
dimension, it is indeed timely that the Security Council is
now following up the efforts undertaken in the General
Assembly to focus the attention of international public
opinion on this problem.

The Council must also take into account the threat
posed by mines to the safety of peace-keeping personnel.
As casualties in Bosnia and Angola have recently sadly
demonstrated, the presence of land-mines is a major
inhibition to the ability of United Nations personnel to carry
out their duties in support of many missions.

For all these reasons, in April this year the New
Zealand Government renounced the operational use of anti-
personnel land-mines by the New Zealand Defence Force.
It is our hope that the tide of international opinion will turn
against the use of anti-personnel land-mines, and that other
countries will soon join in renouncing their use.

We call again for an immediate and unequivocal ban
on all anti-personnel land-mines. The outcome of the recent
Review Conference of the States Parties to the Convention
on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain
Conventional Weapons Which May be Deemed to be
Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects was
disappointing because it did not go as far as we had hoped.
Nevertheless it was a success in keeping the land-mines
problem at the forefront of international attention. The next
review conference will be in 2001. In the meantime we
must take every opportunity to enhance the momentum in
favour of a global ban.

New Zealand is proud to have been actively engaged
in and to have made a significant contribution to mine
clearance efforts by the international community over many
years. New Zealand has contributed demining instructors
and programme management personnel from the New
Zealand Defence Force to United Nations operations in
Afghanistan, Cambodia, Mozambique and, most recently,
Angola. New Zealand personnel continue to serve in this
capacity in Cambodia, Mozambique and Angola.

We have also provided financial support for United
Nations efforts in demining. In July 1995 the New
Zealand Government announced at the International
Meeting on Mine Clearance a pledge of $100,000 per
year for the next three years to the United Nations
Voluntary Trust Fund for Assistance in Mine Clearance.
This year the Government increased the annual instalment
to $250,000. In addition, New Zealand continues to
provide substantial funding to the Cambodian Mine
Action Centre and to the unexploded ordnance
programme in Laos.

New Zealand has also provided financial support for
the Department of Humanitarian Affairs (DHA) Mine
Clearance and Policy Unit, and two New Zealand Defence
Force officers are currently attached to the Department of
Peace-keeping Operations (DPKO) and the DHA
respectively as demining advisers.

New Zealand has welcomed the Secretary-General's
moves to improve the ability of the United Nations to
manage and conduct land-mine related operations: first,
the establishment of the Voluntary Fund, which provides
a necessary and timely mechanism to channel funding to
demining operations; secondly, the establishment of
specialized demining units within DPKO and DHA; and
thirdly, the designation of DHA as the focal point for the
United Nations for mine clearance activities.

These are welcome first steps. But notwithstanding
the progress that has been made to date, there remains
much to be done to ensure a more seamless approach to
the conduct of the various mine related tasks through the
life of a mission and beyond.

There is a need for the mandates given by the
Security Council to include strategic recognition and
direction on mine issues, such as operational and
humanitarian mine clearance, mine awareness, data base
information gathering and the establishment, through
training programmes, of indigenous demining capabilities.
This would better enable the Secretary-General and
mission planners to allocate appropriate resources towards
achieving the objectives set, and ensuring a smooth
transition from demining as a peace-keeping requirement
to demining as a long-term peacebuilding activity.

There is a role for the Council in more clearly
defining the responsibilities for the various mine clearance
tasks among the agencies involved in a peace-keeping
operation. We believe that there is a need to rationalize in
order to avoid duplication. This was recognized this year

 

by the Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations,
which called upon the Secretary-General to intensify his
efforts to provide a more coordinated approach between the
demining units of DHA and DPKO.

Now once that is done, we would urge the
Secretary-General, as a matter of the greatest priority, to
seek the means to equip fully those with land-mine
responsibilities at United Nations Headquarters. Until this
is done, the effective implementation of mine clearance
programmes will continue to be hindered, as will the ability
to apply lessons learned to new missions. Similarly, the
creation of uniform operating procedures and standards that
will benefit both training and the conduct of operations
awaits the formation of an effective United Nations
Headquarters element.

We would see merit in a structured review of the mine
clearance issues from past peace-keeping operations, so that
lessons could be drawn for the future. It would be very
useful for the Council to request such a review in a
presidential statement, as a follow-up to this meeting.
Perhaps this task would be a valuable new project for the
Department of Peace-keeping Operations "lessons learned
unit".

It is apparent that operations in areas with a significant
mine threat also require special consideration. How best to
achieve the mission in such a situation and how to ensure
the safety of personnel are direct Security Council
responsibilities. We believe that the demining effort must
be timely, well-trained and properly equipped. New Zealand
would see merit in examining, within the standby force
concepts currently under investigation, the possibility of a
rapid mine clearance capability that could be employed
before or at the beginning of an operation. Consideration
should also be given to acquiring greater numbers of mine-
protected vehicles and developing operational concepts and
standardized procedures to counter the mine threat. This is
a further element which, we believe, could usefully be
reflected in a statement by the Council.

Clearly there are substantive issues requiring urgent
action within the United Nations system if the United
Nations is effectively to discharge its responsibilities in
mine clearance in both the peace-keeping and post-conflict
peace-building settings. Germany's initiative in calling this
meeting of the Security Council provides an important
opportunity for doing this. Other, complementary, initiatives
have been announced by Canada and Japan, and are
strongly supported also by New Zealand. We welcome all
of these as signs that the international community is
determined to address head-on the land-mine threat. I can
assure the Council of New Zealand's continuing
commitment and support in that endeavour.

