Mrs. Nufiez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) for his briefing. I would also like
to welcome and express my gratitude for the statement
by Mr. Ivica Dacie, First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia.
We have also paied close attention to the statement by
Ms. Vlora Citaku.

First, as we have said in previous statements,
Uruguay believes that resolution 1244 (1999) is the
internationally accepted legal basis for resolving the
situation in Kosovo, which includes full respect for the
principles of the territorial integrity and sovereignty
of Serbia.

We are encouraged to hear that the political
conditions in Kosovo are improving to some extent,
as indicated in the most recent report (S/2016/666) of
the Secretary-General and as just mentioned by Special
Representative Tanin. Nevertheless, the challenges
on the security front continue to be significant.
There has been tension, attacks and other alarming
incidents, including - and I would like to highlight
this point - on members of the minority communities,
many of them Kosovar Serbs. Uruguay regrets the
occurrence of those incidents, expresses its firm
rejection of the use of violence and encourages all
efforts to find a way to promote peaceful and inclusive
dialogue in order to make progress towards resolving
the problems of Kosovo.

We are discouraged by the lack of significant
progress with regard to the practical implementation
of the agreements reached within the context of
the dialogue process undertaken between Belgrade
and Pristina facilitated by the European Union. We
urge all parties to step up the dialogue so as to reach
compromise and make progress along the path towards
stability and development.

Uruguay attaches the greatest importance to full
respect for human rights. We understand that in the
case of Kosovo what is of particular importance are
the efforts undertaken on the issue of persons who
disappeared in the recent conflict. We are particularly
pleased to note the holding of a working session of the
Joint Working Group on Missing Persons, in which
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) participated and at which Belgrade
and Pristina agreed to increase their exchanges of
information on specific cases. We believe that those
steps, in addition to providing consolation to the
families of the disappeared and healing the wounds of
the past, are acts of justice that are important strides
towards reconciliation.

My country is also concerned about the situation
of the internally displaced. The Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees estimates
that the total number of internally displaced persons
in Kosovo at the end of June 2016 stood at 16,714. In
that regard, we note with satisfaction the fact that the
Kosovo authorities endorsed a concept document on the
regulation of displaced persons and durable solutions.
The document points to the need to establish a legal
foundation to ensure accountability of the authorities
and to define institutional mechanisms that would then
facilitate the return of families and internally displaced
persons in safe and sustainable conditions.

Another important aspect highlighted in the
report of the Secretary-General is the phenomenon
of migration through the region towards Europe. In
that connection, we believe that regional cooperation
focused on a human rights approach is fundamental.

I wish to conclude by reiterating the fact that
Uruguay very much values the role played by UNMIK
in promoting security, stability and respect for human
rights. We also recognize the important role played
by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, the Kosovo Force and the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo. Moreover, we would like
to highlight the substantial contribution of the United
Nations agencies present on the ground.

