Mr. Feltman: I address the Security Council at a
time when the risk of escalation in Israel and Palestine is
palpable. The past month has witnessed unconscionable
crimes of hatred committed by extremist elements,
reprehensible retaliatory violence, provocations at
Jerusalem's holy sites and a worrying increase in
rockets launched from Gaza towards Israel. The coming
days will see the anniversary of the conclusion of last
year's devastating Gaza conflict, a conflict from which
the Palestinians there have yet to recover. One year on,
their continued suffering highlights the inadequacy of
our collective response to date. I therefore begin my
briefing to the Council today with an appeal to political,
military, community and religious leaders on all sides
to work together to reduce tensions, reject violence and
prevent extremists from escalating the situation and
hijacking the political agenda.

I reiterate the Secretary-General's strong
condemnation of the horrific terrorist arson attack,
apparently committed by extremist Jewish settlers, on
a Palestinian family in the occupied West Bank village
of Duma in the early hours of 31 July. The attack killed
lS-month-old Ali Dawabsha. His father died of wounds
five days later, while his mother and four-year-old
brother are still fighting for their lives. The Secretary-
General has welcomed the strong condemnations of the
attack by Prime Minister Netanyahu and other Israeli
officials, as well as political and religious leaders across
the spectrum. At the same time, we denounce the calls
that have been made by Hamas and Islamic Jihad to
escalate the violence and carry out revenge attacks.
At a moment of heightened emotions and anger, such
incitement can serve only to bring about more tragedy.
I urge the Israeli Government to promptly bring the
perpetrators of this heinous act to justice.
I also note the Israeli Cabinet's decision on
2 July to strengthen the legal and institutional
means for addressing terrorism by Jewish extremists
and ensure that the new anti-terrorism law applies
equally to all perpetrators. However, I am concerned
about the decision to extend the use of prolonged
administrative detention, which the United Nations
has consistently opposed. This practice, whether used
against Palestinians or Israelis, is incompatible with
international human rights standards and should be
ended. All administrative detainees should be promptly
charged or released. I want to underscore that this attack,
like so many over the years, including those against
Israeli settlers, occurred in the context of chronically
inadequate law enforcement in the West Bank. Such
violence is possible because of the environment created
as a result of Israel's decades-long policy of illegal
settlement activities.

The goal is clear, but more than 20 years of failed
negotiations have bred mistrust and, worse, have led
to the slow and painful withering of hope. In such a
contentious environment, restoring confidence, before
returning to realistic negotiations, is a must. What
is needed now is a comprehensive approach on three
levels - on the ground, in the region and with the
international community - to fundamentally alter the
current negative dynamics and begin to shape a clear
and positive pathway towards peace. On the Israeli side,
that should reflect significant policy shifts to enable
Palestine's sovereignty, economy and security to grow.
On the Palestinian side, unity is critical. The legitimate
Palestinian Authority must represent all of Palestine
and all Palestinians. I am encouraged by the increased
cooperation between the Quartet and key regional
actors, and I fully support enhanced exploration of how
the region, including through the Arab Peace Initiative,
may contribute to resolving the conflict. The Secretary-
General supports the Quartet's work to connect these
various levels of engagement.

In the West Bank, after failed attempts to form a
Palestinian Government of national unity, a Government
reshuffle resulted in the appointment on 31 July of five
new ministers. The process met with some resistance
among Palestinian factions.

The reporting period was marked by continued
violence, including incidents that resulted in Palestinian
casualties as well as a number of attacks on Israelis and
Israeli security forces. Israeli security forces conducted
some 188 search-and-arrest operations, resulting in
the arrest of some 292 Palestinians. A total of 203
Palestinians were injured, including 40 children and
seven women. Six Palestinians were shot and killed
by Israeli security forces, including a 17-year-old.
Twelve members of the Israeli security forces were also
wounded, with no fatalities reported. I reiterate that
any use of force by Israeli security forces in the West
Bank, including East Jerusalem, must be consistent
with international human rights law. Clashes between
Palestinians and Israeli settlers in the West Bank
resulted in injuries to nine Palestinians, including four
children, and seven Israelis. On 12 August, in what was
apparently a retaliatory attack for the administrative
detention of several Jewish extremists, another
arson attack was reported in Ein Samia, where a tent
belonging to a Bedouin was set on fire and completely
burned, reportedly by Jewish extremists.

Israel's practice of demolishing homes and
structures also continued. This month, 86 structures,
26 ofthem residential, were demolished in the occupied
West Bank, including East Jerusalem, displacing 177
Palestinians, including 89 children. On 17 August
22 structures were demolished in four communities
in the planned E-l area, affecting vulnerable
Palestinian Bedouins in particular and displacing 78
people, including 49 children, the largest number of
Palestinians displaced in the West Bank in one day
in nearly three years. And yesterday 27 structures,
eight of them residential, were demolished, resulting
in 42 displaced, including 27 children in the Jordan
Valley Area C community of Fasayil al-Wusta. The
Secretary-General calls on the Israeli authorities to halt
the demolitions of Palestinian-owned structures in the
West Bank, revoke plans that would result in the forcible
transfer of Palestinian communities and implement an
inclusive planning and zoning regime that will enable
Palestinians" residential and community development
needs to be met.

Recent changes in Israeli law and policy affecting
the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, risk compounding the already precarious
human rights situation. On 30 July, the Knesset
amended the Prisons Act to allow a judge to order the
force-feeding of a hunger-striking prisoner to prevent
imminent death, if that is recommended by a doctor.
While Israel insists that it has established a careful
legal mechanism in order to strictly limit this means of
enforcement to instances where a threat to life exists,
numerous human rights and medical bodies have
questioned whether force-feeding meets international
standards of medical ethics, safety and human rights.
Care should be taken to consider and address the
underlying human rights concerns, including prolonged
administrative detention, that lead prisoners to
undertake such extreme protests. We are aware that the
status of prolonged hunger striker Mohammed Allan
may be evolving.

On 20 July, the Knesset also amended the Israeli
penal code to increase harsh punishments for throwing
stones at moving vehicles, allowing for sentences of up
20 years. The law is likely to disproportionately affect
children. In another legal development, the Israeli
Supreme Court legitimized the applicability of Israel's
1951 absentee property law to Palestinian property in
East Jerusalem when the owner is in the West Bank,
a move that enables property to be expropriated from
Palestinians who have become absentees through no
fault of their own.

Turning to Gaza, the unrelenting pressure on
the socioeconomic situation, owing to the continued
closures, the lack of electricity and water and the
slow pace of reconciliation, continues to feed the
population's discontent. While much remains to be
done, I welcome some positive developments on
reconstruction, particularly under the residential stream
of the Gaza Reconstruction Mechanism, which enables
the reconstruction of homes that have been completely
destroyed. Since its launch in June, and thanks to
financial assistance from Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Qatar
and Germany, 2,250 families have been processed, of
whom some 630 have already purchased construction
materials. Although the Mechanism is working, current
resources are insufficient to meet the massive demand
for assistance. In a recent letter to the foreign ministers
who participated in the October 2014 Cairo conference
on Gaza's reconstruction, the Special Coordinator
urged donor countries to fulfil their pledges.

We welcome Egypt's opening of the Rafah crossing
for several days this week. The Secretary- General urges
the Egyptian authorities to allow the Rafah crossing to
be opened on a more regular basis while taking into
account Egypt's security concerns.

Security incidents in Gaza continued to be recorded.
The Secretary-General condemns the firing at Israel
by Palestinian militants in Gaza of 24 rockets, one of
which hit Israel with no reported injuries. Palestinian
militants also test-fired seven rockets at the sea.
Israeli security forces conducted four air strikes inside
Gaza. On 7 August, in response to a rocket fired from
Gaza, the Israeli Air Force struck a Hamas training
site, injuring four Palestinians. In incidents that took
place following the Duma arson attack, a 17-year-old
Palestinian was shot dead and two others were injured
by Israeli security forces in the vicinity of the wall of
separation.

The Secretary-General is relieved by Commissioner-
General Krahenbiihl's announcement today that the
schools of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) will
indeed open in time. The Secretary-General joins the
Commissioner-General in expressing his appreciation
in that regard to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the State
of Kuwait, the United Arab Emirates, the United States
of America, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, Norway,
Sweden and the Slovak Republic. The Governments
of host countries, particularly the State of Palestine,
the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan and Lebanon,
have spared no effort during this challenging period.
The Secretary-General is sincerely grateful for their
support. A sustainable solution must still be found to
address UNRWA's long-term funding needs so that we
can ensure that the provision of basic services, such as
education, are no longer at risk for Palestine refugees.

I should like to say few words about the situations
in Lebanon and Syria. In Syria, the air raids by Syrian
forces on a marketplace in the town of Douma, which
reportedly killed and injured more than 300 civilians on
15 and 16 August, were some of the bloodiest since the
conflict started in March 2011. This would constitute
yet another crime for which those responsible must be
held accountable. Hostilities must end and the parties
must show genuine commitment to resolving the
conflict through an irreversible political transition,

by engaging in the efforts of the Secretary-General's
Special Envoy, as endorsed in the Security Council's
presidential statement S/PRST/2015/15.

In Lebanon, political differences continued to hinder
the proper functioning of Lebanese State institutions,
despite Prime Minister Salam's commendable efforts to
run the Government. We continue to call on Lebanon's
leaders to act urgently and responsibly by filling the
presidential vacuum without further delay. The situation
along the Blue Line and in the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon area of operations has remained
calm, despite Israeli violations of Lebanese air space
on an almost daily basis.

In conclusion, the recurrent violent incidents and
radicalization in the occupied West Bank, including
East Jerusalem and Gaza, threaten to further destabilize
an already tense environment. The incidents share a
common thread. They are the inevitable product of a
failure to make the tough choices necessary to resolve
this conflict. They are the ramifications of a failure to
prioritize the pursuit of a shared future built on trust
rather than fear. We can no longer accept that reality.
It is time to reverse the perilous tide that we are facing
and restore, to Israelis and Palestinians alike, the hope
that is in danger of being stifled by those promoting
their hate-driven agendas.

