Mr. Danon (Israel): Two days ago, the United States
adopted an important policy that rights a historical
wrong. We thank the United States Administration
for clearly rejecting the false claim and historical lie
that the Israeli communities in Judea and Samaria
are inherently illegal under international law. Earlier
today, I had the pleasure of speaking with United
States Ambassador Craft who, as she is travelling in
Latin America, called to express her continued support
for Israel.

We look forward to combating the hypocrisy we
see when it comes to identifying the true obstacles
to peace in the region. We hope that the rest of the
international community will find the courage to
review the United States policy with an unbiased eye.
Judea and Samaria are inseparable parts of the Jewish
people's homeland. This is not a recent development
or claim, but a historical truth that will never again be
denied. The United States announcement reaffirms that
resolution 2334 (2016) was based on political motives
and has resulted in prolonging the conflict.

Many times, members of the Security Council have
claimed, as they did today, that the Jewish communities
in Judea and Samaria are an obstacle to finding a
solution to the conflict. The Pavlovian response of some
European countries to Secretary of State Pompeo's
announcement only further delays the chances of
ending the conflict. History teaches us that such claims
have no merit. Let me be clear - Jewish communities
are not an obstacle to peace. Israel has made this clear
many times, not only with words, but with actions. In
our peace agreements with Egypt and Jordan, we have
proven that when there is a partner, we are willing to
negotiate and go to great lengths to achieve peace.

In 2005, Israel unilaterally decided to leave the
Gaza Strip. Despite its rights to the land, Israel made
this difficult decision because we thought that it would
bring us closer to ending the conflict. Instead, it was
met with terror and violence. Last week, we witnessed
yet again rockets being fired at civilians 4 some 400
rockets. In 2009, President Obama asked Prime Minister
Netanyahu to freeze building in Judea and Samaria.
Prime Minister Netanyahu showed pragmatism and
froze building for 10 months. Israel once again showed
its willingness to make compromises in order to achieve
peace. Needless to say, the response to this gesture was
once again the rejectionism of the other side.

History clearly demonstrates that not only is
Israel working to attain peace, but it has proven time
and again that the Jewish communities in Judea and
Samaria are not obstacles to achieving it. Why then
would some members of the Council obsessively repeat
the mantra that Jewish communities - which they refer
to as settlements - are an obstacle to peace? Perhaps,
it has to do with the political agenda and desire to
force a solution on the sides. Otherwise, why would
the international community refuse to acknowledge the
true obstacles to peace?

As opposed to the baseless claim that the Jewish
communities stand in the way of peace, there are two
true main obstacles to peace that must be overcome,
if we are to be able to reach an agreement. We did not
hear them mentioned here today.

The first is the Palestinian Authority's incitement
against Israel and the Jewish people. When an entire
generation is taught in school that the State of Israel
has no right to exist, when children are taught to idolize
martyrs whose so-called heroic acts are killing innocent
people, and when teachers demonize Jews, we are faced
with a real obstacle to peace. Incitement is an obstacle
to peace, but we do not hear all Council members saying
so because it places blame on the Palestinian Authority
instead of on Israel.

The second real obstacles to peace is the Council's
attempt to determine the outcome of the negotiations
before they have even started. Too many members of the
international community have a habit of trying to alter
the starting point of future negotiations. Perhaps, that
is done out of frustration over the fact that a solution to
the conflict has not yet been reached.

The international community uses questionable
legal tools to try to solve a political conflict. There are
many examples of such behaviour. In internationally
endorsed agreements, Israel and the Palestinian
Authority agreed - we signed that agreement - that the
future border will be negotiated directly and bilaterally.
Although I heard certain remarks contrary to this fact
in the Chamber today, we nevertheless have those
agreements. Some in the international community have
decided to go beyond the explicit agreement between
the parties and add a few preconditions.

Several minutes ago, we heard some Council
members say that future borders will be negotiated
based on the so-called 1967 lines. The General
Armistice Agreement of April 1949 between Israel
and Jordan explicitly states that the demarcation
line was established for military purposes only and,
as stated in Article VI of the Agreement, "without
prejudice to future territorial settlements or boundary
lines". That was signed in 1949 between us and the
Jordanians. Adding such a precondition is an attempt
to decide the outcome of the negotiations before they
have begun. Similarly - and this explains why some
in the international community insist on claiming
that Jewish communities in Judea and Samaria are
obstacles to peace despite knowing very well what I
just mentioned - the claim is meant to try and decide
the fate of these communities in a future agreement
before the sides have - or really one side has - even
agreed to negotiate.

Just last week, the mandate of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (UNRWA) was renewed. UNRWA
maintains the status of refugees and preaches in schools
about a non-existent right of return. Why would the
international community choose to keep people in
refugee status? Why should someone who is a citizen of
another country - for example, of the United Kingdom
or the United States - still be considered a refugee
according to UNRWA? The only possible explanation is
that it is an attempt to shape the solution to the conflict.

Furthermore, inviting to the Council Israeli
organizations that, under the umbrella of Israeli
democracy and freedom of speech, paint a distorted
picture of reality - and this is not the first time - is
an attempt to solidify a one-sided narrative. It does
not advance the prospect of negotiations. It all but
guarantees that they will not happen in the near future.

The United States announcement this week says
the exact opposite of what others in the international
community are saying. It says that we cannot decide for
the parties what the solution will look like and that only
they can make that determination. There is a crucial
difference between saying that we will not declare all
Jewish communities in Judea and Samaria illegitimate
and that we will allow the parties to decide on what
happens with them in future, on the one hand, and that
we will declare that these communities are illegitimate
and that there can be only one outcome in future, on
the other. Why should we negotiate if the Security
Council knows better? The United States is not trying
to misuse international law in order to force an outcome
to the conflict, but rather understands that one can only
come from negotiations. This idea was echoed by an
American official who said that the announcement will
create an appropriate level playing field for future talks.

When the international community tries to force
a solution, it achieves the exact opposite effect. When
Palestinians see that their battles are being fought for
them, why would they agree to come to the negotiating
table where they would have to compromise to speak
with us? I would ask my colleagues, the Ambassadors
of Belgium and France, how many times they have met
Mr. Mansour over the past year or over the past four
years. How many times has Mr. Mansour met with the
Israeli delegation over the past four years? How many
times has President Abbas met with Prime Minister
Netanyahu over the past four years?

Maybe the international community thinks it
is helping the Palestinians, but it is not. It is simply
delaying the day that we will actually have to sit down
and negotiate directly. The international community's
actions are delaying the negotiations, which is
clearly counterproductive.

The automatic support of some European countries
for the Palestinians has resulted in a propaganda
campaign that starts here in New York and ends in
Ramallah. If they truly want to help, they must change
their approach because their criticism is preventing
direct negotiations. If the international community
wants to bring the conflict to an end, it must shift
its focus from trying to determine the outcome of a
negotiation to encouraging the occurrence of one.
The United States has played an important role to that
effect, and we believe that the Arab countries in our
region, through their influence, can also play a vital
role in bringing both sides to the negotiating table.

Israel is more than willing to negotiate, as we have
shown many times in the past. But, in order to get the
Palestinians to the table, the international community
must stop trying to force an outcome. Instead, they
must force the Palestinians to show up - simply show
up - without preconditions. The political conflict
will never have a legal solution. The only solution is a
negotiated one.

