Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): At the outset, I would like to congratulate both
the leadership and the people of Eritrea on the lifting
of the Security Council's sanctions. We have long said
that the international restrictions against Eritrea were
irrelevant. Over all these years no convincing evidence
has been produced for Asmara's support to destructive
forces in the region, and in the wake of the changes that
have occurred in the Horn of Africa, the classification
of the dispute between Djibouti and Eritrea as a threat
to international peace and security was also outdated.
We hope that the Council's adoption today of resolution
2444 (2018) will be a significant milestone in the
work of strengthening friendly and good-neighbourly
relations in the region. It would not be an exaggeration
to say that the Council is indebted to Ethiopia and its
Prime Minister, Mr. Abiy Ahmed, whose brave and
decisive actions did a great deal to ensure the outcome
of today's vote.

Of course, the resolution will not deal with all
of the region's chronic issues in one fell swoop, to
coin a phrase. We hope in particular that it will be a
stimulus for promoting the normalization of relations
between Eritrea and Djibouti. At the same time,
however, we believe that the work of settling all the
issues outstanding between the two countries belongs
to bilateral diplomacy. If necessary, the parties can use
the good offices of mediators and other purpose-built
international mechanisms. In that regard, we consider
that the regular and, what is most surprising, the
indefinite reporting imposed by a group of countries
looks like an outrageously excessive demand.

We regret the fact that the authors of the resolution
included provisions affirming sexual and gender-based
violence as a separate criterion for the imposition
of sanctions, despite the fact that such behaviour is
covered under the existing listing criteria. I want to
remind the Council once again that issues pertaining
to sanctions are clearly regulated under Chapter VII of
the Charter of the United Nations, which is about the
presence of threats to international peace and security.
Any broader interpretation of that position runs the risk
of a loss of sanctions instruments' effectiveness and,
what is worse, their relevance. With regard to other
countries subject to sanctions we have explained many
times the negative consequences of such moves for the
Council's work. Let me emphasize once again that this
issue is not part of our direct remit. Ifwe want to discuss
such issues, we have the Human Rights Council and
the Commission on the Status of Women. We should
respect the appropriate division of labour in that regard.

