Ms. Liriano de La Cruz (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): I wish to begin by thanking you,
President Michelle Bachelet, for your initiative to
convene this timely and decisive meeting. The leadership
you have shown in the various posts you have held
reflects your commitment to the loftiest international
goals. I wish also to congratulate the Secretary-General
on the clarity and depth of his briefing. Likewise, we
welcome the briefings by Mr. De Aguiar Patriota, Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission, and Ms. Leymah
Gbowee, President of the Gbowee Peace Foundation
Africa.

The Security Council is the organ with primary
responsibility for the maintenance ofinternational peace
and security under the Charter of the United Nations.
Today's meeting in particular addresses an issue that
has serious implications for international peace and
security. A review of the international environment
gives us the opportunity to renew our commitment in
the face of continually evolving challenges and promote
a bold vision to achieve peace and security.

When we focus our attention on people, we see that
the most urgent priorities of those affected by armed
conflict are often security and development, respect for
the rule of law and human rights. In other words, this
is a matter of life and death. A firm resolve to assume
the global responsibility to protect civilians in armed
conflict would certainly result in greater credibility for
the Security Council. The effective protection of the
civilian population is essential for sustainable peace,
and this should be taken into consideration whenever
peacekeeping operations intervene.

Along with the changing international context,
as we have heard repeatedly since the beginning of
this meeting, new threats are emerging that affect
security. These threats include marginalization,
terrorism, climate change, arms proliferation, piracy,
drug trafficking and its corollary, international
organized crime. The complexity of those threats
and the interdependence of the issues of security and
development issues are making the Security Council's
role increasingly difficult, especially with regard to
the mandates of its increasingly complex peacekeeping
missions, thus weakening its effectiveness.

We believe that the Security Council, in order to
meet these new challenges, should reconsider the most
effective way for it to operate. The Council should
optimize its effectiveness, particularly on the issue of
prevention. It is better to prevent crises and conflicts
than it is to find solutions to them. In that respect, the
Security Council should do everything in its power to
improve the Organization's early-warning system.

In addition to their operational content, peacekeeping
operations must continue to strengthen their
comprehensive and multidisciplinary nature. We
commend the inclusion in these operations of new
components that prioritize women, child soldiers,
victims of sexual abuse and, as we stated earlier, the
protection of civilian populations. In that regard, I wish
to commend President Bachelet and the Secretary-
General for their strong leadership in promoting
the cause of women in these sensitive topics, which,
unfortunately, were marginalized in the international
security context until only recently.

Ensuring international peace and security is a huge
task that requires collaboration and greater support on
the part of the Security Council vis-a-vis international
cooperation organizations and the international
community. The mission would be to strengthen
the capacity to really undertake peacebuilding in
the affected countries in such a way as to prevent, if
possible, the resurgence ofa crisis. Countries emerging
from conflict should increasingly be able to count on
effective aid programmes to restore their political,
judicial, security and socioeconomic institutions.
If they do not have a clear vision and if they do not
appropriately address extreme poverty and deprivation,
it is certain that there will not be lasting peace. There
are cases of countries in which there were peacekeeping
operations that lasted many years and then came to an
end, but those countries had to return to dealing with
the problems. That means that the approaches followed
did not address the fundamental problems.

In the Dominican Republic we have tremendous
respect for the goodwill of the international
community, expressed through the Security Council, in
supporting our neighbour, Haiti, to overcome adverse
circumstances of every kind. Our people have worked
in solidarity to do all they can to help our neighbour
country, and in that regard it is worth noting the efforts
of the bilateral Joint Commission as a solid expression
of support for the tasks of recovery. We therefore wish
to acknowledge the efforts made by the countries in our
Latin American region and beyond that are a part of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti.

Mr. Barros Melet took the Chair.

We wish to make use of this important event to
exhort the international community represented in
this important international effort to devote greater
attention to fragile States and States emerging from
conflict in order to build the capacity of their national
institutions to efficiently address the problems of
development and security. The international agents as a
whole, with their financial support and capabilities, are
called to work together to address the needs of marginal
societies. In today's world, which operates in a security
environment is rapidly changing and is unpredictable,
we have to take actions and responses that are every
more convincing and consistent. If we do not, the
United Nations and international community will lose
a great opportunity for peace.

