Mr. Alkalaj (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I would
like to congratulate you, Madam President, on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of November and wish you and your delegation
great success. We also welcome Mr. Valentin Inzko,
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
took note of his report on the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (S/2019/843, enclosure) and his briefing.

We welcome the unanimous adoption by the Security
Council of resolution 2496 (2019), which extends the
mandate of the European Union-led Operation Althea,
which has been present in Bosnia and Herzegovina for
many years. It is important to emphasize that Bosnia
and Herzegovina, as a host country, has enjoyed
respectable and fruitful cooperation with Operation
Althea, in particular in the areas of capacity-building
and the training of its armed forces.

Bosnia and Herzegovina seeks to play an
indisputably constructive role in the United Nations
and other multilateral institutions, and we aspire to
membership of the European Union (EU) and bilateral
partnerships with their individual member States.
Having said that, I would like to inform the Council that
the Presidency agreed on a number of issues, including
the path of Bosnia and Herzegovina to EU accession
and the disposition of State property in Croatia and
other issues. Numerous challenges lie ahead on our
path towards integration in European and Euro-Atlantic
structures. However, our commitment and dedication
to facing and overcoming those challenges remain.

EU membership remains one ofmain strategic goals
ofBosnia and Herzegovina and is a subject offocus by all
political actors in the country. The authorities of Bosnia
and Herzegovina are fully committed to overcoming
challenges and implementing reforms required for
full-fledged integration into the European Union. We
have increased efforts in a number of areas relevant to
achieving that goal, including the implementation of the
reform agenda and socioeconomic reforms as a matter
of priority, as well as our continuing determination to
strengthen the rule of law and good governance.

As we heard today, the rule of law is extremely
important for Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as
for any other country, established by the principle of
equality before the law for every citizen in the country,
without exception. With regard to processing war crimes
in domestic courts, we would like to reiterate that the
effective processing of all war crimes, regardless
of the national or religious origin of the perpetrators
and victims, is essential for reconciliation and long-
term stability.

The fostering of friendly and constructive
cooperation among the countries of the region on issues
of mutual interest remains a top priority of Bosnia and
Herzegovina's foreign policy. Bosnia and Herzegovina
plays an active role in regional initiatives through the
South-East European Cooperation Process, the Western
Balkan Fund, the Central European Initiative, et cetera.
The summit of the Heads of State and Government of
the participating countries of the South-East European
Cooperation Process was held in Sarajevo on 8 and
9 July. The Cooperation Process is one of the leading
political formats for dialogue in the region. As a good
example of regional cooperation among three partner
countries, namely, Serbia, Turkey and Bosnia and
Herzegovina, I would also like to mention the Sarajevo-
Belgrade highway construction project.

During the reporting period, Bosnia and
Herzegovina continued to fulfil its international
obligations with regard to countering terrorism and
violent extremism. The framework action plan to
implement the strategy of Bosnia and Herzegovina for
preventing and combating terrorism for the period 2015
to 2020 is being implemented.

With regard to the economic situation, it is always
important to emphasize that Bosnia and Herzegovina's
economy, like those of other countries in the region,
has been increasingly dependent on global economic
performance. We must also emphasize that our focus
and top priority in economic reform programmes
remains the creation of a legal framework to improve
the business environment and job creation for young
people. Currently, the main concern is the significant
outflow of young, skillful and educated people, which
could have a very negative impact on future economic
development. Massive investments in infrastructure,
health care and education are needed to reverse
that trend.

Bosnia and Herzegovina has also started a very
important planning, monitoring and evaluation process
in the field of social and economic development that
is fully in line with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. In that regard, Bosnia and Herzegovina's
voluntary national review was presented at the
High-level Political Forum in July. Allow me also to
express our gratitude to the United Nations country
team in Bosnia and Herzegovina for its outstanding
contributions and tireless efforts in assisting our
institutional development agenda.

I would like to draw the attention of the Council
to the issue of illegal migrants. During the reporting
period, Bosnia and Herzegovina experienced a
significant increase in refugees and migrants on its
territory, most of whom crossed the border illegally. In
response, Bosnia and Herzegovina's authorities have
undertaken a set of comprehensive measures, including
in the humanitarian and security areas.

Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to contribute
actively to international peace and security by
deploying its military and police personnel to United
Nations peacekeeping missions. Currently, we have
approximately 45 personnel serving in United Nations
peacekeeping missions worldwide.

In his report, High Representative Inzko notes that,
in the face of significant obstacles to accomplishing his
mission, he has declined to fully invoke the executive
powers of his Office. We realize that such an approach
can broaden confidence in his judgment for the benefit
of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a democratic nation and
for peace, stability and security.

I would like to address a few words to Ms. Selma
Korjenie, following her deep and thorough analysis of
the situation and positive perspective on the future of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. To her, I would like to say that
yes, we can do it - together and with the help of our
friends from around the world.

In conclusion, we would like to express the
readiness of Bosnia and Herzegovina's authorities to
continue their work in securing a better and prosperous
future for its citizens, as well as our gratitude to our
international partners for supporting Bosnia and
Herzegovina on that path.

