Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): I would like at the outset to thank the
Prosecutor for her written report and also for the very
informative briefing that she has just delivered.

Belgium would recall its tireless support for the
International Criminal Court (ICC) as an independent
and impartial judicial institution and its unswerving
support for the work of Ms. Bensouda and her Office.
The court embodies the efforts of the international
community to develop the rule of law throughout
the world and thus participates in the maintenance
of international peace and security. I wish to take
advantage of the presence of the Prosecutor here in
the Council to reiterate my country's commitment to
preserve the integrity and independence of the Court
and its officials.

In the cases pending before the court following
the referral of the situation in Libya by the Council in
2011, three suspects remain at large. As underscored
by the Prosecutor in her report, the Court depends
entirely on the cooperation of States in carrying out its
arrest warrants. Once again, it must be recalled that all
States Members of the United Nations, whether they
are parties to the Rome Statute or not, are called on to
cooperate fully with the Court and the Prosecutor under
resolution 1970 (2011). This, of course, concerns first
and foremost Libya, which must cooperate with the
ICC, notably in the framework of the arrest and transfer
to the Court of Mr. Al-Tuhamy, Mr. Al-Qadhafi and
Mr. Al-Werfalli.
We welcome the positive cooperation between the
ICC and the authorities of the Government of National
Accord. Concerning Mr. Al-Werfalli, it is up to General
Haftar, the Commander of the Libyan National Army,
to facilitate his immediate transfer to the Court.

The Security Council also has an important
responsibility with respect to this situation, which it
itself referred to the Court. We invite the other members
of the Council to engage in a collective process of
reflection on the concrete measures that could be taken
to support the Court and its mandate. In this regard,
several of the proposals made during the Arria Formula
meeting held last July at the initiative of the Netherlands
to consider the relationship between the Council and
the ICC are particularly relevant.

The Council could thus consider allowing the
designation on sanctions lists of persons wanted by the
Court as soon as an arrest warrant is issued. It is also
important to encourage the exchange of information
between Sanctions Committees and the Court as well
as the communication of arrest warrants and mutual
assistance in such arrests.

My country would also like to recall that, in
accordance with article 115(b) of the Rome Statute,
there is a provision for the United Nations to cover the
expenses incurred due to referrals to the Court by the
Security Council. It would be illogical for the financial
burden of such investigations to be borne solely by the
States parties. We hope that the Council will be able to
reach an agreement on this issue.

Belgium strongly deplores the resumption of
fighting in and around Tripoli in recent weeks and
believes that it is now urgent for the Council to be able
to express its opinion on the situation in Libya. It must
be firmly recalled that all those who are guilty of grave
violations of international humanitarian law and, more
broadly, those who would jeopardize peace in Libya
will have to answer for their acts.

As the Prosecutor underscored in her statement of

16 April last, all leaders, both military and civilian, who
have control, authority or effective command over their
subordinates are susceptible to criminal prosecution
before national courts or the ICC for the crimes
the latter have committed. In this respect, Belgium
welcomes the fact that the Office of the Prosecutor is
currently gathering information on this issue and will
determine whether parties to the armed conflict have
committed crimes that fall under the jurisdiction of the
Court. Equally, we applaud the work that has been done
with a view to the potential prosecution of perpetrators
of crimes against migrants.

The fight against impunity for the most serious
crimes is a vital part of any lasting, peaceful solution to
the crisis in Libya. It is therefore more than ever the duty
of the Council and of all States Members of the United
Nations to support the Court in the implementation of
its mandate.

