Mr. Omaish (Jordan): First of all, I would like
to join all other speakers today in thanking you,
Mr. President, and your colleagues for the exceptional
manner with which you have handled the affairs of the
Security Council during what has been a very busy
month.

I will not review the substance of what has been on
the Council's agenda over the month of August. Rather,
I will focus on the Council's methods of work by
making some basic suggestions, which we have raised
in the past.

First, when the Council workload is very heavy,
as we have witnessed this month and today, we should
abbreviate informal consultations to have only the
briefer speak, followed by questions or comments that
do not exceed three minutes. No showcasing should be
allowed, so that we can free up time for thinking about
the problems presented outside the Chamber.

Secondly, in order to place more of the responsibility
on Council members themselves, briefings should be
followed in consultations by our questions addressed
only to the briefers, as is the norm. The Secretariat
should then leave the Consultations Room so that we
can have a discussion among ourselves on how to move
the agenda item forward, after which we can inform the
Secretariat accordingly.

Thirdly, we should commit ourselves to making
concise statements focused on reaching beyond the
surface features of a violent crisis and on trying to
understand its deeper complexities.

Fourthly, Secretariat briefings should include a
deep analysis into why a particular crisis was triggered
in the first place, and not just a description of the
unfolding of the events of the crisis at hand, so that
Council members can understand the very DNA of the
cr1s1s.

Fifthly, it is important, when the Council is
managing several hot crises simultaneously, to create
space for thought between our statements. We as
Council members need time to think and consult in the
proper non-United Nations sense of the term.

I thank you again, Mr. President, and wish the
delegation of the United States of America all the best
during the month of September.

