Mr. Ulibarri (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me first and foremost to congratulate the elected
members of the Security Council, who have joined the
Council this month, and to wish them every success.

My delegation welcomes the convening of this
debate. We welcome also the growing interest shown
by the Security Council in the promotion and
strengthening of the rule of law in the maintenance of
international peace and security. That initiative is
reflected in the broadest-ranging efforts of the
Organization, including in the convening of the high-
level meeting of the General Assembly that is to take
place in September, which my delegation
enthusiastically supports. We wish also to thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2011/634*) on the
implementation of transitional justice measures in
conflict and post-conflict societies.

Costa Rica aligns itself with the statement to be
made by the representative of Austria on behalf of the
Human Security Network and wishes to emphasize the
following elements.

The rule of law and legal certainty in every
country and in the international system are essential
elements for the sustainability of peace and security,
and for the protection and promotion of human rights,
as well as the promotion of development.

As stated in the ministerial declaration of the
Human Security Network of 23 September 2009, peace
and justice are interrelated and complementary.
Furthermore, the rule of law should not be viewed from
a merely procedural perspective as a matter of legal
norms. Rather, it should include the assurance that
justice is done from the most substantive point of view,
which, in the global arena, implies firm opposition to
impunity for the commission of serious Violations of
international humanitarian law and of human rights
norms.

We welcome the progress that has been made in
providing for the protection of persons, in particular
civilians, including women and children, when
addressing security-related issues. In its actions to
prevent and resolve conflicts and to help build and
maintain peace in specific situations on the ground, the
Council must sustain its efforts to make the rule of law
in the broader sense the linchpin of its resolutions and
mandates in a systematic and non-selective manner.

Furthermore, we encourage the Council to make
greater use of the information that is available within
the United Nations system regarding the human rights

situation in the various countries of the world and to
establish channels for more open communication with
the Office of the High Commissioner and with other
human rights mechanisms that are relevant to the issue
we are considering today.

As they play an important role in ensuring respect
for and promotion of the rule of law, both the Council
and the United Nations system as a whole must also
adopt a more comprehensive approach to transitional
justice mechanisms and to the establishment of specific
programmes aimed at building national capacities. That
must go hand in hand with the rejection of initiatives
that seek to grant amnesty to the perpetrators of crimes
against humanity. A further essential undertaking is the
adoption of an approach that addresses transnational
organized crime in the context of programmes dealing
with the rule of law, as is reflected in the report of the
Secretary-General.

The Council has reiterated its commitment to an
international order that is based on the rule of law and
on international law. For that reason, in its daily and
concrete actions it must support the work of the
international tribunals. The Council must not fail to
recognize and encourage the contributions made by the
International Criminal Court; its commitments must
include the referral of situations whenever necessary,
as well as the provision of clear and resolute support
for the Court's actions. That cooperation, on the part of
both the Council and the membership of the United
Nations, is particularly important in terms of the arrest
of suspects, an aspect that Costa Rica has repeatedly
underscored.

Furthermore, the Security Council must also
maintain its support for the International Court of
Justice, as the Court is one of the most significant
means used for the pacific settlement of disputes, in
particular when there is non-compliance with the
obligations stemming from the decisions adopted by
the Court, pursuant to Article 94 of the Charter.

Moreover, as a fundamental prerequisite for its
legitimacy, the actions of the tribunals, be they
international, regional or national, must also be subject
to law and free of any attempt at political
manipulation.

Like all the other organs of the multilateral
system, the Security Council must be subject to the
rule of law. As one of the earliest proponents within the
Council of respect for due process in the imposition of

sanctions, in accordance with the regime established
under resolution 1267 (1999), Costa Rica welcomes the
progress that has been achieved in that area, in
particular through the establishment of the Office of
the Ombudsperson towards the end of 2009. However,
further changes must still be made in order to meet still
higher standards.

Finally, we believe that, above and beyond
sanctions regimes, when seeking to address new
security threats such as terrorism or piracy, the
Security Council must be particularly cautious in
ensuring that its actions remain governed by the
specific nature of the situation at hand and are time-
bound and restricted by the provisions of Chapter VII
of the Charter. That will enable it to maintain its
legitimacy and better serve the cause of peace and
security.

