Mr. Lukwiya (Uganda): I thank the presidency of
the Council for organizing this important debate on
post-conflict peacebuilding. I also thank the Secretary-
11-21335
General, the Deputy Prime Minister of Timor-Leste,
and the Chairman of the Peacebuilding Commission for
their insightful statements this morning.

Uganda welcomes the increasing emphasis on the
need to ensure that post-conflict peacebuilding activities
are carried out in a more coordinated, coherent and
effective way. Post-conflict countries face a number of
challenges, including insecurity, weak or non-existent
State institutions, the resettlement of internally displaced
persons and refugees, reconstruction and economic
recovery, which are often compounded by lack of
resources. It is therefore essential that peacebuilding
efforts be underpinned by recognition of the need to
address the root causes of conflict and to build effective
national institutions for sustainable peace and
development.

In this regard, the primary responsibility for
re-establishing and building the institutions of
governance lies with national authorities, supported by
international partners, including regional organizations
and the United Nations. In Uganda's experience, the
building of national institutions requires identifying
key priorities based on a country's specific needs. This
should be followed by developing and agreeing on a
national strategy to address them, and by mobilizing
the requisite political, financial and technical support
and resources. Given the competing demands on scarce
resources, it is important to sequence implementation
beginning with the most urgent priorities. These
include guaranteeing security of life and property,
national reconciliation, adherence to the rule of law,
and promoting democratic governance. It is also
important to develop and implement a national
economic recovery programme.

In order to build effective national institutions in
post-conflict situations, these must enjoy popular
support and legitimacy to overcome the distrust and
suspicion that follow conflict. One way to achieve
public trust and legitimacy is by ensuring that
institutions are responsive to the needs of the
populations and that decision-making is consultative
and participatory. There is also a need to focus on
delivering tangible dividends, including the provision
of basic services and the improvement of the standard
of living of the population. In cases where gross
violations of human rights have been committed,
justice must be done so that those responsible are held
accountable.
3

The major challenge post-conflict countries face in
building national institutions is mainly the lack of
financial resources and technical expertise in various
fields. We welcome the increasing engagement of the
United Nations, through the Peacebuilding Commission,
regional and international partners, and international
financial institutions in support of national capacity
development and improving mobilization of resources
for peacebuilding. The best and most sustainable
approach is to build on existing national human
resources and capacities. Where technical expertise and
assistance are provided, emphasis should also be placed
on building national capacities to undertake those
responsibilities.

Finally, we look forward to the imminent
completion of the Senior Advisory Group's review of
international civilian capacities and its recommendations
for improving the international response by
strengthening the availability and appropriateness of
civilian capacities for post-conflict peacebuilding. Of
particular interest will be proposals on how best to
mobilize and organize specific civilian capacities from
the global South and among women, and on how to
ensure that their deployment enhances the building of
national capacities. Uganda reiterates the importance of
women's full participation in post-conflict peacebuilding
and involvement in institution-building.

