Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, my delegation would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting.
We are also grateful to Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
and Ambassador Jose' Singer Weisinger, in his capacity
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2374 (2017) concerning Mali, for their
informative briefings regarding the increasing tensions
at the political level and the deterioration of the security
situation in our brother country of Mali and in the
Sahel region.

On behalf of the Government of the Republic
of Equatorial Guinea, I want to express our firm
condemnation of the terrorist attacks of 30 September
and 1 October on the Malian armed forces and on one
of the battalions of the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) in the areas of Boulikessi
and Mondoro. We offer our sincere condolences to the
families of the fallen soldiers and wish the wounded a
speedy recovery.

The Government of the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea, under the leadership of President Obiang
Nguema Mbasogo, reiterates its full solidarity with
the Government of Mali and the countries contributing
troops to the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. We want to
emphasize that such attacks should not in any way
hinder the valiant efforts of national and international
parties to achieve peace and security. On the contrary,
they should serve as a reminder of the urgent need
for strong and effective support on the part of the
international community for the efforts of the countries
of the region to combat terrorism.

Mali has been dealing with a multidimensional
crisis since 2012. Neither the signing ofthe 2015 Algiers
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali and
the mobilization of enormous financial resources, nor
the deployment of Operation Barkhane, MINUSMA
and even the G-5 Sahel Joint Force has succeeded in
curbing the jihadist threat. In the face of these gloomy
prospects, international public opinion is clear and
unanimous that the humanitarian and security situation
is deteriorating to a worrying degree, while the civilian
population is the most affected by the conflict and
marginalized young people are badly exploited by
terrorist groups preying on their vulnerability.

In the light of the situation, we should combine
synergies and prioritize mechanisms and initiatives that
can potentially weaken the terrorists and create new hope
for restoring peace. In that regard, the implementation of
the inclusive national dialogue launched in September
constitutes an ideal framework for addressing the most
pressing matters, as the Secretary-General underscores
in paragraph 99 of his report (S/2019/782) - that is,
fostering consensus among national actors with regard
to the essential reforms that will lay the groundwork for
a more peaceful and stable Mali.

My Government takes note of the postponement of
the thirty-eighth session of the Agreement Monitoring
Committee, which was supposed to take place on
17 September in Kidal. We urge the Malian parties
not to withdraw from the dialogue. In the current
environment, it is crucial to ensure that the negotiations
continue in order to create the necessary conditions
for the rapid implementation of the peace agreement,
particularly in View of the upcoming internationally
established deadlines. Those joint efforts should result
in the speedy provision of basic social services and
State services, including those related to the return of
the Malian Defence and Security Forces to the northern
area of the country.

Equatorial Guinea reiterates its unwavering support
for the Malian Government on its path to stability and
lasting peace and greatly appreciates the leadership and
work of MINUSMA in often very difficult conditions.
We welcome the 25 July communique of the African
Union Peace and Security Council highlighting the
urgent need for the Malian parties to redouble their
efforts to further accelerate the implementation of the
Algiers agreement, which is the most viable framework
for resolving the crisis in northern and central Mali,
as well as for ramping up the continuing support for
G5-Sahel operations and strengthening its presence in
the centre of the country, in accordance with resolution
2480 (2019).

In line with the declaration issued at the
extraordinary session of the Heads of State and
Government of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) on 14 September in
Ouagadougou, we reaffirm the principle of respect for
the inviolability and territorial integrity of States in
accordance with the founding principles of the African
Union, and commend the adoption by the leaders of
ECOWAS of a $1 billion plan of action over the next
five years aimed at stepping up the fight against
terrorism and cross-border organized crime, including
trafficking in arms, tobacco and drugs.

In conclusion, I want to point out that the
implementation of everything that we just mentioned
will not bring back the thousands of people who lost
their lives. However, it is likely to create conditions
conducive to optimism and a new hope for realizing
peaceful co-existence, accepting intercommunal
co-existence, and fully restoring the authority of
the States' concerned so that they can exercise
their constitutional prerogative and legitimacy by
protecting their people and property, as united and
indivisible States.

