The President: I should now like to make a
statement in my capacity as representative of the
United Kingdom.

I would like to join others in thanking
Ambassadors Verbeke, Jurica and Urbina for their
briefings to the Council this morning. I would like to
thank not only them, but also their staffs and the expert
groups of each Committee, for their time and
commitment. Ambassador Verbeke's leadership of the
1267 Committee will be much missed.

On the work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
the United Kingdom welcomes the revised
organizational plan for the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) and the
adoption of Security Council resolution 1805 (2008)
extending the Directorate's mandate. We welcome the
renewed emphasis on tailored dialogue between States
and the Counter-Terrorism Committee and, in
particular, the need for increased focus on the delivery
of technical assistance as key to full implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001).

We look forward to early progress on the global
survey of the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001)
that is under discussion in the Counter-Terrorism
Committee. This will be the first substantive report
from the Committee on the strengths and weaknesses
in our collective efforts to tackle terrorism, and on
what more needs to be done. We look forward to
considering the report's recommendations here in the
Security Council.

On the 1267 Committee, the United Kingdom
believes that we need to improve the quality of the
consolidated list of the Al-Qaida and Taliban Sanctions
Committee. The list must reflect the current threat. Its
legitimacy depends on the quality and extent of the
information within it. We must continue to update the
list at every opportunity and ensure our procedures for
listing and de-listing are efficient and effective. At
present, they are not. Our ability to remove individuals
that no longer meet the criteria is as important as
listing additional names that do. Additionally, I would
like to reinforce the importance of cooperation between
the 1267 Committee, the Monitoring Team, Member
States and regional and international organizations. We
hope that this cooperation continues to grow.

The United Kingdom welcomes the extension of
the mandate of the 1540 Committee, in particular the
clear focus on capacity-building and sharing of know-
how. The unanimous adoption of resolution 1810
(2008) sends a strong signal of the international
community's determination to ensure that weapons of
mass destruction do not fall into the hands of criminals,
terrorists and would-be proliferators. We look forward
to early agreement on the Committee's report on
compliance with resolution 1540 (2004).

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Slovenia, to whom I give the floor.

