At the outset, I wish to commend the Russian Federation for its presidency of the Security Council this month and its Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs, Sergey Vasilievich Vershinin, for chairing this important meeting. We thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his comprehensive briefing and his constant work on the issue. For the second consecutive time, Member States' participation in this open meeting is limited to written statements owing to measures taken to prevent the spread of the novel coronavirus. That situation calls to mind the anxiety arising from the global health crisis that has spread all over the world, including the Middle East region, where its effects have been exacerbated by the ongoing conflicts and crises, which have caused difficult humanitarian situations and economic challenges. The threat, which affects everyone, should be an additional incentive to bring an end to the conflict and tension in the region. This quarterly meeting provides an opportunity for Member States to emphasize constantly, with one voice, the central importance of the Palestinian issue, which has wide-ranging implications for security and stability, not to mention being a question of inalienable rights. The international community has a responsibility to uphold those rights and achieve a just, comprehensive and lasting settlement. We are convinced that a just, lasting and comprehensive peace and a settlement to all aspects of the Palestinian question must be achieved in accordance with international law and the Charter of the United Nations. There can be no substitute for a peaceful, consensus-based settlement reached through earnest negotiations between the Palestinian and Israeli sides on the basis of the agreed terms of reference, the internationally recognized resolutions, the principle of land for peace and the Arab Peace Initiative, leading to a two-State solution and the establishment of an independent, viable State of Palestine on the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, living side by side with Israel in security and peace. That outcome means an end to the occupation of Arab territories, to settlement activities and to any endeavour to illegally annex those territories. It means upholding the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people and finding a just solution to the issue of refugees. It means bringing an end to measures that affect the character, legal status and demographic composition of Jerusalem, and bringing an end to the stranglehold on Gaza and to all other practices of the occupying Power that contravene international law and the resolutions of the United Nations. Any arrangements that are not based on those terms of reference will not achieve the peace to which we aspire. Qatar has a policy of working to mitigate humanitarian crises and economic hardship, and it is committed to creating conditions conducive to peace. Accordingly, in coordination with international partners, it has continued to provide humanitarian and development support to its Palestinian brethren, including in the Gaza Strip. His Highness Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad AlI-Thani, Emir, of the State of Qatar, has provided financial assistance amounting to $150,000,000 to help prevent the spread of the novel coronavirus and tackle its effects in the Gaza Strip. Those efforts complement humanitarian and development support for Palestinians in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. In addition, Qatar has increased its contributions to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. Unfortunately, the Palestinian question is not the only issue in our region that needs to be solved. There are other issues with repercussions for regional and international peace and security and for the peoples of the region. and that urgently require a solution. The crisis in Syria has caused considerable suffering to the Syrian people, suffering that worsens with every passing day in which the crisis is not brought to an end. The Constitutional Committee, if a true commitment is made to ensuring its success, is one step in the right direction. Through a meaningful political process under the aegis of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, it can lead to a solution conducive to a political transition in accordance with the Geneva communique, and to the implementation of resolution 2254 (2015) in all its aspects, with a view to meeting the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people and protecting the unity, sovereignty and independence of Syria. As has been shown, any military solution will only lead to more atrocities and more humanitarian disasters. The country has seen enough war crimes and crimes against humanity. Justice must be done and those responsible, whatever side they belong to, must be held accountable. The people of Yemen also aspires to and deserves peace, security and stability; an end to the violence and crisis that have lasted for several years; and the protection of the unity and territorial integrity of Yemen. The Yemeni people is still beset with hardship and suffering. It is essential to provide basic necessities and facilitate access to humanitarian assistance for all Yemenis. Efforts must be made to end the crisis through negotiation among Yemenis, in accordance with the outcomes of the national dialogue and the Initiative of the Gulf Cooperation Council, and to comply with the relevant resolutions of the Security Council, particularly resolution 2216 (2015). We therefore support the efforts of the Special Envoy of the Secretary- General For Yemen to press for a solution through dialogue. Turning to the crisis in Libya, we welcome the ceasefire agreement and the resumption of the political process in accordance with the Libyan Political Agreement and its outcomes with a view to reaching a comprehensive political settlement that would preserve the unity, sovereignty and independence of Libya and put an end to the crisis and the resulting violations, suffering and difficult economic circumstances. A military campaign was launched in order to undermine the legitimate Government established under the Libyan Political Agreement, which is recognized by the international community; but the result was merely to complicate the situation and commit war crimes and grave violations of international humanitarian law. What the Libyan people needs now is respect for its determination to find a peaceful solution, end the violence and reach national consensus. Faced with all those crises, our region urgently needs de-escalation and solutions through dialogue consistent with the principles for the peaceful settlement of disputes. Qatar has taken that approach as a matter of principle in confronting the Gulf crisis that was unjustifiably imposed on it three years ago with the introduction of an unfair blockade and illegal unilateral measures that have complicated the situation in the region and affected stability and security. Since the outset of the crisis, His Highness Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad AI- Thani, Emir of the State of Qatar, has called for a solution through dialogue based on neighbourly relations, respect for the sovereignty, independence and unity of States, and non-interference in the internal affairs of States. He has encouraged mediation brokered by friendly neighbouring States, in particular by the late Sheikh Sabah Al- Ahmad Al-Sabah, Amir of the State of Kuwait. Qatar has stood by its principles, which are grounded in respect for international law, and has successfully petitioned the international legal system, first and foremost the International Court of Justice, to confront those measures, which are a violation of the Charter of the United Nations, international law, international agreements and covenants, and human rights. Lastly, Qatar will remain committed to its principled stance in favour of peace and stability in the region, de-escalation and the peaceful resolution of conflicts for the benefit of the peoples and States of the region.
