Mr. Baja (Philippines): We congratulate you, Sir,
on your presidency and thank our four honoured guests
for enriching our debate. As the thirteenth Council
member to speak on this item, almost all that should be
said has already been said. Allow me, therefore, to
recall the parable of the greatest man.

A very religious and wealthy businessman was at
a business conference. To add some excitement, he
proposed a contest among a group of friends composed
of an Italian, an American, an Englishman and a
Chinese man. He announced: Friends, I will pay your
hotel bills for a week and award a construction contract
for the reconstruction of Gloritania to anyone who can
identify the greatest man who ever lived. The Italian
said it must be Christopher Columbus because he
discovered the United States of America. The
American said it must be George Washington because
he led the United States to become one of the most
powerful countries in the world. The Englishman said
it must be Winston Churchill because he led us to do
our best during our worst time and he is known for his
wit and eloquence.

All of this was rejected by the businessman. Then
came the Chinese man who said the greatest man who
ever lived was Jesus Christ. Correct, said the
businessman. I will arrange to pay your bill. You won
the contract. As the Chinese shook hands with the
businessman, the latter said, congratulations for
winning by naming the greatest man on earth.
However, I am even more impressed, considering that
you are not a Christian. Well, said the Chinese man, I
still think honestly that Mao Tse Tung was the greatest
man, but, you see, business is business.

This is not the theme of our intervention. It is to
say, in a brief form, that for better or for worse,
business plays a big role in international life. The
private sector is a global partner in conflict prevention
and post-conflict reconstruction. In times of peace,
business is an engine of economic growth and in times
of post-conflict reconstruction, business becomes an
instrument for sustainable peace and development.

Multinational corporations and even small and
medium enterprises have a role in creating wealth and
in promoting socio-economic development. Directly or
indirectly therefore, they have a role in contributing to
the prevention and resolution of conflict.

The role of business, however, can be positive or
negative, or a combination of both, depending on the
situation. Economic growth helps improve situations of
existing or potential conflict, but it offers a double-
edged effect because if the benefits of economic
growth are unevenly distributed, they can increase
rather than decrease the potential or existence of
conflict. Moreover, in post-conflict situations, there is a
tendency for violent conflict to arise or resurface if
economic development is not accompanied by the
strengthening of social and civil institutions.

Already, some companies are becoming aware of
their negative and positive impacts on society. Other
companies, however, including those involved in the
arms industry or in the illegal drug trade, are being
identified as direct causes of violent conflict. The
question is, how will the Security Council address that
concern?

While business plays a crucial role in conflict
prevention and post-conflict situations, the more
crucial question is how to harness that role in order to
safeguard global peace and security. The Philippines
believes that appropriate support systems should be
established.

First, an enabling environment should be created
so that the private sector can conduct its business.
Business establishments cannot do this alone. The
enabling framework for preventing and resolving
violent conflict must first be in the hands of the
Governments themselves at the national and
international levels.

Secondly, there is a need to forge partnerships
between the public and private sectors. Partnerships are
a valuable mechanism for addressing policy issues.

Thirdly, economic development should be
accompanied by the strengthening of the social, capital
and civil institutions that are essential in post-conflict
situations. They are necessary in order to prevent the
re-emergence of violent conflict.

Businesses often breathe and think with their
pockets. But they can also take a proactive stance
during the post-conflict period. They can participate in
truth and reconciliation commissions, support weapons
hand-ins, amnesties and demobilization programmes.
They can also provide funding and managerial support
to build the capacity of government services, including
judicial systems and police forces.

The Prince of Wales Business Leaders Forum in
1998 has identified major areas that provide useful
frameworks for preventing and resolving conflicts. As
the Council on Economic Priorities has aptly put it,

"The challenge of conflict prevention and
resolution is about values-based relationships at
every level of the company and at every level of
the society. The question of whether a company
contributes to conflict or helps to prevent it,
depends on the values, policies, and operating
guidelines of the company and the way its
employees and business partners accept, interpret,
and implement these."

The same is true for the international community.
The prevention of conflict and the maintenance of
peace depend upon the values, rules and norms of the
international community, and the way countries accept,
interpret, and implement those norms.

