Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Chairman of the Committee for his
detailed and extremely interesting briefing. I would
like to make two sets of remarks.

First of all, allow me to pay tribute to the
remarkable way in which Ambassador Heraldo Mufioz
and his assistants have steered the work of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaeda and the Taliban and
associated individuals and entities during the period
that has elapsed. I do not want to get into an exhaustive
account, but I would still like to highlight at least three
results that are very important, in our opinion, with
regard to the action led by Ambassador Mufioz. As
head of the 1267 Committee, Ambassador Mufioz has
been resolute in seeking to strengthen the Committee's
operation, and thereby to increase the effectiveness of
sanctions. As we were able to observe listening to him
just now, he was very skilfully able to emphasize the
continuation of the Al-Qaeda threat and identify very
rigorously its new nature, that is to say, the more
diffuse character that Al-Qaeda has right now and
therefore the new challenge that the Al-Qaeda network
raises.

Secondly, Ambassador Mufioz has worked
remarkably to improve cooperation with Member
States. There has been a stepping-up of dialogue and
information in New York. The visits that Ambassador
Mufioz mentioned have been very productive, and we
believe that this cooperation, which is also a search for
unity, should be maintained and further developed, if
possible.

And thirdly, we have observed that Ambassador
Mufioz was able to take the necessary steps to
strengthen the commitment of all the Member States in
implementing sanctions. This is a very important
objective that should be maintained. We have to
constantly recall that the obligation to cooperate is a
crucial condition if we want our collective action to be
effective.

With Ambassador Mufioz, I would express the
same regret that the text of the report of the Monitoring
Team is only available in one language. Besides
defending multilingualism, I find that this reflects a
rather odd lack of sensitivity to the multicultural nature
of the threat and the response that should be provided
to it. I would quite willingly have read this text in
Spanish but will wait impatiently to read it in my
native language.

For my second set of remarks, I would like to
take the opportunity to reassert that France will
continue to act in order to strengthen the effectiveness
of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al-
Qaeda and the Taliban and associated individuals and
entities, and also to strengthen the effectiveness of
sanctions that we have imposed on the Al-Qaeda
network.

We would like to reiterate the observations that
have been made. I would say, firstly, that the current
sanctions are useful and, at the same time, we are
aware of their limits. We should therefore continue, all
of us, to think about how to improve their
implementation. And as Ambassador Motoc has said
before me, I believe that progress can be achieved in
many areas: in the freezing of assets; in the concrete
implementation of the travel ban; in providing
assistance to certain countries, as Ambassador Munoz
mentioned; and also, as Ambassador Motoc also said,
in the important problem of the effectiveness of the
review procedures for individuals who feel that they
were wrongly put on the Consolidated List of
Individuals and Entities Belonging to or Associated
with the Taliban and Al-Qaida Organisation as
Established and Maintained by the 1267 Committee.
Here again, Ambassador Mufioz spoke about the
quality of the list: of course, this is an area where we
have to improve our performance.

With respect to strengthening the effectiveness of
the Sanctions Committee, our line of action is
obviously continuing and enhancing the Committee's
relations with all the committees that deal with
terrorism or with non-proliferation. Identical aspects of
the struggle against terrorist acts - for example,
monitoring informal financial transactions - should
not be dealt with separately, without a link between
them. There is a great deal of room for synergy and
information exchange among the various committees
concerned.

I believe that that last comment calls more
generally for a collective discussion on the question of
fighting terrorism. We were pleased to note that the
report of the High-level Panel mentioned the need to
further mobilize United Nations resources and to
define a global strategy. We also welcome the
Secretary-General's intention to make proposals in this
area shortly; of course, we support that intention.

Without prejudging whatever direction we may
take today, we believe it is important, if we want to be
effective in fighting terrorism, to fight extremism and
intolerance in all their forms. It is also crucial to
reconcile the struggle against terrorism with strict
respect for the rule of law.

I would like to conclude by repeating the
philosophy mentioned by Ambassador Mufioz. It is
clear today that, when it comes to an anti-terrorism
strategy, we must have two concerns. First, we have to
be more effective, and secondly, we have to make sure
that the legitimacy of this action would be increasingly
recognized and shared. I believe that Ambassador
Mufioz's manner of work was inspired by those two
concerns for effectiveness and balance. In the vast area
that will open up before us next year in order to further
enhance our comprehensive strategy against terrorism,
I believe that his experience and the great intellect he
applies to everything he deals with will play an
important role in helping the United Nations move
forward.

