Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to begin by thanking Mr. Angelo for
introducing the report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad (MINURCAT) (S/2009/359).

Costa Rica welcomes the preparation of the
strategic work plan for the Mission, which will be a
valuable tool for measuring its progress. We believe
that the inclusion of benchmarks is valuable, as is the
description of activities planned to achieve them. In
particular, we support the decision to include a new
benchmark on improved peace and security in the
subregion in general. As we have stated previously, the
voluntary, safe, dignified and sustainable return of
refugees and internally displaced persons in eastern
Chad - a basic objective of MINURCAT'S
deployment - can be achieved only if the root causes
of conflict are addressed within each of the countries
and in the subregion as a whole. This new peace and
security benchmark responds to that need and is a
significant measure that will help us better understand
that MINURCAT's objectives depend on a solution to
the internal conflict in Chad and on improved relations
between that country and the Sudan.

Costa Rica agrees with the Secretary-General
that, if the MINURCAT benchmarks are to be met, in
addition to appropriate performance, there is a need for
other concrete actions by the Government of Chad, the
armed opposition groups, regional actors and the
international community. The Government of Chad has
the responsibility to redouble its efforts to implement
the Sirte Agreement and to promote a political process
that is comprehensive and inclusive of all parties. As
the Secretary-General noted in paragraph 62 of his
previous report on MINURCAT (S/2009/ 199), for any
reconciliation process to be viable, it is important that
all opposition, political and armed, be associated and
included.

In that connection, we also call on all parties to
the internal conflict in Chad to commit themselves to
the process of dialogue and national reconciliation
within the framework of the Sirte Agreement and the
13 August 2007 agreement. We recognize the progress
made in the past few months in implementing the
13 August agreement and in preparing for elections.

We also welcome the treaty signed between three
rebel groups and the Government of Chad a few days
ago in Tripoli, whereby that coalition of armed groups
renounced armed struggle and committed themselves to
dialogue, setting an example to be imitated by other
armed groups.

We urge the Government of Chad to consider
every possibility for reconciliation, including accepting
the good offices of the Secretary-General to facilitate
dialogue. We join in the appeal issued by the Secretary-
General to regional actors and members of the Council
with influence over the parties, urging them to commit
themselves to a peaceful settlement of their
differences.

On the regional level, we once again echo the call
addressed to the Governments of Chad and the Sudan
to refrain from their usual political and military
provocations. It is high time for them to cease
undermining the work of the international community,
to end their support for rebel groups and to devote their
energies to confidence-building and the normalization
of their relations. We hope that the Dakar Contact
Group will meet soon, and we support the efforts of the
Government of Qatar to foster better relationships
between the two countries. However, it is important to
stress that the ultimate responsibility lies with the
Governments of those two countries, which are called
upon to show the political will necessary to fulfil their
commitments and agreements.

My country is very concerned about the
humanitarian and human rights situation in Chad,
including the prevalence of sexual violence,
particularly that involving members of the Chadian
armed forces. We are also troubled by the recruitment
of children. We support the measures and initiatives
taken by MINURCAT and other national and
international partners to address the issue of the
recruitment and use of children so as to improve the
judicial system and raise awareness of resolutions 1325
(2000) and 1820 (2008).

We vigorously condemn the attacks on
humanitarian personnel, and we believe that impunity
for those committing these crimes must end.

We are grateful for the inclusion in the report of
specific cases regarding the promotion of dialogue and
reconciliation among local communities, which is a
key part of the mandate. We encourage the Mission to
continue these efforts and to suggest new ways of
supporting and further bolstering the capacity of
MINURCAT in this respect.

We are pleased that the deployment of the
Detachement integre de securite (DIS) has been
completed, and we hope that the process of training
and qualifying DIS agents will be reinforced by
MINURCAT. We also support the establishment of the
Office of Protection and Escorts to improve
coordination between the humanitarian community,
MINURCAT and the security forces.

Finally, we wish to express our concern regarding
the deterioration of the security situation in the Central
African Republic, particularly the increase in conflicts
among ethnic groups. We support the actions of
MINURCAT in its area of operations with a view to
improving the security environment, and we hope that
coordination with the United Nations Peacebuilding
Support Office in the Central African Republic will be
extended so as to deal with the resurgence of violence
in north-eastern Central African Republic.

