We thank the Assistant Secretary-General as well as the briefers for their contributions on this matter. South Africa's strong commitment to a collective, multilateral response to the existential challenge of climate change remains unwavering, and we are redoubling our efforts at the continental and national levels to address the crisis, even during the current coronavirus disease pandemic. South Africa recognizes that extreme weather events, drought, water scarcity, food insecurity and desertification, which are thought to be exacerbated by climate change, have the potential to increase the risk of violent conflict, either within sovereign States or across State boundaries. In Africa, there is some evidence to suggest that this may be the case in parts of the Sahel and the Lake Chad basin, as well as the Horn of Africa. In these specific instances, climate change is a threat or risk multiplier that escalates existing tensions and conflict by placing strain on already scarce resources. Notwithstanding these instances, there is currently little scientific evidence to support the more generalized conclusions of a direct causality between climate change and threats to international peace and security. South Africa therefore remains wary of introducing climate change into the Security Council as a thematic issue, or adopting generic decisions in this forum. Instead, where climate change is thought to be a clear contributing factor to a threat to international peace and security, it is appropriate for the Security Council to comment on this issue, within the specific context of the countries that may be affected. Even in those circumstances, the contribution that the Security Council can make is modest and unclear. We therefore welcome this opportunity to hear ideas from Council members as to what that contribution could be. It is important to emphasize that climate change is a sustainable development issue that needs to be addressed through the full implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, with assistance to Member States from multilateral bodies dedicated to effectively supporting all three pillars of sustainable development - economic, social and environmental. The key to addressing climate change is to secure international collaboration to take the necessary mitigation and adaptation measures and to ensure that all developing countries that require means of implementation support or assistance in responding to the loss and damage caused by climate change receive such support. Insofar as there are security implications to climate change, these are likewise best addressed through massively scaled-up, appropriate and accessible climate- adaptation and mitigation-related support to the affected countries. The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) holds the primary mandate and capabilities to galvanize that type of action by the international community, particularly since the UNFCCC enjoys universal membership, operates by consensus and adheres to its principles, including equity and common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities. To introduce climate change as a thematic issue on the agenda of the Security Council would, in our view, risk diffusing the importance of the UNFCCC and detract attention and resources from its essential work. We also think that there are reasonable questions about when and on what scientific basis the Security Council would invoke climate change as a contributing factor to a specific conflict situation and where precisely the Security Council draws the line with respect to incorporating environmental issues into its agenda. Certainly, climate change is but one of several serious environmental challenges with potential peace and security implications, and we need to guard against mandate creep by the Council, or the Council outpacing its own resources and capacities. We do not wish to downplay specific climate-related security risks, which the Security Council has progressively acknowledged in various outcomes over the years and which have received enhanced analytical capacity in the United Nations system, most notably in the Climate Security Mechanism of the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, the United Nations Development Programme and the United Nations Environment Programme. Rather, our message is that the international community needs to channel its resources effectively through the bodies in the United Nations system that are most fit for a particular purpose. We nevertheless welcome the opportunity of this meeting to explore proposals to enhance the capacity of the Security Council to better respond, as appropriate, to climate-related security risks. In conclusion, we would urge, as always, that these risks be considered in the context of close partnerships with regional organizations, including the African Union, and that we seek creative, cost-effective means of utilizing existing resources and avoid generating new mechanisms that could entail significant costs and additional burdens for already strained operations.
