Mr. ilkin (Turkey): At the outset, allow me to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council and to express our
appreciation for the convening of this important open
debate on an issue that greatly affects us all.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report, as well as Mr. Abe for his excellent
introduction of it. The report indicates that important
progress has been made in various fields of concern,
though there is still much to do.

Turkey has already aligned itself with the
statement made by the representative of Luxembourg
on behalf of the European Union. I will therefore
briefly expound on a certain aspect of the issue of
small arms.

Today, we all recognize that the excessive
accumulation and uncontrolled spread of small arms
and light weapons pose a significant threat to
international peace and security, as well as to the social
development of many countries. The issue is not
merely about arms control and disarmament. It has
many aspects, including humanitarian issues, organized
crime and terrorism. The threat weighs no less than
that of weapons of mass destruction and requires
concerted and resolute action by all United Nations
Members.
We took a significant step forward with the
adoption in 2001 of the United Nations Programme of
Action, which still stands as the only globally
recognized framework. Yet, there is no international
legal instrument for dealing with the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons.

In that context, I would like to underscore the
importance of the work of the Open-ended Working
Group, which is currently negotiating an international
instrument on the marking and tracing of small arms
and light weapons. Turkey hopes that the instrument to
be agreed will contain all of the elements needed to
guarantee its effectiveness. That can be achieved if our
efforts lead to an instrument which has a legally
binding and comprehensive nature covering all kinds
of such weapons, including their ammunition. We
therefore call upon all United Nations Members to take
firm and resolute action to curb that global scourge.

The illicit proliferation of small arms requires the
development of long-term strategies. In that respect,
we also acknowledge the role of the Security Council
in making small arms a focus of global attention and
action. Turkey will continue to support all efforts and
to advocate enhanced international cooperation to
combat and eradicate the illicit trade in small and light
weapons in the framework of the United Nations and in
other forums.

