Mr. Hamidi (Malaysia): I thank you, Sir, for
convening today's meeting and presiding over the
Council today. Malaysia believes that this meeting is
especially timely and important in the light of the most
recent development in Syria.

I take this opportunity to place on record my
delegation's appreciation for New Zealand's strong
leadership, alongside Egypt and Spain, particularly
on the Council's efforts to address the humanitarian
dimension of the Syrian conflict.

My delegation wishes to underscore its deepest
appreciation and respect for the unflagging efforts of
the United Nations in spearheading the international
response to the Syrian crisis. In this connection, I
thank both the Secretary-General and his Special
Envoy, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, for their presence and
participation today.

Malaysia is horrified and outraged by the attack on
the United Nations-backed humanitarian convoys near
Aleppo on Monday night. We strongly condemn the
killing of unarmed civilians and humanitarian workers
in that incident as yet another flagrant violation of
international law, which reflects the absolute disrespect,
disregard and contempt that the parties to the conflict
have for the values of humankind.

Malaysia stands in solidarity with other friends
of Syria in helping to alleviate the situation of its
citizens amid this grim reality. In this regard, we have
taken certain steps, including making modest, direct
financial and in-kind contributions to Syrians in need,
especially those in the border areas. We have also
committed to taking several thousand Syrians fleeing
the violence in their homeland, and I am pleased to
share with the Council the fact that this initiative has
been implemented.

The bloody and protracted conflict in Syria
continues to sorely test the Council's ability to
unite around a common approach for a credible and
sustainable political solution to the crisis. Since 2011,
the conflict has metastasized, spawning a humanitarian
crisis of immense proportions that we are all struggling
to contain, as well as provided space and an enabling
environment for the cancerous growth of terrorism,
most notably the rise of Da'esh, whose heinous acts
and barbaric atrocities have reverberated far across
the globe.

Against that background, the Council must remain
resolute and continue to strive for unity and coherence
in both its purpose and action in order to effectively
discharge its Charter-mandated responsibility of
maintaining international peace and security. In noting
the various formats pursued in the process of seeking
to resolve the Syrian conflict, I wish to underscore that
the Council can never be sidelined and has a central
role to play.

At this critical stage, despite some highly publicized
setbacksin recentdays,the Russia-United States package
of agreements reached on 9 September represents the
latest concrete effort towards, first, halting the violence
and subsequently laying the groundwork for a credible
and inclusive political process on the future of Syria.

We have also listened very carefully to the views of
the Secretary-General and Special Envoy De Mistura
on a possible power-sharing agreement between the
parties to the conflict. We understand that the primary
aim of these proposals is to end the hostilities, an aim
that we strongly support.

As a current member of the Council, Malaysia's
support for the implementation of its decisions on Syria
is unwavering, especially those related to the cessation
of violence and on the humanitarian situation.

Particular attention must be given to the protection
of children as the most vulnerable group in any violent
conflict. We were shocked to the core by the bombing
of a maternity hospital in Idlib, which sent babies
crashing to the floor in their incubators. We winced
at images of children gasping for their last breath
after being attacked with chemical weapons; and we
were heartbroken by the sight of 5-year-old Omran
Daqneesh, covered in dust and blood, sitting quietly,
alone and in shock, waiting in an ambulance after he
was pulled from the rubble of his family home; many
others, sadly, did not make it out alive.

Despite the countless horrific incidents of children
being bombed, gassed and starved, the parties to the
conflict in Syria seem to have wilfully jettisoned all
reason and humanity, unable to say "enough is enough"
so as to prevent more casualties, especially of children.
We strongly demand that the conflicting parties respect
international humanitarian law, particularly in providing
unfettered humanitarian access and in protecting
civilians and civilian objects, including children, relief
or rescue personnel, schools and hospitals.

While the 2012 Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex) remains relevant, Malaysia is of the View that
moving the political process forward should be guided
by the provisions of resolution 2254 (2015), taken in
parallel with the implementation of the 9 September
Russia-United States arrangement. We call on all
interested partners and stakeholders to support the way
forward as outlined by Special Envoy De Mistura.

Finally, I wish to underscore that Malaysia remains
committed to seeking accountability for the various
violations and abuses committed in the course of the
conflict in Syria. We stand ready to cooperate with
all interested partners, and we will support initiatives
towards this end.

I wish to also convey Malaysia's utmost appreciation
and respect to the many United Nations system and other
humanitarian actors and agencies, toiling untiringly
in the field and bringing some measure of hope and
dignity to a war-ravaged people.

We can never hope to repay such a debt; however,
it behoves all of us to redouble our efforts to achieve
a durable political solution, so that the guns will fall
silent and that peace, reconciliation and rebuilding of
the Syrian nation can soon commence.

