Mr. Baja (Philippines): We too thank
Ambassador Heraldo Mufioz for his comprehensive
briefing on the recent initiatives of the 1267
Committee pursuant to its strengthened mandate under
resolution 1526 (2004). We also congratulate him on
his successful leadership of the Committee, noting
particularly his dialogue with Member States in
fulfilling his mandate. I hope the Chairman will visit
our region in the near future.

Today's meeting is particularly important as the
Committee further solicits the cooperation of other
Member States to submit their national reports on their
implementation and understanding of the sanctions
regime against individuals and entities linked to Al
Qaeda and the Taliban.

The strengthened mandate under resolution 1526
(2004) has accorded new impetus to the work of the
Committee and, consequently, to global efforts to
counter terrorism. More submissions of national
reports were encouraged by the resolution's setting of a
deadline. Through the contacts made by the new
Monitoring Team, countries that have not yet submitted
reports now have a better understanding of the work of
the 1267 Committee and of the reporting requirements.
This could result in even more submissions in the near
future. My delegation awaits the comprehensive
analysis of the national reports.

The Chairman's detailed account of his
discussions during his mission to four countries
provides us with a snapshot of the current situation of
implementation in those countries, including the
difficulties they have experienced. My delegation
notes, among the recommendations and observations
put forward following the Chairman's mission, the
wide-ranging avenues by which terrorist activities are
being financed: from legitimate means, through
commercial transactions such as those of import and
export businesses; or through outright illegal means,
such as kidnappings and other crimes. The implication
of this for the effectiveness of plugging loopholes in
traditional modes of funds transfers through the
banking system should be examined.

The Committee's work - and, for that matter, the
overall global counter-terrorism effort - should
continuously evolve to keep ahead of the terrorists.
Countries in South-East Asia are pursuing this line.
With adequate capacity-building support from other
countries and from the international community as a
whole, South-East Asian nations have been generally
successful in this regard.

The international community's vigilance cannot
falter. Resolution 1267 (1999), which created the
Committee and the string of resolutions further
strengthening the Committee's mandate; the
resolutions on the Counter-Terrorism Committee; and
other related resolutions, such as resolution 1540
(2004) on non-proliferation: all these attest to the
Council's and the international community's vigilance
in this regard. Thus, the other recommendations put
forward during the Chairman's mission that are deemed
outside the scope of work of the Committee should
nevertheless be addressed in appropriate forums. We
welcome the Chairman's close coordination with other
committees, such as the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
in pursuit of common goals.
We also share the view of the Chairman and the
other delegations that the fight against terrorism and
the protection of human rights cannot be separated.
Thus, in fighting terrorism, countries should not fall
into the trap of violating human rights in the course of
that fight. Countries in South-East Asia have also kept
this theme in mind.

