Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic): At
the outset, it gives me great pleasure to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Council.
I am confident that you will conduct the work of the
Council with great wisdom and professionalism. I would
also like to extend to the Permanent Representative of
Kenya our thanks for what he achieved last month.

The Security Council is seized today of a very
important question related to the future of the peace process
in the Middle East. Israeli settlement activity constitutes
one of the most complicated questions in the Arab-Israeli
conflict. It becomes more sensitive and complicated when
it relates to the city of Al-Quds Al-Sharif -- Jerusalem --
which has a unique political status and represents the
spiritual patrimony of three religions and is closely linked
to deep religious feelings in the Islamic world.

The decision adopted by the Israeli Government on 26

February to build housing units in Jabal Abu Ghneim in

East Jerusalem should be discussed within the context of

past Security Council positions and resolutions. The
delegation of Egypt would like to recall the Security
Council meeting held on 12 May 1995, during which it
discussed Israel's confiscation of Arab lands in East
Jerusalem, lands adjacent to those on which the Israeli
Government has decided to build housing units in Jabal
Abu Ghneim.

While the previous Israeli Government responded
positively to the will of the international community after
its expression of concern for the peace process, and did
not take the steps it had intended to take concerning the
confiscation of these lands. unfortunately, to the contrary,
the present Israeli Government did not hesitate to decide
to confiscate lands without any regard for the
repercussions of such a decision on the peace process.

The international community. as represented in the
organs of the United Nations,_has more than once stood
up very decisively to the illegitimate Israeli measures
aimed at annexing East Jerusalem, whether by changing
the legal status of the city, by changing its demographic
composition or even by changing its geographical nature.
These attempts by Israel should not obscure the following
facts. ,

The first fact is that the city of East Jerusalem, like
all other lands and towns in the West Bank and the Gaza
Strip, is part and parcel of these lands. These lands were
acquired by Israel by force in the war of 1967. Such an
occupation does not acquire any legality with the passage
of time. According to international law, lands that have
been occupied by force have to be vacated The
international community should not recognize such an
occupation, but should rather apply the principles and
doctrines for which the foundations were laid long ago.

'The second fact is that those Arab lands, including
East Jerusalem, are governed by the Hague Rules of 1907
and the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War. This has
been confirmed by the General Assembly in all its
relevant resolutions, the last of which related to the
applicability of the Geneva Convention to occupied Arab
lands and was adopted during the last session of the
General Assembly. This makes it necessary for Israel
being the occupying Power, not to undertake any change
in these lands

The third fact is that the Security Council has
adOpted many resolutions calling upon Israel to respect its
obligations as the occupying Power. The representative
of Palestine referred to them: resolutions 252 (1968), 271
Security Council 3745th meeting
Fifty-second year 5 March 1997

(1969), 476 (1980), and 672 (1990). The most important of
this set of resolutions is resolution 478 (1980), which states
that

"all legislative and administrative measures and
actions taken by Israel, the occupying Power, which
have altered or purport to alter the character and status
of the Holy City of Jerusalem, and in particular the
recent 'basic law' on Jerusalem, are null and void".
(resolution 478 ( 1980), para. 3).

Respect for Security Council resolutions on the
question of Jerusalem represents one of the basic
requirements for the success of the peace process in the
Middle East. There is no doubt that any disregard for the
position of the international community on this sensitive
question would deal an abortive blow to the peace process
and bring it to a sad end. As the Council knows, many
parties, including large sectors of the Israeli population,
have made great efforts for it to succeed. Nor is there any
doubt that if the Council is silent about this, certain
questions will be raised conceming its resolutions.

The fourth fact is the bilateral agreements signed by
Israel and the Palestinian National Authority and the
implementation protocols make it binding on both parts not
to take any measures that deal an abortive blow or prejudge
the results of the negotiations on the questions of final
status, which as we know include Jerusalem, refugees,
settlements, borders and security arrangements. There is a
clear, uncontroversial text contained in chapter five of the
Interim Agreement signed by both the Palestinian and
Israeli parties in Washington in September 1995:

(spoke in English)

"Neither side shall initiate or take any step that will
change the status of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip
pending the outcome of the permanent status
negotiations." (Interim Agreement on the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, article XXX], para. 7)

(spoke in Arabic)

This text represents a restriction accepted by Israel, and
Israel must abide by this restriction that prevents Israel
from undertaking any change - I repeat, any change - in

the occupied Arab territories, including East Jerusalem.

Pasta runt servandam- respect for contractual
obligations: this is the basis of the current world order.

Respect for that principle means, as set out in article 26
of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, that

"every treaty in force is binding upon the parties to
it and must be performed by them in good faith".
(United Nations Treaty Series, vol. 1155)

All parties, including the Security Council, must take that
legal principle into consideration when addressing this
very important question. Any violation of that principle
anywhere in the world, and in relation to any conflict,
reduces the credibility of the party that violates it, and
creates loopholes that undermine the international order.

The Security Council, under its Charter obligations,
must therefore stand against any attempt to avoid
international obligations, particularly when such an
attempt has a direct effect on the maintenance of
international peace.

Israel must cease its policy of building settlements.
Apart from its being a violation of international law, this
policy can only strengthen extremism and confrontation
and weaken those who support moderation and dialogue.
Countries concerned with the success of the peace
process - in, particular the United States of America,
whose great efforts as a sponsor of the peace process are
recognized by all - must shoulder their responsibility to
point out to the Government of Israel the extremely
negative effects of its policies. Israel should not
implement this policy, in order to show that it is serious
about the peace process and about not allowing that
process to fail.

Egypt hopes that .the Security Council will be able
today to adopt whatever decision is necessary to protect
peace in the Middle East, which is directly threatened by
these Israeli measures. This relates to the Council's
position on Israeli policy in the occupied Arab territories
in general, and in East Jerusalem in particular.

