Mr. Belinga-Eboutou (Cameroon) (spoke in French): The Security Council is today holding its first
public meeting of the month. I would like to express
my delegation's pleasure at seeing you, Sir, preside
over our deliberations, especially during this important
period in the history of international relations, which
could have an impact on the Council. Rest assured that
the entire delegation of Cameroon is ready to extend its
fraternal cooperation.

I would also like to extend my country's
congratulations to Germany on the excellent work it
carried out during its presidency of the Council in the
month of February.

Lastly, I welcome the presence among us of the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Kofi Annan.

We are meeting this morning to discuss the
quarterly report of the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC)
(S/2003/232, annex), which its Executive Chairman,
Mr. Hans Blix, has just presented to us with his
customary eloquence. UNMOVIC's report, the twelfth
of its kind, was, for good reason, awaited by the
international community with particular eagerness.
Overall, its contents are factual, and follow up on the
progress reports made to the Council in the months of
December, January and February. In addition, Mr. Blix
and Mr. ElBaradei have provided us with additional
information during their briefings. That information
serves as a useful complement to the report and should
lead to an updated discussion. I thank them for that.

My delegation is pleased to note that the
momentum of inspections, which was interrupted in
1998, has once again been well established. No doubt,
the credit for that goes to Mr. Blix and his teams in
New York and Baghdad, as well as to Mr. ElBaradei.

There is of course no deadline in resolution 1441
(2002), which is the roadmap to the disarmament of
Iraq. But that resolution does establish a process whose
major phase should be carried out in a short time
frame. As we see it, the resolution does not provide for
endless activity.

What does the report before us say? It says that
real progress has been achieved in the areas of process
and procedure. It also reveals interesting results in
some areas, ranging from the beginning of the
destruction of missiles and bombs to the areas of rules
and procedures, interviews and aerial surveillance. All
of that is to Iraq's credit. However, the report also
clearly emphasizes that "The results in terms of,
disarmament have been very limited so far"
(S/2003/232, annex, para. 73).

It is clear that better cooperation from the Iraqi
authorities would have made it possible to achieve
speedier and more substantial progress. As we and
others have said previously, the effectiveness and
viability of the inspections regime depends upon
unconditional, full and active cooperation on the part
of the authorities in Baghdad. We believe that view is
shared around this table, as well as by the inspectors
themselves.

At this stage, in the light of the report and the
oral briefings given to us today, Cameroon believes
that Iraq has not yet taken the final opportunity
afforded to it by the Council on 8 November when it
unanimously adopted resolution 1441 (2002).

Cameroon has always favoured the peaceful
settlement of disputes. Cameroon is against war- in
Iraq or elsewhere - but, as a member of the Security
Council, it has the responsibility and the duty to
ensure, along with other members, that States fully
implement the decisions taken by this body, whether
with regard to Iraq or to any other conflict on the
Council's agenda. In that vein, Cameroon is convinced
that the matter of Iraq should be dealt with calmly and
with pragmatism and determination.

We are in favour of inspections. We continue to
believe that they can allow us to achieve the objectives
set by resolution 1441 (2002), but we do not believe
that inspections should go on indefinitely.

We must together seek, in good faith, a credible
alternative to war and to endless inspections. Some
proposals have been put forward in this regard that are
deserving of consideration.

We believe that the major and central problem, at
this crucial time, is to induce the Iraqi authorities to
cooperate actively, fully and unconditionally if they
wish to see the peaceful and rapid disarmament of their
country, to which only they hold the key.

As the report before us states, without such
cooperation, there can be no verified disarmament.

It seems to us that, rather than continuing to make
a show of our divisions, we should work together to
overcome our differences and to rebuild our unity and
our cohesion. In that way, we will able - in a single
voice, with greater strength and credibility, and with a
view to achieving the effectiveness we seek - to
enjoin the Iraqi authorities to cooperate actively and
fully with the inspectors, as required by resolution
1441 (2002), to which they have fully agreed.

The gravity of the situation and the need for
effectiveness require that, at this late hour, we do
everything possible, as we did in October 2002, to
harmonize viewpoints through mutual concessions. We
must absolutely find a solution that is based on
consensus. The unity and effectiveness of the Security
Council would thereby be preserved, and the United
Nations and the international community would
thereby be strengthened, as would international peace
and security.

I should like to conclude by urging the Iraqi
authorities - in the interest of their people, their
country and of the region, and in the interest of
peace - to make clear, finally and very quickly, their
full readiness and their firm commitment to cooperate
in the context of resolution 1441 (2002).

I call on all Council members to work together to
build a common position that would make it clear, with
all the required firmness, to the Iraqi authorities that, if
they wish to see the peaceful disarmament of their
country, they have no alternative but to abide by the
decisions of the international community.

I call on the members of the Council to use all
necessary means to induce Iraq finally to take up this
last opportunity offered in resolution 1441 (2002).

Let us refuse to be victims of fate.
Disarming Iraq of its weapons of mass
destruction is important, even crucial, for international
peace and security. On such an important issue -
Cameroon has said it before and will repeat it today -
the peoples of the United Nations expect the members
of the Security Council to work and act together, not at
cross-purposes. The peoples of the United Nations do
not want to see Council members take parallel paths;
indeed, parallel lines never meet. Our peoples wish to
see us go forward together.

It is in this spirit, and fully aware of this dual
requirement of unity and cohesion, that Cameroon has
been participating, and will continue to participate, in
the work of the Security Council and in the Council's
consultations on the various proposals we have before
us, in order finally to make the disarmament of Iraq a
reality.

