Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I am
thankful for this opportunity to address the Council
in my capacity as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1572 (2004) concerning Cote
d'lvoire, the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2206 (2013) concerning South Sudan, and the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals,
with a view to sharing my insight and thoughts on these
three subsidiary bodies. I will start with my work as
Chair of the 1572 Committee concerning Cote d'Ivoire.

My November 2014 visit to the country was
undoubtedly the highlight of my tenure as Chairman.
The opportunity to meet with the highest authorities
of Cote d'Ivoire on the ground, including President
Ouattara and his chief ministers, to visit the diamond-
producing areas near the Liberian border, and to
witness first-hand the work carried out by the United
Nations via the United Nations Operation in Cote
d'Ivoire (UNOCI) were enriching experiences that
greatly facilitated my work. Meeting my counterparts
strengthened the channels of cooperation. Hearing
their comments and concerns on the implementation
of the sanctions regime was essential to improving
the effectiveness of the work of the Committee and its
secretariat team. As a result of that visit, I proposed
to the Committee certain actions that allowed us to
streamline its work, in particular the consideration of
requests for notification and exceptions of the current
sanctions regime. Processing times were shortened
thanks to the close cooperation between the secretariat
of the Committee and the Permanent Mission of Cote
d'Ivoire to the United Nations.

The work of the Panel of Experts that advises the
Committee also benefited from that visit. Although
there was a certain distrust concerning its work prior
to the visit, cooperation between the Government in
Abidjan and the Panel of Experts deepened thereafter.
The work of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of UNOCI was instrumental in that
regard. An important lesson learned is that if we wish
to have an intelligent sanctions regime, we should not
allow too much time pass before visiting the country
that is the object of sanctions. The reality on the ground
is subject to change, and visits make it possible to avoid
misconceptions. I believe that C6te d'Ivoire has made
significant progress in re-establishing democracy,
territoriaol control, security and development that
should spur the Council to consider lifting the sanctions
regime in the short term.

During my two years as Chair of the Cote d'Ivoire
Sanctions Committee, the list of sanctioned individuals
has grown shorter; the embargo on diamonds has
been lifted, and the arms embargo regime has been
substantially modified. I appeal to Council members to
consider these elements during the upcoming renewal
of sanctions. Cote d'Ivoire has a level of development
and national capacity that allow it, with the support of
the United Nations and the international community,
to confront certain challenges it faces alongside
any other developing country, but that do not, in my
opinion, affect international peace and security and
do not justify the continuation of the sanctions regime
mandated by the Security Council. As pointed out by
other Committee Chairs, there is a time to impose
sanctions and a time to lift them. The reduction of
sanctions should be evaluated and does not imply any
detachment or reduced vigilance on our part.

I will now discuss my work as Chair of the
2206 South Sudan Sanctions Committee. Since its
establishment nine months ago, our task has been to meet
the challenge of establishing conditions conducive to its
proper functioning, beginning with the negotiation of
guidelines - a process that is not without its challenges
and during which we encountered the factors limiting
the Chair when defining the Committee's course of
action. In addition, during that period the Committee
agreed to add six individuals to the sanctions list.

In that initial and essential phase, the Committee met
with representatives of INTERPOL, the United Nations
Mine Action Service, the Special Representatives
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict and on Sexual Violence in Conflict, as well
as with representatives of South Sudan and countries
of the region, in order to understand their challenges
and needs as we implement the agreed sanctions. The
object of those meetings was to establish channels of
communication and cooperation that may contribute to
the work of the Committee.

I stress the importance of the meetings with
the country concerned, countries of the region and
representatives of regional organizations. It is a good
practice that should become a permanent fixture in
the work of the various committees and repeated
throughout the year in order to build trust and generate
frank discussion. Without the commitment of the
international community, especially neighbouring
countries, the implementation of any sanctions regime
will be difficult.

We acknowledge the work of the Panel of Experts
and its monthly and mid-term reports. Its final report,
which is expected shortly, will be considered by the
incoming Chair in January. We also appreciate the
agreement reached by the Committee with INTERPOL
to exchange information between that body and the
Committee and its Panel of Experts. In the same vein,
the practice of open briefings for the presentation of
the Chair's reports, as we did in the 2206 Committee,
should be the general rule. It contributes to the
transparency of the work of the Committee, promotes
State understanding of the sanctions regime, and
reminds us that these are individual rather than
collective measures.

The imposition of sanctions is one of many tools
at our dispoal, though perhaps not the best, to move
the international peace and security agenda forward.
The establishment of a sanctions framework should
therefore be accompanied by the necessary monitoring
of its implementation by the Council. Otherwise, they
do not serve their purpose and undermine the actions
of the Council. The Council should, in a united and
consistent way, demonstrate and reaffirm that sanctions
regimes ultimately seek to create conditions conducive
to international peace and security in the countries
concerned, ensure accountability and the protection of
civilians, and combat impunity.

My work and that of my team would not have been
possible without the support of other members of the
Committee and the secretariat. I would like to express
my gratitude to everyone, in particular Kiho Cha, David
Biggs, Manuel Bressan and their respective teams.

With regard to our work as the Chair of the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals,
we were involved in a special moment - the closure of
the ad hoc tribunals and the launch and closing of the
first review process of the initial phase of the Residual
Mechanism. It was with great pleasure that we took part
in the closing of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda, whose progress and challenges faced in the
contribution to the fight against impunity we noted, in
addition to those of the International Tribunal for the
former Yugoslavia and the Mechanism itself.

As set out in the annual reports ofInformal Working
Group on International Tribunals - and will continue
to be - the Group's work has also been reflected in
resolutions, presidential statements and press releases
and various reports of the Security Council. All of them
serve to demonstrate the determination of the Group to
move forward on issues that are of major interest to the
international community. We are aware of the diverse
positions with regard to the fulfilment of the mandates
of the Tribunals. In that regard, we have fostered
a permanent dialogue among all the stakeholders
involved, with the appropriate level of flexibility, in
order to seek convergence and respond in the most
appropriate way to the various realities that we have to
deal with.

It was particularly rewarding to serve as a
facilitator, along with my team, in each of the general
discussions that were held regarding the main concerns
of the Working Group. My recommendation in that
satisfying task is to maintain or even increase such
dialogue, especially with the officials of the Tribunals
and the Mechanism, at a critical time for the successful
culmination of the functioning of the Tribunals and
of their proper accountability. Chile is convinced that

cooperation with the completion strategy is one of the
direct ways of contributing to international justice in
situations where there are crimes against humanity.
That is why our commitment remains unwavering.

I would like to conclude by reiterating our gratitude
to all those who have contributed to the work of the
Tribunals, with a particular mention of the constant
support of the Secretariat and the Office of the
Assistant-Secretary-General for Legal Affairs.

I should now like to make a few comments that
apply to all the subsidiary bodies I have chaired.

We should not disregard due process when we
discuss Security Council sanctions. It is a matter both
of principle and of practical concern, for a lack of due
process can complicate the implementation of sanctions
in some States and regions. The Council should bolster
the mandate of the Office of the Ombudsperson, which
is currently valid for the 1267 (1999) Committee and
the 1989 (2011) Commitee, and expand them to other
subsidiary bodies. The adoption of resolution 1730
(2006) and the establishment of a focal point for
delisting represent a major step forward, although many
improvements stillll need to be made.

The diversity of this organ should be reflected in
various Panels of Experts, and we call on those Panels
to fully apply the principles of gender balance and
equitable geographical representation.

We value these kinds of meetings, as well as the
formal and open wrap-up sessions in this Chamber, with
the participation of all Council members and including
an official record and interpretation. However, we note
with concern the tendency to confuse wrap-up sessions
carried out by the Council with the informal briefings
that should be conducted by the President. Both have
different formats and objectives. The first involves the
work of the Council, and second that of the presidency,
which reports on its work. It is only through well-
known formats and clear rules that we will guarantee
tthe ransparency and accountability of this organ.

Finally, I would like to express my gratitude to
those who extended support to me throughout my
chairmanship. I urge the Security Council to continue
working to put an end to impunity, but always hand in
hand with due process. I would also like to express the
best of luck to the countries that will succeed me in my
role as Chair of the two subsidiary bodies and of the
Working Group.

