Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Once again, we find ourselves in the Security
Council, facing a surreal, absurd scene that the three
Western permanent members of the Council keep
repeating as they don the mantle of the humanitarian
penholders. Since the last briefing delivered by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(see S/PV.8593), they have engaged in drafting a
biased political draft resolution (S/2019/756) - not a
humanitarian one - under what they call a ceasefire in
north-west Syria.

It is now confirmed that the ink of that pen dries
up when it comes to the war crimes and crimes against
humanity that were committed and are still being
committed by what is called the international coalition,
led by the United States and its proxies from terrorist
organizations and affiliated illegitimate militias. The
ink of that pen also dries up when it comes to the illegal
foreign presence on the territories ofmy country, be they
United States, British, French or Turkish. It dries up,
too, when it comes to the repeated Israeli aggressions,
encouraged by the silence of the Council and the
immunity provided by some permanent members of
the Council to the practices of the Israeli-occupying
authorities for decades.

Some colleagues have said that combating terrorism
does not exempt us from respecting our relevant
commitments under international humanitarian law.
However, I have not heard those same colleagues say, for
example, that producing terrorism does not exempt one
from respecting commitments under international law
and the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.
Both international law and the provisions of the Charter
take precedence over international humanitarian law,
or they are at least on equal footing. But if international
humanitarian law is to be respected, the provisions of
the Charter of the United Nations and international law
must first be upheld.

History will remember this meeting because it was
sought to disrupt the Russian presidency, as was the
case on 8 October 2016 when the Russian Federation
presided over the Council (see S/PV.7785). Attempts
were made by some countries at that time to introduce
a draft resolution to disrupt the Russian presidency
of the Council. It is a case of history repeating itself,
because the objective of this meeting is not to provide
humanitarian help the Syrian people, but rather to
misuse this agenda item politically and embarrass the
Russian presidency.

As with previous such resolutions adopted by
the Council, the draft resolution (S/20l9/757) before
us sets forth in the second preambular paragraph
that the Security Council reaffirms "full respect for
the sovereignty, independence, unity, and territorial
integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic". However, the
practices of the penholders have proved the existence
of a significant gap between the principle and the
application of that particular paragraph. The penholders
of the humanitarian slogan have violated the sovereignty
of the Syrian Arab Republic, which is unacceptable.

How can the humanitarian penholders undertake
their duties and lead that movement, which is supposedly
underpinned by humanitarian drivers, at a time when
they have called for this meeting and presented a draft
resolution without genuine coordination or consultation
with the delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic? It is
our delegation that is concerned, first and foremost,
in the discussion of such a draft resolution. How can
they disregard the fact that the Syrian Government has
agreed to a ceasefire in the de-escalation zone in Idlib,
starting on 31 August, while maintaining the right to
respond to any violation by terrorists, in line with the
Astana agreement, on establishing the de-escalation
zones, and the Sochi agreement?

We have the right to wonder why the co-penholders
fail in their draft resolution to make any reference
to excluding terrorist groups from the cessation of
hostilities. It is known to all that the Astana agreement
on establishing de-escalation zones does not include
the armed groups designated by the Security Council as
terrorist entities. The agreement provided for a number
of pledges, including compelling the armed groups
that signed the Astana agreement to disengage from
terrorist organizations, especially Da'esh, the Al-Nusra
Front and other affiliated groups.

Both the Astana and Sochi agreements underlined
the right of the Government of Syria and its allies to
counter terrorist organizations, regardless of their
names. All of that is absent in the draft resolution
submitted by the humanitarian penholders. How can
those humanitarian penholders claim to be earnest
on the humanitarian situation in Syria when they fail
to include, in the draft resolution, the main reason
behind the humanitarian crisis in the country, which is
terrorism supported, unfortunately, by some countries
that are members of the Council? They also disregard
the fact that there are thousands of foreign terrorist
fighters in Syria.

By way of example, we note that the German
Federal Government announced recently, in response
to a parliamentary question submitted by Konstantin
Kuhle, an internal affairs expert of the German liberal
party, that the number of German foreign fighters in
Syria and Iraq amounts to 500 terrorists, of whom
approximately 360 are still fighting in the ranks
of terrorist organizations. These are the German
Government's statistics, which underline what has been
confirmed - the presence of thousands of terrorists
from Europe. How can my colleague, the Permanent
Representative of Germany, ignore that important
information issued by his own Government? How can
he fail to make any reference of the need to counter the
phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters and for their
countries and masters to withdraw them from Syria?

By the way, I would like to touch upon what my
colleague the representative of Kuwait said in the most
recent Council meeting on this topic (see S/PV.8609),
that the Salafist movement in Kuwait did not exist and
that the terrorist Al-Mteiri did not exist either. I have
here a poster distributed by the Salafist movement on
the streets of Kuwait. We can see pictures of Kuwaiti
nationals under the banner "Wage war - jihad in
Syria". They are all Kuwaiti members of the Kuwaiti
Salafist movement. Here is another such poster.

I have also a copy of a New York Times article that
my colleague the representative of Kuwait also said did
not exist. It speaks of Mr. Al-Mteiri, a Sergeant in the
Kuwaiti army. It says,

(spoke in English)

"Ghanim al-Mteiri gathers the funds and
transports them to Syria for the rebels fighting
President Bashar al-Assad. Mr. Mteiri - one of
dozens of Kuwaitis who openly raise money to arm
the opposition - has helped turn this tiny, oil-rich
Persian Gulf state into a virtual Western Union
outlet for Syria's rebels, with the bulk of the funds
he collects going to a Syrian affiliate of Al Qaeda.
One Kuwait-based effort raised money to equip
12,000 rebel fighters for $2,500 each. Donors
earn 'silver status' by giving $175 for 50 sniper
bullets, or 'gold status' by giving twice as much for
eight mortar rounds."

(spoke in Arabic)

The American Carnegie Endowment for
International Peace has produced two studies on
the Kuwaiti Salafist movement and on the support it
provides to terrorism in Syria and Iraq. The Kuwaiti
representative said that if I had any names or documents,
I should present them. Here I am, presenting those
documents. Anyone who wants a copy can get it from
the Permanent Mission of the Syrian Arab Republic to
the United Nations in New York.

How can the humanitarian penholders and sponsors
of the draft resolution claim that they are earnest about
the humanitarian situation when they have participated
from day one in the illegitimate so-called Global
Coalition against Da'esh, which has not combated
terrorism in any way? Instead, it has intentionally
and systematically destroyed Syrian infrastructure,
including bridges over the Euphrates River, grain
silos, schools, hospitals and safe villages. It has killed
thousands of civilians and has saved Da'esh terrorist
leaders in the two towns of Hajin and Baghouz in Deir
ez-Zor and in Raqqa city, in order to recycle them and
use them in other countries as the moderate terrorist
democratic opposition.

How can the humanitarian penholders claim that
they are earnest about humanitarian issues when the
draft resolution disregards the dangerous announcement
of the United States and Turkey about reaching an
agreement on establishing a so-called safe zone on
Syrian territories and starting joint patrols? Such an
agreement would complicate and prolong the crisis in
Syria by establishing new facts on the ground in areas
where the forces of those two occupying countries are
illegally deployed.

How can the humanitarian penholders claim that
they are earnest about humanitarian issues when they
contribute to economic terrorism by imposing unilateral
coercive economic measures with grave catastrophic
consequences for Syrians? Such measures undermine
the ability of the Syrian Government to respond to the
people's daily needs.

In conclusion, based on all this, my Government
would like to thank all countries that have voted against
the draft resolution, especially the Russian and Chinese
delegations, and those that abstained in the voting in
order to uphold the principles of international law and the
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations * first
and foremost, respect for the sovereignty of States and
non-interference in their internal affairs.

