Mr. Klimkin (Ukraine): Mr. President, I want to
thank you for taking the laudable initiative to convene
today's meeting. I also wish to thank our briefer today,
Secretary General of the International Civil Aviation
Organization (ICAO), Ms. Fang Liu, for providing a
real and extensive outlook on the topic and the work
of the United Nations and its specialized agencies in
this field. It would be remiss of me not to commend
the efforts of the United Kingdom, which we really
appreciate, in preparing the resolution that was adopted
today (resolution 2309 (2016)).

The key words here - civil aviation and terrorist
attacks - remind me immediately of the tragic events
of 11 September, which occurred just a few blocks from
here. Fifteen years ago, the international community
was prompted to take decisive steps in the fight against
terrorism and to strengthen security regulations in civil
aviation so as to reduce terrorist risks in this sphere.

Nevertheless, the terrorist threat to airtransportation
systems continues to grow. Such threats take different
forms, including terrorist shootings aimed at bringing
down aircraft, smuggling explosives on board, hijacking
and using an aircraft as an improvised guided cruise
missile, and exploiting the airways to move fighters and
human or material resources to conflict zones. Other
challenges include attempts to compromise security at
airports, including cyberattacks as well as conventional
terrorist attacks in airports; insider threats; and threats
of the use of improvised explosive devices, man-portable
air defence systems (MANPADS) and other surface-to-
air missiles against civilian targets, including during
takeoff or landing.

Despite the activities of ICAO and other relevant
organizations dealing with issues of aviation security,
there is a persistent need to improve mechanisms for
States' cooperation in this field and to increase their
capacity to confront the terrorist threat.

The holding of today's meeting at such a high level
proves the importance of this issue and the common
understanding ofthe need to improve public confidence
in safe air travel. Airports have long been attractive
targets for terrorist groups attempting to cause
numerous civilian casualties. Owing to the importance
of the air transportation system in ensuring the proper
functioning of modern societies, its destruction or any
disruption of its work are bound to attract a significant
level of public attention.

Taking into consideration the recent terrorist
attacks against airports in Belgium and Turkey,
provisions concerning the protection of such critical
infrastructure facilities should be duly reflected in
terrorism-prevention programmes. States should
conduct specialized vulnerability assessments, in
collaboration with airport operators and stakeholders,
to identify weaknesses, interdependencies and ways
of improving the protection of airports against a
growing number of diverse threats, both physical and
cyberrelated. Close cooperation between the relevant
State authorities in this field with private operators
should also be maintained.

We strongly believe that there is an urgent need for
the United Nations and its specialized bodies, together
with ICAO, to develop preventive measures against
possible threats as well as to ensure strict and effective
international and national controls on the import,
export, transfer or retransfer and storage of MANPADS
and other missile weapons to mitigate potential risks.

Regrettably, Ukraine has faced such a problem
in dealing with the terrorist activities in the Donbass
region of Ukraine carried out with the direct support
of the Russian Federation since 2014. On 17 July
2014, Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17 was shot down
by terrorists in the sky over the eastern part of
Ukraine, killing 298 people. This terrible atrocity is
a potent reminder of the gravity of the threat posed
to civil aviation by terrorist groups armed with such
sophisticated weapons.

In this regard, I wish to underscore the need for
the full implementation of resolution 2166 (2014),
in particular with regard to the Security Council
demand to bring to account those responsible for
this incident and to cooperate fully with efforts to
establish accountability.

As the Council may recall, last year's efforts to set up
an international tribunal to prosecute those responsible
was sabotaged in this Chamber owing to the veto of
the Russian Federation. Such a tribunal, I am confident,
would have been our most effective instrument for
responding to this heinous crime. Nevertheless, we
continue our work with other partner States within the
joint investigation team and with other grieving nations
to address the situation and to present options for a
mechanism to establish full accountability. This should
be done within the proper time frame, because justice
delayed is justice denied.

The aforementioned horrendous crime prompted
ICAO to undertake several initiatives related to conflict
zones, including establishing the Task Force on Risks
to Civil Aviation arising from Conflict Zones, setting
up the Conflict Zone Information Repository, and
publishing detailed guidance on the threats posed to
commercial flights by surface-to-air missile systems.

We strongly support such ICAO activities and
call for the enhancement of the global system of
information-sharing about such threats. It is also
imperative that special attention be given to conflict
zones in the risk-assessment process during the
mapping of flight routes.

Here I would like to highlight another important
issue. The responsibility for air-traffic services in the
high seas over the Simferopol Flight Information Region,
which includes Crimea, was delegated to Ukraine by
regional air navigation agreements as approved by an
ICAO Council decision of February 1997. Ukraine has
faithfully fulfilled its responsibilities and provides air-
traffic services in accordance with ICAO Standards
and Recommended Practices.

Following the illegal occupation of Crimea in April
2014, the Russian Federation started to interfere in the
international emergency frequency in the air-traffic
service provided by Ukraine. Such actions create
serious threats for flights within international airspace
over the high seas and run counter to the Chicago
Convention and its annexes 15 and 11, as well as the
relevant ICAO regulations in this area.
The Russian Federation, having unilaterally
resorted to the provision of air navigation services
within the Simferopol region, has also violated General
Assembly 68/262, on the territorial integrity okaraine,
adopted in March 2014. It is obvious that the publication
of aeronautical information by the Russian Federation
can only be regarded as an attempt to legitimize its
unlawful activities.

We wish to emphasize the importance of strict
adherence to the Standards and Recommended
Practices of ICAO by all Member States without any
exception, especially in the airspace over the high seas.

At present, the use of explosive devices constitutes
a significant threat to civil aviation. The urgency ofthis
risk is underlined by the number of incidents that took
place in 2015 and 2016. Moreover, modern technologies
that allow for the production of non-traceable weapons
components bring this threat to a new level. This calls
for introduction of additional security enhancements at
airports, including screening protocols to reduce the
risk of explosives or weapons entering the premises of
being smuggled onboard the aircraft by passengers or
facility employees.

Information-sharing among international partners
is another tool to address the challenges faced by
international civil aviation. Therefore, we encourage
Member States to strengthen sharing agreements with
foreign partners and to continue working closely with
the law-enforcement and intelligence communities as
well as competent international organizations such as
INTERPOL to monitor for watch-listed terrorists.

This also brings us to the issue of stopping the flow
of foreign terrorist fighters by countering their transit,
in line with the relevant Security Council resolutions,
and implementing the Council's bans on terrorists.
We believe that the primary obligation to prevent the
movement of foreign fighters lies primarily with the
source countries, which have to spot and stop their
flows at the earliest stages.

We support universal implementation of Advance
Passenger Information/Passenger Name Record data
systems throughout the world and an active use of
the INTERPOL Stolen and Lost Travel Documents
database to check travellers' information against current
sanctions lists. If duly implemented, these measures
can be a classical win-win scenario for Governments
and airlines. We call for ICAO and other relevant
international organizations to assist those Member
States in need to ensure universal implementation of
the above-mentioned standards.

In conclusion, I would like to note that by adopting
resolution 2309 (2016) today, we have sent a strong
message to the international community on the need to
focus its efforts in developing new standards of aviation
security and safety to confront terrorist threats to civil
aviation. To neutralize these threats effectively, we must
ensure that our global and national plans to combat the
terrorism scourge, including those introduced within
the United Nations, are adaptive and responsive to
emerging dangers.

The United Nations, its counter-terrorism agencies
and bodies - such as the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate and the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force - and ICAO must play an
absolutely proactive role in strengthening the capacities
of Member States to achieve this goal.

