Mr. Skau (Sweden): I associate myself with the
statement that will be made by the observer of the
European Union later this morning.

Let me begin by joining others in thanking the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for her
final report to the Council and for the diligence and
professionalism that she and all the staff of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
have shown as they carried out their mission to support
the people of Haiti. We really appreciate their work.

I would also take the opportunity to pay tribute
once again to the many United Nations staff members
who lost their lives serving with MINUSTAH,
including my very close friend Kai Buchholz, who died
in the tragic earthquake of 2010. Kai was a fun, caring
and clever friend and an exceptionally dedicated and
professional United Nations colleague, and I miss him
very much indeed.

The conclusion of the mandate of MINUSTAH on
15 October and the establishment of the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH)
mark an important milestone for Haiti. During the 13
years of MINUSTAH's mandate, the Haitian people
have made significant progress in the consolidation
of democracy, as well as security and stability. We
commend Haiti for that progress, which has opened
a window of opportunity for Haiti's future. However,
challenges remain. President Moise and his Government
have set out some important priorities, namely, to
improve economic development, infrastructure,
resilience, security, the rule of law, respect for human
rights and national dialogue. The Government must now
spare no effort in delivering on those commitments.

The rule of law should continue to be a top priority
for the Government. The strengthening of the Haitian
National Police and a continued focus on judicial reform,
including fighting corruption, will also be absolutely
crucial for inclusive socioeconomic development and the
creation of better conditions for private investment. It is
important that all actors, including national authorities,
political parties, civil society and the private sector,
work together towards that end. Previous experience
has shown the important role that policing plays in
providing a bridge between security and development
in transition processes. Sweden currently contributes
10 police officers to MINUSTAH and will contribute
the same number to MINUJUSTH.

As Haiti moves forward to address its challenges,
the partnership between Haiti, bilateral donors and the
United Nations needs to evolve so as to provide the most
appropriate model of support in the spirit of sustaining
peace and supporting inclusive socioeconomic
development. As more and more tasks are transitioned
from the United Nations Mission to the United Nations
country team, the international community must also
step up and ensure that the United Nations agencies
have adequate resources to effectively carry out their
important roles.

No society can reach its full potential without the
full, equal and effective participation of women. As
the Secretary-General notes in his report (S/2017/840),
more efforts are needed to protect and promote women's
rights in Haiti. The important work undertaken by
MINUSTAH on gender mainstreaming and against
sexual and gender-based violence must not be lost. It
is important that MINUJUSTH continue to integrate
gender throughout its policies and maintain a strategic
focus, coordination and budget for gender issues.

We agree with the Secretary-General's assessment
that it is important that the Haitian authorities put
in place binding measures for the application of the
constitutional minimum quota of 30 per cent women
in public office. The election of more than 30 per cent
women at the municipal and local levels is promising
and will hopefully act as a springboard for the increased
participation of women at the national level as well
in future.

We were happy to co-sponsor resolution 71/161,
in support of the Secretary-General's new approach to
eradicate cholera and build resilience in Haiti. Sweden
is currently exploring how to best support the United
Nations Haiti Cholera Response Multi-Partner Trust
Fund and we encourage others to consider contributing
to the Trust Fund as well, so as to collectively bring to
an end cholera in Haiti.

The people of Haiti have made huge progress in
rebuilding their country over the past 14 years, not
least by overcoming the devastation caused by the
earthquake in 2010. We must continue to stand with
them. Sweden will remain a committed partner for
Haiti as the country begins a newchapter.

