Lord Ahmad (United Kingdom): May I first join
others in thanking you, Mr. President, for scheduling
this debate today and for giving the Security Council
the opportunity to further consider the threat posed to
international peace and security by climate change. The
Dominican Republic's own experience has encouraged
you to be a powerful advocate for this issue and a leader
in this field. I am sure that I speak for all in saying that
we look forward to your remarks later in the debate. I
also wish to thank all the briefers, but 1 was particularly
struck by the contribution of Ms. Lindsay Getschel. By
drawing attention to the challenge of climate change
and the importance of the consideration of the youth,
all countries should acknowledge that we should not
only engage the youth but also involve them in finding
the solutions. From the perspective of my Government,
and I am sure that I speak for many in the Chamber
and beyond, I certainly make that commitment because
it is important that we work together to find common
solutions, and the youth have an important role to play.

This is also an extremely important issue for the
United Kingdom. Indeed, we were the first country to
raise the issue in the Security Council, in 2007 (see S/PV.5663). We are particularly concerned about small
island developing States and least developed countries,
including almost60percent ofourfellowCommonwealth
members, which face an existential threat from climate
change and associated natural disasters.

Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo
mentioned the devastation of Hurricane Irma in 2017.
I, too, visited the Caribbean in the wake of Hurricane
Irma, where the devastation but, more importantly,
the determination of the people left a deep and lasting
impression on me. Our Prime Minister, Mrs. May, has
said that there is a clear moral imperative for developed
economies to help those that stand to lose most from the
consequences of man-made climate change. Through
our International Climate Fund, we support cleaner
economic growth and have helped more than 21 million
people to prepare for the risk of increased droughts and
floods. Between 2016 and 2020, we pledged to provide
at least $7 billion in support to the Fund, and we aim for
a balance in our spending on adaptation and mitigation.
We have also sought to strengthen our work within
the Caribbean region to build resilience by bringing
together resources, capabilities, assets and expertise to
show a collaborative and strengthened response to the
challenge posed by extreme weather events.

We all acknowledge that climate change is not an
abstract, theoretical risk. It is real and is happening now.
Severe weather events that used to happen, as was often
said, once in a century now occur two or three times in
a decade, sometimes more often. They impact essential
resources and drive people from their homes. They
threaten sustainable development, including our ability

to meet the Sustainable Development Goals and to
trade, and they exacerbate conflict and instability. The
situation is in fact much graver than previously thought.
Research by the United Kingdom's independent Climate
Change Committee, in collaboration with the China
Expert Panel on Climate Change, recently concluded
that we have significantly underestimated the social
and, indeed, the economic risk of climate change.

That risk, of course, threatens us all. It is therefore
important that we all contribute to the solution,
including through discussions such as the important one
we are having now. In Paris in 2015, the international
community rallied together to find a shared solution
to this shared and common problem. As the British
Prime Minister has said, the Paris Agreement is a vital
pillar of the rules-based international system. We must
now accelerate global action to meet the commitments
that we have made, and we must heed the call of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change to increase
our ambition. That includes through our existing
partnerships. For example, last April in London,
the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting
reaffirmed its commitment to the Paris Agreement
and to pursuing efforts to limit the increase in global
average temperatures to 1.5 degrees Celsius above
pre-industrial levels. I, too, pay tribute to Poland's
leadership at the twenty-fourth Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change.

In that vein, we strongly commend the Secretary-
General's efforts to refocus the United Nations on the
urgent need to address climate change. In our view,
the United Nations needs to enhance its approach to
climate security in three important ways.

First, with respect to information-sharing, we must
make better use of the climate risk data available in
the private sector and, importantly, in civil society. We
must integrate that data into decision-making across
the entire United Nations system.

Secondly, we need to consider all risks, including
climate-related risks, in a holistic way and when
planning and implementing solutions to peace and,
indeed, security issues. As mentioned by Mr. Heiko
Maas, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany,
the Security Council has started to reflect that in
recent resolutions, in particular - I agree with
him - on the issues of Lake Chad, Somalia, the Sahel,
Mali and Darfur. The task now is to ensure effective
implementation and, importantly, integration into our
development, peacebuilding and humanitarian work.
The United Kingdom welcomes the piloting of a mini-
mechanism to ensure that information is available to
United Nations reporting, but it should explore ways to
go further, for example, by improving the coordination
and integration of United Nations agencies and
missions that manage climate-related security risks on
the ground.

Finally, we must invest in resilience. The United
Kingdom will lead efforts aimed at increasing resilience,
ahead of the Secretary-General's climate summit this
year, while collaborating with a range of actors to launch
what we hope to be genuinely transformational actions.
Again, to Ms. Getschel, I would say that I am sure her
suggestions have caused us all to reflect, and that, from
a Commonwealth perspective, I have the opportunity
to host youth ambassadors from the Commonwealth in
London next week. I will certainly be reflecting very
strongly on her suggestions and recommendations in
the coming days.

In economic terms alone, this makes sense. Investing
and preparedness to respond will on average cut in
half - yes, half- the cost of deploying humanitarian
aid in the wake of a disaster, and it can also speed up
crisis response by up to two weeks. Resilience also
presents a huge opportunity for supporting employment
and spreading prosperity, which of course accelerates
development and ultimately enhances security. Through
the United Kingdom-led Centre for Global Disaster
Protection, we are working with developing countries
to increase their preparedness, and indeed resilience to
climate change and natural disasters.

In conclusion, there is no doubt that climate-related
security challenges are real; they are here and they
are now. We must work together to ensure the United
Nations system is able to holistically consider climate
risks in decision-making and, most important,
integrate them into mission planning and ultimately
into implementation.

