Lord Ashdown: My apologies to the Council for
not having been here earlier. I had an appointment with
the Secretary-General. I apologize to my colleague
Jaap de Hoop Scheffer for not having been here when
he spoke. I think I owe the Council some comments
and responses to questions from earlier on this
morning.

May I first of all express my warm thanks and
those of my staff for the very kind comments made by
representatives this morning. They are really are very,
very welcome indeed, and I am very grateful for those
kind words. However, I think that the representative of
Angola, if I may say so, was entirely correct: the real
heroes of this remarkable transformation are not the
international community, although I think we have
done much of which we can be proud; we have made
our mistakes, too, but overall I think that we are
entitled to feel proud of the peacekeeping operation.
The real heroes are the extraordinary, remarkable and
courageous people of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and, if
anyone should be receiving these accolades, it seems to
me that it is they.

Before answering the questions that were put to
me, could I just warmly welcome a number of
particular interventions. The representative of Romania
gave the kind of promise that everyone likes to hear -
that they were considering increasing the number of
troops they may be able to provide in the European
Union-led force (EUFOR). That is a generous offer for
which I know my EUFOR colleagues will be extremely
grateful.

If I may say so, I greatly welcomed also the
comments of the representative of Spain, who noted
the special importance of the feasibility study and the
NATO Partnership for Peace agreements. Those are,
indeed, the magnets which draw the compass by which
we steer. I believe that, in due course, the scaffolding
of Europe and NATO will provide the structures within
which Bosnia and Herzegovina will make the second
stage of its journey - a journey which is not about
peace implementation but about transition.

I also strongly welcome, if I may, the comments
that were made by almost all representatives on the
importance of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia and Republika Srpska
cooperating and crossing that watershed. For what it is
worth, I think that there are forces in Republika Srpska
that wish to see that done, and I welcome that. The
United States was, ifI may say so, correct - you, Sir,
were correct - in reminding us that this was about a
fundamental principle of Dayton, and the infringement
of Dayton is arguably the greatest failure as a result of
this.

My colleague the representative of France, who is
sitting next to me, was correct in saying that, after so
many words, only concrete results would do. The
representative of Germany made a very strong point on
this matter. I think that what he hinted at is correct -
that when you look at deficiencies in terms of
cooperation with The Hague, these are about
personalities who have failed to fulfil their individual
duties. They are also about systemic failures, and that
is one of the reasons why the reform of the police and
defence structures which is taking place is so
important.

The representative of the Netherlands wished me
luck as European Union Special Representative. My
job is to try to coordinate the European Union's assets.
I am not their boss, but I am primus inter pares, and I
have to try to coordinate those assets. I am grateful to
him for kindly wishing me luck; I shall need it. It adds
a different dimension to my job, but one which I
welcome and which I think is important as Europe
takes the lead in this process, although it is not the
monopoly deliverer of the international community's
assistance in peace implementation matters.

May I especially thank the representative of
Japan. Japan's support for the peace implementation
process, even though it is probably the country, along
with Canada, that directly benefits least from this,
being on the other side of the world, has been
remarkable. In particular, the support that was offered
to the war crimes chamber by the representative of
Japan is extremely welcome.

The formation of the war crimes chamber, a very
important moment, is on track and on time. But there is
not enough money to be able to ensure that the
chamber can be sustained beyond the middle or the
third quarter of next year. We do need that kind of
practical assistance to make the war crimes chamber
actually work. It would be a disaster, I am sure you
would all agree, if we set up the war crimes chamber
and it starts to try war crimes domestically, relieving
the pressure on The Hague, and then it falls flat on its
face because there are not sufficient funds keep it
going. Lastly, that is not an imminent prospect; it is
one for the longer-term future.

Japan's assistance in tourism, which we have
begun to build in Bosnia and Herzegovina, is also
extremely important.

It seemed to me that I was asked to respond to
three key questions. The representative of the Russian
Federation asked me, I think, for assurance that we
were not in the business of attributing all the problems
of Bosnia and Herzegovina to the Serbs. I can
enthusiastically give that assurance. I actually believe
that, arguably, the Serb people and the Republika
Srpska have made a greater and more difficult
contribution to the whole reform process than any of
the other peoples in Bosnia and Herzegovina and I
have always sought to go out of my way to recognize
that. It was more difficult for the Republika Srpska to
agree to the reforms on defence and to the reforms for
the Indirect Taxation Authority than for any of the
other peoples. If we now stand at the gates of success,
it is in very large measure because of the statesmanship
and courage shown on a wide level in the Republika
Srpska.

But, as I am sure the Russian representative will
understand, the fact nevertheless remains that the one
barrier that now stands between us and opening those
gates to success is the barrier of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. In that regard, it is
a tragedy to me that the Serbs, having contributed so
much to delivering the country to the point it is at now,
are the people responsible for the barrier that now
remains between us and success. I can give my
absolute assurance that we will follow, as we were
rightly requested to do, a balanced approach to the
matter.

It is simply not true to say that the Serbs or
Republika Srpska are the only barriers to reform. We
have had cause to overcome barriers to reform put up
by the other people in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which
were equally large. But, the one immediately in front
of us, The Hague, is obviously an issue for the
Republika Srpska more than for any of the others.

The Russian representative also asked me to
ensure that the Constitutional Court amendments to
which he referred were enacted. I agree with him that
that is a piece of unfinished work that has to be
addressed. Could I make the point to him, however,
that, when it comes to enacting those amendments, the
roles of the institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
above all the Human Rights Chamber, ought not to be
overlooked. If the High Representative does
everything, rather than the institutions of Bosnia and
Herzegovina that are there to resolve those issues, then
we will be in effect undermining Bosnia and
Herzegovina's institutions. If people - and in this case
it is the Serbs again - should argue that their rights
under the Constitutional Court amendments have not
been adequately delivered, I would encourage them to
go, at least initially, to the Human Rights Chamber, to
the Constitutional Court in particular, to ensure that
those rights are delivered. I will certainly back up and
support that process. But ifI were to act in place of the
courts, I would be undermining the courts.

France asked me whether or not I believed that
the rule of law and the economy ought to go hand in
hand or operate sequentially. The answer is they must
go hand in hand. The rule of law is essential for
economic growth. Once the rules have been
established, not least the business rules and business
courts, only then will the economy begin to grow. It
seems to me that economic reform and justice reform
are essentially part of the same reform package: each
feeds off the other and each is necessary. Therefore,
those two threads, which have been almost the central
threads that we have followed, need to be followed not
sequentially, but in parallel.

Finally, the representative of the United Kingdom
made a point, which I think is important, about the
Bonn powers and the existence of the High
Representative. Mladen Ivanie, whom you heard from
earlier on, has his views. They are his personal views
and he put them forward in a very straightforward
manner, as usual; they are not, I think it would be fair
to say, necessarily the views of his Government. They
are his views, and I have my views, and perhaps they
are not as far apart as you might imagine in terms of
the existence of the High Representative and the Bonn
powers. But those are not matters for me, they are
matters for the Peace Implementation Council, as the
representative of the United Kingdom rightly said.
Whatever steps we take in the future to ensure that we
alter the nature of the international engagement, either
in respect of the future of the High Representative and
my Office or the future of the Bonn powers, has to be
decided by the international community in the first
place, although of course the views of our colleague
from Bosnia and Herzegovina are very important.

Secondly, as the representative of the United Kingdom
very correctly said, they have to be measured against
progress on the ground. The representative of the
United Kingdom made the point that it is progress on
the ground that enables us to move to the next stage 7
as we must in due course 7 of handing over full
sovereignty to the Bosnian and Herzegovinian people.

Mr. Chairman, I am grateful for the chance to
answer those questions.

