The President (spoke in Russian): The Security
Council will now resume consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, which is
contained in document S/2000/1196.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council welcomes the
briefing by Mr. Annabi on 19 December and the
presence of the Foreign Minister of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia at the meeting.

"The Security Council expresses its grave
concern at the situation in certain municipalities
in southern Serbia, Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, and particularly in the ground safety
zone, as defined in the military-technical
agreement referred to in annex 2 of resolution
1244 (1999) of 10 June 1999. It strongly
condemns the violent action by ethnic Albanian
extremist groups in southern Serbia and calls for
an immediate and complete cessation of violence
in this area. The Council reiterates its resolution
1244 (1999) in its entirety.

"The Security Council calls for the
dissolution of ethnic Albanian extremist groups.
The Council also calls for the immediate
withdrawal from the area, and in particular from
the ground safety zone, of all non-residents
engaged in extremist activities.

"The Council welcomes the start of a
dialogue between the Serbian and Yugoslav
the

authorities and representatives of the affected
communities, which could facilitate a lasting
settlement to the problem.

"In this regard, the Council welcomes the
commitment of the Yugoslav authorities to work
towards a peaceful settlement, based on
democratic principles, and to respect the
provisions of resolution 1244 (1999) and the
military-technical agreement, as expressed in the
letter of the President of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia to the President of the Security
Council of 13 December 2000 (S/2000/ll84).

"The Security Council welcomes specific
measures taken by the international security
presence (KFOR) to address the problem,
including increased surveillance of the border,
confiscation of weapons and the disruption of
identified and illegal activity within Kosovo in
the vicinity of the eastern administrative
boundary. It welcomes the constructive dialogue
between KFOR and the Yugoslav and Serbian
authorities, including through the Joint
Implementation Commission. The Council calls
on KFOR and the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) to
continue to make all necessary efforts to address
the problem. The Council also calls on Kosovo
Albanian leaders to contribute to the stability of
the situation.

"The Security Council welcomes the
detailed public statement of the Secretary-
General of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
of 29 November 2000, and the strong message
which this sent to extremist groups in the
Presevo-Medveda-Bujanovac area.

"The Security Council will remain actively
seized of the matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2000/40.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.25 p.m.
