Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): (spoke in French): The Kingdom of the Netherlands would
like to thank Special Envoy Michel Kafando and
Ambassador Jiirg Lauber for their informed advice
on the situation in Burundi. We thank the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2018/1028) and welcome his
announcement that he will present the Council with
a set of options on the role of the United Nations in
Burundi. I would like to focus on three points - first,
the inter-Burundian dialogue; secondly, the security
situation, the socioeconomic context and human rights;
and thirdly, the way forward.

My first point concerns the progress of the
inter-Burundian dialogue. The Kingdom of the
Netherlands expresses its support for the East African
Community facilitator, Mr. Benjamin Mkapa, and
congratulates him on his tireless efforts to promote
an inclusive and acceptable inter-Burundian
dialogue. Despite his efforts, the outcome of the
fifth inter-Burundian dialogue session, held from
25 to 29 October, was disappointing. We agree with
the facilitator that it is regrettable that the Burundian
Government did not take part in the dialogue and that
as a result, many disagreements persist. It is also clear
that there is still no road map for the 2020 elections.
Important issues such as the return of the opposition
diaspora and the protection of the achievements of
the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement are
still outstanding.

That brings me to my second point. The Netherlands
remains concerned about security, the socioeconomic
context and the human rights situation in Burundi. While
the overall security situation has improved, a climate
of repression continues to compromise the calmer
situation. The most recent report of the Commission of
Inquiry on Burundi (A/HRC/39/63) indicates that there
have been disappearances, torture and arbitrary arrests.
It also notes that the main perpetrators of those acts are
Government actors or their proxies, such as the national
security services, the police and the Imbonerakure
militia. Those abuses must stop immediately and must
not go unpunished. In addition, many Burundians
are dealing with a difficult socioeconomic situation.
Approximately 1.7 million people are food insecure and
378,000 Burundian refugees are still living outside the
country. In that context, international aid is vital. We
welcome the leadership of Ambassador Lauber, Chair
of the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, in continuing to monitor the issue. It
is also essential that Burundi's partners be able to
continue to provide their support.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands remains firmly
committed as adevelopmentpartner of Burundi. The door
to dialogue remains open to resolve misunderstandings
and to restore mutual trust. Dialogue must also be
the answer to the sudden suspension of international
non-governmental organizations, which is a serious
setback to the country's development activities.

My last point is on the way forward. Today,
the Council is considering the situation in Burundi
for the fifth time this year. There are encouraging
signs, particularly the announcement that President
Nkurunziza will not seek a new term. However, there
is insufficient progress on the most consensus-based
points most consistently highlighted by the Security
Council both in its presidential statement in April
(S/PRST/2018/7) and in its press statement in August
(SC/13461), namely, first, the need for an active and
unconditional commitment to dialogue conducted
under the auspices of the East African Community
(EAC); secondly, reaching an agreement among the
stakeholders before the 2020 elections; and thirdly,
the necessary resumption of cooperation between
Burundi and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, the Office of the
United Nations Special Envoy and the African Union
observers. At present, such issues are still pending.

The ordinary summit of the East African
Community will assess the situation in Burundi at
the end of the month, while time is running out and
the time frame between now and 2020 narrows. The
leaders of the region will have to rise to the challenge
and bring the political process out of the impasse in
which it has become embroiled. They have a key role to
play in determining the future stability of Burundi and
the region as a whole. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
looks to the EAC for leadership and guidance on the
way forward to continue the dialogue. We therefore
welcome the offer by Mr. Benjamin Mkapa to brief the
Council following the EAC summit, as stated in his
letter of 9 November.
We call on the African Union, the United
Nations and the guarantors of the Arusha Peace and
Reconciliation Agreement to actively support the
pursuit of a political solution. Inclusive dialogue
remains the only sustainable way to build the necessary
confidence for free, fair and peaceful elections in 2020.

In conclusion, I would like to echo the words of
Mr. Benjamin Mkapa - the Council must remain
seized of this matter.

