Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): Our delegation
welcomes the opportunity to participate in this
enriching exchange of views. We appreciate your
bringing before us today the very challenging subject
of the role of business in conflict prevention,
peacekeeping and post-conflict peace-building.

We do not underestimate the influence of
complex internal and external economic interests in
conflict. In many instances, economic factors such as
disputes over natural resources or international markets
may have contributed to generate or escalate war.
Nevertheless, companies also have a lot to lose with
war and conflict. Business is normally built on the
basis of an aversion to risk, and a stable political and
social environment actually means reduced risk.
Business also has a clear interest in reducing risk by
working towards conflict prevention and helping
reconstruct economies after war.

This morning, Mr. von Pierer, speaking for
Siemens, provided us with a good example of a
business vision, and of the contribution it can give to
peace-building efforts.

The primary and most evident role of business
activity in promoting peace and stability is the
generation of wealth. Business activity creates
opportunities for desperately needed income generation
in war-torn countries. When business is on the rise, so
is investment, employment and the availability of
essential goods. Infrastructure and technology
development will also benefit from increased economic
activity. That gives people hope, as was stressed by the
President of the World Bank, Mr. James Wolfensohn.

Companies also contribute to peace through the
empowerment of communities. Their comparative
advantages can be used in areas such as human
resources and management skills development, support
of civil society, economic empowerment and promotion
of equitable hiring and better labour standards.

Private business may also assist in conflict
management, either by refraining from assuming
attitudes that would worsen the conflict or by acting
within the framework of a coherent national
development policy, thus contributing to economic
sustainability. The private sector can contribute
towards implementing governmental programmes,
including in the fields of foreign aid and humanitarian
assistance and in partnership with local authorities and
the international community. In that context, the role of
regional and subregional cooperation acquires
particular importance.

Last week, we were pleased to hear accounts of
how regional cooperation is helping rebuild
infrastructure in Afghanistan and how regional joint
action is being taken to face drug trafficking, which
constitutes a central problem for that country and, in
the end, for all of us. Regional economic development
strategies lead to sustained stabilization and must be
regarded as an important dimension of peace-building
efforts.

We must remain aware, though, that the private
sector alone, acting out of enlightened self-interest,
will not create the ideal environment for promoting
peace. Its action, important as it is, is not a substitute
for the essential role played by public authorities. The
latter have primary responsibility for providing
incentives for economic activity, investing in social and
economic development, encouraging partnerships and
carrying out sound public policies in areas such as
trade, agriculture and industry. Decisive action by
public authorities in those areas must be supported by
intergovernmental organizations and peacekeeping
agencies.

On a broader scope, public authorities must also
be able and willing to take measures related to the rule
of law, property rights and sound economic
management, and be ready to fight corruption. Those
measures will help create a favourable environment for
the development of business and its engagement in
recovery and reconstruction efforts. Special attention
must be paid to incentives offered to small and medium
enterprises, due to their potential for job creation.

On the one hand, the benefits of business
engagement in promoting economic development and
social justice are very significant and must be
especially encouraged in reconstruction programmes.
On the other hand, in order to prevent negative
involvement of business actors in conflict, their
activity must be subject to public scrutiny and, not
least, good practices must be publicly recognized.

The case of conflict diamonds offers a good
example of how the international community can act to
curb the negative effects of trade. We welcome the fact
that yesterday the General Assembly adopted a
resolution strongly supporting the Kimberley Process
for international certification - an important tool in
the effort to reduce the role played by the diamond
trade in financing armed conflict. Security Council
resolution 1459 (2003) also supports the ongoing
Process, and Brazil has incorporated it in its domestic
legislation.

In the field of setting standards for corporate
practices, we note with great satisfaction the Global
Compact initiative launched by the Secretary-General
three years ago. In the effort to create a more inclusive
and sustainable global economy, the programme has
brought together businesses and United Nations
agencies, workers" associations and civil society,
helping promote fundamental principles of corporate
citizenship and increase corporate support for corporate
responsibility practices. Many Brazilian enterprises
participate in the Global Compact initiative, which is
firmly supported by our Government.

Brazil favours a closer cooperation between
business and the United Nations. The role of business
in conflict management is being increasingly taken into
account by development initiatives. The New
Partnership for Africa's Development, which was
already referred to here, launched in 2001, helps fight
poverty, underdevelopment and marginalization in the
continent. It incorporates the idea of mobilizing
resources with private sector participation to contribute
to creating a favourable environment for conflict
prevention and the prevalence of peace.

History offers a number of examples of
involvement of business in international and intra-State
conflict. The new modern international awareness of
the role of business and its responsibilities in times of
conflict will certainly help make business a firm ally of
peace, together with the United Nations family, the
international financial institutions and non-
governmental organizations. In particular, we share the
views expressed by the President of the Economic and
Social Council, Ms. Rasi, to the effect that much more
can be done by the General Assembly, the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council, working
together, to develop a comprehensive and more rapid
response to countries in special situations and also to
envisage a long-term perspective towards both
sustainable development and conflict prevention.

Ambassador Kumalo recalled the instances of
cooperation being provided to Guinea-Biseau and
Burundi. We believe that such cooperation should be
expanded. Active business participation is crucial, not
only for economic development but also for social
justice, and has a sure impact on peace-building. The
Brazilian delegation is ready to participate in all efforts
towards enhancing the cooperation between the United
Nations and the business sector in conflict prevention,
peacekeeping and post-conflict peace-building.

