Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I welcome you to the presidency of the
Security Council, Madam. We thank the Secretary-
General for his comprehensive statement and the
Permanent Representatives of Australia and Lithuania
for their briefings on the efforts of the Committees
they lead in undertaking the tasks mandated by recent
decisions of the Council. We continue to believe
that the activities of those entities are an important
contribution to strengthening the central coordinating
role of the United Nations and the Security Council in
international counter-terrorism cooperation.

Two months, following the adoption of resolution
2178 (2014), aimed at cutting off the oxygen for all
activities of foreign terrorist fighters, the Council has
once again been compelled to focus on the problem of
terrorism - a threat that is not going away. Posing a
threat to all regions of the world, the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), the Al-Nusra Front (ANF)
and other terrorist groups have long been active in the
Middle East. They have acquired additional capacities
for their criminal activities due to the weakening of
State institutions, courtesy of foreign intervention in
no small measure, and to the support of various foreign
sponsors. Moreover, so long as the ISIL and ANF
extremists were fighting Government forces in Syria,
certain States did not seem especially bothered. We
believe that such double standards are unacceptable in
the fight against terrorism.
The report published recently by the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian
Arab Republic, created by the Human Rights Council,
explicitly notes that weapons and support provided
from abroad to so-called moderate armed groups in
Syria have time and again fallen into the hands of
more radical elements, including ISIL. Extremists have
enjoyed foreign financing, including through charitable
organizations and private individuals. The document
paints an appalling picture of the current consequences
of such short-sighted - to put it mildly - activities,
especially for civilians, including women and children.

Leniency towards the activities of extremist groups
has jeopardized the future of entire States, as is clear in
the examples of Iraq, Syria and Libya. Lebanon, Yemen,
Mali and the Central African Republic are also on the
firing line. Terrorist activities on the Afghanistan-
Pakistan border continue to be linked to Al-Qaida, as
stated in the reports of the Monitoring Teams of the
Committees established pursuant to resolution 1988
(2011) and resolution 1267 (1999). In that regard, we
support focusing the efforts of the Security Council on
combating the radicalization that fuels terrorism, the
replication of terrorist ideology and violent extremism,
and the use of the media and the Internet for terrorist
purposes, and on banning incitement towards terrorism
and countering the appeal of terrorist activities. It is
vital that States pursue their efforts under the auspices
of the United Nations system's work in those areas.
Presidential statement S/PRST/2014/23, adopted today,
points us in the right direction.

Another cause for concern is terrorist income, one of
the most important sources of which is the illegal trade
in Syrian and Iraqi oil. In Syria, jihadists are exploiting
as many as 10 oil fields. ISIL is producing almost
30,000 barrels a day. In Iraq, that terrorist organization
controls 14 oil fields and is exporting up to 50,000-
60,000 barrels a day. Terrorists' total daily income
from the oil trade is approaching $3 million. Moreover,
air strikes on the oil facilities seized by the terrorists
in Iraq and Syria have barely made a dent in the level
of illegal sales. Objectively, they merely complicate the
living conditions of people living in those regions. Oil
tankers go about their business; makeshift pipelines are
up and running; and shady dealers and middle-men are
helping get crude oil onto the black market.

The Security Council's requirements of Member
States, as set out in resolution 2170 (2014) seem to
have gone unheeded - a situation that requires the
Council's focused attention. In that context, we cannot
help but note that in April 2013 the European Union
partially lifted the series of restrictions imposed on
Syria and authorized the purchase of Syrian oil by
non-State traders. In so doing, it indirectly facilitated
the financial strengthening of ISIL and the Al-Nusra
Front, which control the oil fields in north-eastern
Syria. Brussels should acknowledge that.

We are also troubled by reports of ISIL's seizure of
humanitarian assistance earmarked for needy Syrians.
We must prevent situations in which humanitarian
assistance is distributed under the black flag of the
Islamic State, which strengthens its authority in
territory under its control.

Another worrisome issue is the growing battle
capabilities of the terrorists, above all ISIL. They
already have access to chemical weapons of mass
destruction. There is much eyewitness testimony of
their use by terrorist militants in Iraq and Syria. There
is a genuine danger that they may gain access to the
Libyan and Iraqi chemical arsenals. We believe that
the Council must take a decisive stand on this issue
and make it clear that the use of chemical weapons by
whomsoever will carry consequences. In that regard, we
regret that our delegation's proposed draft presidential
statement on chemical weapons in Syria was effectively
blocked by a number of delegations, which sought to
amend it for one purpose alone - to shift all the focus
on issues related to the chemical demilitarization of
Syria. The text in question was also omitted from the
presidential statement adopted today. We stress that
shielding terrorists at a time when they are becoming
increasingly proficient at synthesizing, producing and
using substances for military purposes is unacceptable
and very dangerous.

In the light of the new tasks assigned to the Security
Council's counter-terrorism bodies, the need for the
subsidiary organs of the Council and its expert groups
to comply in their work with existing procedures
takes on particular importance. In that regard, we
would like to reiterate that resolution 2178 (2014) sets
out a commitment for airlines to provide passenger
name records only in cases where individuals under
sanction by the Security Council Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities,
have sought to leave or enter countries. Therefore,
the instruction to the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate (CTED) contained in today's presidential
statement to prepare for the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) an overall report on measures to
monitor the movement of air passengers and on the
preparation of the relevant recommendations, without
tying it to a specific Security Council sanctions list,
breaches the terms of resolution 2178 (2014).

We welcome the role of CTED in providing
assistance to the Counter-Terrorism Committee and
commend the Directorate's swift preparation of a
preliminary analysis of the gaps in the implementation
of resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005) that make it
harder for States to combat the threat of foreign terrorist
fighters. We believe that the central focus of CTED
under its updated mandate should remain to provide
support to the CTC, monitoring the implementation of
the previously mentioned resolutions and coordinating
the provision of technical assistance to Member States.

