Ms. Shalev (Israel): I thank you, Madam, for
having convened this important debate on counter-
terrorism. I express my thanks, too, to the Chairpersons
of the counter-terrorism Committees for their
professional work and for their informative briefings
this morning.

Close cooperation and coordination among all
three subsidiary bodies in the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force are of the utmost
importance, and we encourage the Committees to
continue providing more frequent informal briefings to
Member States as part of their growing effort to
provide for transparent engagement with their work.

Less than two weeks ago, a car bomb was planted
in the heart of Manhattan in a failed attempt to kill
scores of innocent civilians. Earlier this year, the
people of Russia witnessed the terrible toll of suicide
terrorism. Thus, we are reminded time and again that
terrorism is a global and vivid threat that transcends
boundaries and nations.

The international community, and the United
Nations in particular, have a crucial role to play in
coordinating counter-terrorism efforts. The response to
those providing safe haven to terrorists should be
unequivocal. Sponsoring terrorism and permitting
terrorist groups to act with impunity from one's
territory are not among the prerogatives of sovereignty.
A State that is unwilling to deal effectively with such
activities must be held accountable for its deeds. A
number of United Nations treaties already provide a
legal framework to address this threat. What remains to
be seen is sufficient political will.

We Israelis know first-hand the devastation of
terrorism. In certain parts of our region, we witness
safe haven given to terrorists, the transfer of weapons
to terrorist organizations and the growing incitement to
terrorism. Most alarming in this regard are the Member
States of this Organization that support, harbour,
finance, train, transfer and smuggle terrorists and
weapons in our region.

The most dangerous terrorist organizations
threatening Israel's security are Hamas in the South
and Hizbullah in the North. In this regard, we
emphasize the pressing need to address the
implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624
(2005), in particular, as well as other relevant
resolutions, beyond the mere obligation of State
reporting. In addition, we believe that no counter-
terrorism strategy is complete unless it addresses the
issue of incitement.

Regarding the Counter-Terrorism Committee and
the work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED), I should like to
commend Mr. Smith for his able leadership. We
appreciate his ongoing dialogue with Member States,
as well as the informal briefings on current affairs,
which are an effective and valuable tool.

Israel supported the adoption of resolution 1805
(2008), which extended the mandate of the CTED, and
is further encouraged by the professional dialogue
between Member States and the CTED related to the
Preliminary Implementation Assessments. We also
welcome the finalization of the technical guide that
will serve as a road map for the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001).

Israel's strong commitment to confront global
terrorism has led it to strengthen its professional
cooperation with the CTED. Through our unique and
tragic experience in this field, which has developed
over many years, Israel has willingly shared its best
practices with other interested parties, and we are
constantly considering ways to strengthen our technical
cooperation.

At the same time, however, I wish to emphasize
the overarching goal of the work of the CTED, beyond
the valuable aspects of technical assistance and
capacity-building. As reinforced in Security Council
resolution 1805 (2008), the crucial role of the CTED
remains first and foremost to ensure the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) and to
support the Counter-Terrorism Committee in the
fulfilment of this task.

The Al-Qaida sanctions Committee remains an
important part of the efforts to isolate terrorists and
their means to inflict harm. Israel welcomes the
progress towards promoting clear and fair procedures
concerning the inclusion of individuals on the
consolidated list. Israel encourages efforts to ensure
due process guarantees in the process of listing and de-
listing terrorist groups. In this regard, we welcome in
particular the adoption last year of resolution 1904
(2009) which, among other things, created the post of
an ombudsperson to address key aspects of due process
and human rights concerns. We hope that a
professional, competent individual will be appointed to
this important post. We further welcome the decision of
the Council to make accessible a summary of the
reasons for listing and to conduct a review of all names
on the consolidated list in order to ensue that it is
updated and accurate.

Israel fully supports resolution 1540 (2004) and
the subsequent renewal of its mandate. Israel believes
that it is critical to continue to develop international
standards against the use and proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction. Nuclear terrorism and radiological
substances in the hands of terrorists represent a grave
global threat and a concern to us all. Export control
systems and appropriate national counter-terrorism
legislation are critical elements in the overall effort to
prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and related dual-use items.

Israel further believes that, in order to enhance
the dialogue among Member States and the 1540
Committee, it would be extremely helpful to receive
periodic briefings by the Expert Coordinator of the
work of the Committee.

The international community must continue to
seek and implement measures that keep the world's
most dangerous weapons out of the hands of the
world's most dangerous individuals. It has an
obligation to address in a proactive and decisive
manner the threat posed by the transfer of weapons and
capabilities by some Member States to terrorist
organizations, including in our region, where the
danger from the continuous smuggling of arms is
increasingly clear. This support, which constitutes a
violation of numerous Security Council resolutions,
undermines the stability of our entire region.

We in Israel are all too familiar with the
horrifying toll that terrorism exacts. The struggle
against this plague will require our joint will, effort
and action. We appreciate this opportunity for dialogue
and an exchange of views. Israel, for its part, will
continue to actively engage in the work of the
Council's counter-terrorism Committees and to fully
support their work.

