Mr. Munoz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): First, I
welcome the presence of Foreign Minister Zebari, who
is with us in the Council again, but this time in a
different capacity. It seems to us that his suggestions
and recommendations are absolutely fundamental to
adopting a good resolution on the future of Iraq in this
very important period.

As he said, the first step in the political process
has been taken with the appointment of the sovereign
interim Government. As he said, it is the best possible
result in the present circumstances. It is a compromise.
Like all compromises, it is perhaps not the optimal
situation, but it is based on reality. We agree with him
that the key idea of the resolution that the Council
adopts should be the full transfer of sovereignty to the
Iraqis beginning on 30 June. We believe that the
appointment of the interim Government is an important
step in that direction, as well as in the timetable of the
political transition towards full democracy.

This Government deserves a chance to carry out
its specific tasks for a limited period. Now, the
challenge falls upon us in the Security Council to
prepare a good resolution that truly contributes to the
full transfer of sovereignty to the interim Government,
without ambiguity, with the greatest possible clarity
and, if possible, with additional inputs from the Iraqi
Government itself over the coming days.

We have already made considerable progress, but
the text still needs to shed more light on the
relationship between the sovereign interim Government
and the multinational force. It must reaffirm the
principles of international law and international
humanitarian law. It must specify more clearly the end
of the mandate of the multinational force, with the
understanding that the force will be required for a
significant length of time, as Minister Zebari himself
indicated.
In that context, I would like to take this
opportunity to ask three questions that might help the
Council in its work of preparing the draft resolution.

First, in the stage prior to the selection of the
interim Government, some criteria were set out with
respect to the future interim Government of Iraq. In
that connection, I would like to know whether the new
Government adopted or considered the condition that
individuals appointed as members of the interim
Government could not be candidates in the elections
scheduled for January of next year.

Secondly, I would like to know what, in the
opinion of the Foreign Minister, are fundamental
elements that would enable the interim Government to
exercise its full authority in accordance with the
sovereignty it will have as of 30 June. In other words,
what are the indispensable components that comprise
full and complete sovereignty and that Mr. Zebari and
others would like to see reflected in the resolution?

Finally, we have read in the press some
statements attributed to members of the interim
Government on the subject of security. For that reason,
and picking up on Minister Zebari's own words
referring to full control of the Iraqi forces, we would
like to know whether the new Iraqi authorities hope to
have such full and effective control of the country's
armed forces and security forces. How do they hope to
ensure coordination with the multinational force?

I would like to pose one more question, to which
Minister Zebari should not feel obliged to respond.
What policy will be adopted towards the militias that
currently exist on the ground? That could be a problem
for the political process that lies ahead.

