Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
would first like to thank Mr. O'Brien once again for
his comprehensive briefing and for the years he has
put in at the helm of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), working with unceasing
courage at his humanitarian task, which we would like
to highlight and for which we are deeply grateful. We
are also grateful to his entire team, particularly the
humanitarian workers on the ground, who risk their
lives to bring aid to the civilians in need.

We condemn the recent attack of 17 June and would
like to express our solidarity with the Syrian Red Cross
staff who were injured. It is hard to understand how it
can be that months and years have passed while we have
continued to witness the frustration of OCHA, unable
to carry out its mandated task because of security
issues - or, even more incomprehensibly, owing to the
refusal of the Government itself to authorize it. That
is not a failure on OCHA's part, or for United Nations
institutions generally, but it is a failure for the Security
Council, which has not been able to influence the parties
to the Syrian conflict - and by whom I mean all of the
actors in the conflict - to change their attitude and
enable relatively normal access for humanitarian aid
and its regular delivery.

We in this Chamber are so accustomed to
discussing this subject that we can forget the fact that
this is a human tragedy that Syria has been enduring
since 2011 - not just for the millions of refugees and
displaced persons that the conflict has created, but also
for the hundreds of thousands who have died or been
wounded and for the destruction that has been inflicted
on the country and that will take decades to rebuild. As
usual, it is the most vulnerable who are most affected,
including women, children and the elderly.

The protection of civilians in Syria has merely
been vapid rhetoric that all parties to the conflict
have continued to disregard and violate. The goals for
Syria have been clearly defined and must be gradually
achieved in order to be able to offer the Syrian people
a future full of promise, after so many years of
savagery. The first goal is, and must continue to be,
achieving a political solution that would end the crisis
and lead to a peaceful transition in Syria. The solution
must be negotiated by all Syrians and backed by the
international community. We trust that the good offices
of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, will bring us closer to that goal.

In addition to the Geneva talks, the Astana process
is also necessary for reducing the level of violence in
Syria and, fortunately, the process has been yielding
positive results. We support the efforts of the three
guarantor countries and we believe that progress can
be made next week to consolidate the ceasefire so that
the seventh round of Geneva talks with the parties can
commence in a positive atmosphere.
Almost two months after the signing of the
memorandum that established the safe zones, we
have yet to receive official information on the
implementation of that agreement. We are concerned
about the fact that, to date, the United Nations has not
been granted unhindered access to those areas. That
would give some indication that the essential principles
of international humanitarian law are being respected,
such as humanitarian access, the prohibition of forced
displacement, and freedom of movement, so that people
can freely enter and leave those areas. The political
process and the cessation of hostilities are only two of
the ways to ensure that Syria begins a new chapter.

The third, equally important, issue continues to be
the humanitarian dimension. We are still far from an
encouraging outcome that could alleviate the suffering
of the civilian population in Syria. Once again, we call
for immediate, sustained and unhindered access to all
besieged and hard-to-reach areas. However, our main
goal must be to lift the unjustifiable and abhorrent siege
on those areas.

For Uruguay, the protection of civilians in Syria and
in any other conflict is the top priority. It is immoral to
target civilians because they support one or other of
the parties or because they find themselves in a certain
area that is controlled by one or other of the parties.
Delivering justice for the hundreds of thousands of
innocent victims in the conflict is essential to achieving
lasting peace in Syria and for the country and its entire
population to overcome the horrors of the war.

Uruguay supported the establishment of an
international impartial and independent mechanism
to investigate crimes committed in Syria and hopes
that it can begin its work shortly. We also support the
request of Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for the
situation in Syria to be referred to the International
Criminal Court.

Despite the adoption, one year ago, ofresolution 2286
(2016), we continue to bear witness to the destruction
of hospitals and health centres in Syria, which proves
that the parties to the conflict have disregarded the
resolution's provisions, thereby depriving thousands of
people of their right to medical attention and leading
to hundreds of victims among medical and health-care
personnel. That is in serious violation of international
humanitarian law and amounts to war crimes. The
practice is also carried out on schools, markets and
all kinds of civilian infrastructure. We condemn such
attacks in Syria, Yemen and in any other place where
they occur.
In conclusion, Uruguay underscores that the full
and effective implementation of measures to ensure
the cessation of hostilities, the protection of civilians
and civilian infrastructure and the facilitation of
administrative procedures to allow for humanitarian
access can, and must, make a major difference in the
lives of the Syrian people, who, month after month,
demand that the Security Council take concrete
action. It is therefore imperative that that commitment
be honoured as soon as possible. We trust that, as
has occurred on previous occasions, the Council can
overcome its differences and assume its responsibility
in order to guarantee international peace and security.

