Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Ukraine aligns itself
with the statement to be delivered later today on behalf
of the European Union (EU).

I thank High Representative Valentin Inzko for
his briefing and report (see 8/2017/922, annex), which
is as objective as usual. I also reiterate Ukraine's full
and continued support for his efforts to assist the
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina in overcoming
the challenges they face, including implementing the
General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. The role of the High Representative,
while always pivotal, will be particularly important next
year, in View of the upcoming 2018 general elections.
Ukraine would like to take this opportunity to call on
the Government of the Republika Srpska to resume its
cooperation with the High Representative and refrain
from intimidating his team.

Ukraine welcomes the Security Council'sunanimous
adoption today of resolution 2384 (2017). The Council's
united position sends a strong message of support to
the people and leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as
well as for the activities of the European Union-led
peacekeeping force Althea. Today's resolution also
represents a united call on Bosnia and Herzegovina to
step up its efforts to complete the 5+2 agenda, refrain
from polarizing policies and rhetoric and continue
to work to implement comprehensive reforms. In our
View, along with further actions aimed at European and
Euro-Atlantic integration, those steps will contribute to
building a stable and prosperous country for the benefit
of all its citizens.

Ukraine looks forward to the day when Bosnia and
Herzegovina becomes a fully fledged member of the
European Union. We welcome the progress that has been
made in that direction with the signing in September of
a transport community treaty with the EU and five other
Western Balkans countries, as well as the ongoing work
on compiling answers to the European Commission's
questionnaire. Given the existing support of the people
of Bosnia and Herzegovina for European integration,
we sincerely believe that this foreign-policy objective
could unite both entities.
We echo the concerns of the High Representative
about some irresponsible decisions by the Republika
Srpska National Assembly, even if some of them have
recently been reversed. On a positive note, we are glad
that the threat of holding a referendum on the status
of the Republika Srpska has reportedly been taken
off the table for the time being. I would like to take
this opportunity to reiterate Ukraine's full support for
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and to underscore that its entities have no
right to secede. Ukraine strongly supports the position
of the High Representative on the resolution on the
protection of the constitutional order and assuring the
military neutrality of the Republika Srpska, adopted by
the Republika Srpska National Assembly in October.
We are also concerned about the possibility that this
resolution would, in effect, favour a division of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and we cannot support attempts to
undermine the General Framework Agreement and
Bosnia and Herzegovina's constitutional order.

Next year will be a very challenging one for Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Preparations for the upcoming 2018
general elections have already started a full year ahead,
with very divisive actions and rhetoric. Despite the
existing problems related to indirect elections, the
parties in the State Parliament have not yet begun
a serious political dialogue to discuss potential
amendments to the election law addressing that issue.
Other potential or actual problems include the rejection
of the authority of the Court ofBosnia and Herzegovina
and its Office ofthe Prosecutor in the Republika Srpska
and the continued attempts by its authorities to make
decisions on foreign policy, as well as many others. If
those challenges are not addressed in a comprehensive
and consensual way, with the participation of all sides,
the political gains made since the conclusion of the
Dayton Agreement will be undermined.

I therefore call on the political leaders of all sides
to refrain from divisive rhetoric and to concentrate
on the real issues, where progress is so desperately
needed. It particular, it will be Vital to continue efforts
to implement the reform agenda, which include social,
economic, rule-of-law and public-administration
reforms. It will also be important to show progress in the
functioning of the judiciary, in combating corruption
and organized crime and in countering radicalization
and terrorism. As we enter the third decade of the peace
process, the Council has an obligation to provide all the
necessary political support to ensure further peace and
development in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is crucial
to ensure that any attempts to encroach on Bosnia
and Herzegovina's independence, unity, sovereignty
and territorial integrity are resolutely addressed
and prevented.

