Mr. Alzate (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2012/818) on
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK), and Mr. Farid Zarif, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his very
detailed briefing on the Mission and recent events in
that country. Allow me to also welcome the Ministers
for Foreign Affairs of Kosovo, Mr. Enver Hoxhaj, and
of Serbia, Mr. Ivan Mrkie. We listened very carefully to
their statements.

We note that, during the period covered by the
report, the security situation in Kosovo remained
relatively calm, and useful efforts were made by local
leaders in the region to moderate their rhetoric and
improve trust between the communities. However, we
are concerned by a few incidents that took place in the
north of Kosovo.

I would also like to highlight the progress achieved
in the implementation of the agreements reached
through dialogue and the adoption of measures for
implementing regional cooperation agreements and
joint management of border crossings. All of this leads
us to call on the parties to continue to work on the
basis of the achievements that have been reached and
with renewed energy on those issues that still present
difficulties. We hope that the dialogue promoted by the
European Union between Belgrade and Pristina will be
resumed with renewed confidence, aiming at peace and
prosperity.

We note that the issue of the return of communities
to their places of origin still raises certain types of
challenges, including in the socioeconomic sphere and
with respect to coexistence. In that respect, Colombia
recognizes the work carried out by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
its partners to work with displaced persons towards
rapprochement, and the valuable contribution of other
stakeholders who have contributed to this urgent task.
We commend the initiative of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in
Kosovo and UN-Women in offering their support to the
Kosovo Agency for Gender Equality in the Office of the
Prime Minister in the development of a Kosovo action
plan on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).

We are concerned that attacks against international
organizations in Kosovo continue. My delegation
rejects and condemns such acts and calls emphatically
for respect for the work of these organizations and an
end to these attacks. Furthermore, given the charges
of organ trafficking, Colombia will closely follow the
results of the investigation, and offer its support to the
work carried out by Mr. Williamson, the lead prosecutor
of the Special Investigative Task Force. We hope that
it will reach a swift conclusion and ensure that those
responsible for these acts are brought to justice.

Security, stability and respect for human rights are
key to building lasting results. We therefore believe
that UNMIK must continue to promote cooperation in
this area between the parties involved and regional and
international agencies.

To conclude, I would like to express Colombia's
satisfaction with the holding of the meeting between
the Heads of Government of Kosovo and Serbia in
Brussels under the auspices of the European Union. We
hope that this will mark the beginning of a new period
of deeper and more extensive dialogue and cooperation
between Belgrade and Pristina.

