Mr. Ould Abdallah: The purpose of my
presentation is to introduce the next steps in the
implementation of the Djibouti agreement, an ongoing
process, and to explain how I see Somalia's long march
back to normality. First I would like to make a few
observations, then to outline the importance of the
linkages between governance, security and development,
and finally to discuss how to make the best use of the
first 100 days of the new Government.

A few observations: for years, the situation in
Somalia has been a threat to its people, with continued
armed confrontation and subsequent anarchy, and a
threat to its neighbours, with border insecurity and
trafficking of humans, weapons and drugs. A
vulnerable State has made the whole region vulnerable.
Finally, it has been a threat to the international
community, with increasing irregular migration flows,
home-grown hard drugs, terrorism and piracy.

To address the complexities in Somalia, a new
paradigm, based on the linkages between governance,
security and development, is now needed. While the
Somali elite - military, business and religious leaders,
but also elders and intellectuals - bears most of the
blame for the collapse of their nation, the international
community cannot Shirk its own responsibilities.
Today, all of us, Somalis and the international
community, should undertake efforts to win each
other's hearts and minds. Somalis have to find a way
out of the trap, and we do too.

Obviously, there is no possibility of wide-scale
recovery and rehabilitation if the internal situation
remains volatile. At the same time, without basic
investment in development - providing employment for
09-27495
youth and women and rehabilitating neighbourhoods -
criminality will continue to thrive and security will not
improve.

A strategy with achievable goals should help
stabilize the country. For the next 100 days, these goals
should be limited to employment, renovation of
infrastructure and humanitarian assistance. Many
young people are always available for violent
confrontation. A large number of those extremists, who
carry out murder under different banners, are generally
far more interested in their share of revenues than in
ideology. There are plenty of illegitimate ways to make
small and large profits in and from Somalia. How can
we convince the profit-seekers and spoilers that peace
will be more profitable?

Simultaneous assistance to governance, security
and development should be delivered. While large
resources are available for Somalia, a major problem is
their effective and timely disbursement. That issue
should be addressed urgently. However, it should not
be up to the international community alone to support
Somalia. The country has the longest coastline in
Africa - 2,300 kilometres - with rich fish resources
and promising hydrocarbon deposits. More important,
it has an extraordinarily entrepreneurial business
community, and its diaspora sends more than $1 billion
home each year. Those advantages should be mobilized
for peace, reconstruction and development - not for
destruction. Creating insecurity inside the country for
20 years and, now, exposing young members of the
diaspora to terrorist activities and suspicion in their
new homelands is unpatriotic.

During my first statement before the Council, on
17 December 2007 (see S/PV.5805), I presented three
possible courses of action for the United Nations to
follow in Somalia. They were: a business-as-usual
policy; total withdrawal from the country; and
combined, simultaneous, political, security and
development undertakings. The Djibouti agreement is
the result of the last approach. In that connection, I
wish to recognize with thanks the support that I have
received from the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), the African Union, the League
of Arab States, the Organization of the Islamic
Conference, the European Union, the European
Commission, Norway, the United States, Djibouti and
Kenya, to mention only a few, as well as the permanent
members of the Security Council, who have been very
supportive. The members of the International Contact
09-27495
Group on Somalia, which I chair, have demonstrated a
strong engagement in favour of stability in Somalia.

Today, we need a 100-day assistance programme.
The State legitimacy is established and the legality of
the new institutions is recognized regionally,
internationally and, indeed, by the vast majority of
Somalis. The President, the Speaker, the Prime
Minister, the Cabinet and parliament are all back in
Mogadishu, a welcome departure from past practices of
functioning from outside the capital. Describing
Somalia, The Economist stated recently that there is a
glimmer of hope, and indeed there is a chance for a
fresh start.

That new seriousness of purpose invites the
international community to back the progress being
made through practical actions. Those include, first,
immediate support for the new authorities; secondly,
immediate diplomatic and financial assistance to the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM); thirdly,
transparent and unhindered delivery of humanitarian
assistance; fourthly, the matter of individuals on the
Security Council sanctions Iist; fifthly, impunity; and,
finally, piracy off the Somali coast.

We should now help Somalis reclaim the future
of their country. The new Administration has a
convincing legitimacy and is recognized internationally
by IGAD, the African Union, the European Union, the
League of Arab States, the Organization of the Islamic
Conference and the United Nations. There is, therefore,
an obligation to respect and cooperate with those new
authorities and to do no harm to their institutions and
their credibility. They should be consulted on,
informed about and associated with all political,
economic and humanitarian actions concerning their
country. That new approach should put an end to past
misunderstandings between some members of the
international community and Somalia's central
Government. The new Government should also be
informed about Somalia's assets held in a number of
overseas banks or in accounts managed by
international organizations.

Secondly, pending the mobilization of credible
funding for AMISOM, the courageous and dedicated
African troops and their countries of origin deserve
immediate diplomatic recognition and financial
support. In that context, I hope that the conference for
resource mobilization for AMISOM. and the Somali
forces, organized in cooperation with the African
3

Union, the League of Arab States, the European Union
and the United Nations within the framework of
resolution 1863 (2009), will be successful. The
Secretary-General is due to submit a report for a
United Nations peacekeeping operation in advance of a
Council decision on the issue in June. The integrated
planning process to develop the Secretary-General's
recommendations is ongoing.

Thirdly, after two decades of armed
confrontation, humanitarian assistance is needed more
than ever before. While the needs are enormous,
Somalia is not to be seen as a purely humanitarian
case. A 20-year-Iong emergency is a contradiction in
terms. More has to be done, especially at the political
and diplomatic levels, to find a lasting solution. While
humanitarian assistance should be provided in close
cooperation and consultation with the legitimate
Government, it should not and cannot be used as a
political tool by any party, be it the Government, the
opposition or others.

Fourthly, last year a Somali was taken off the list
of the United Nations Al-Qaida and Taliban Sanctions
Committee. I believe that others should qualify when
they demonstrate a sincere desire to help the return of
peace and stability to their country of origin by
severing all links with radical groups.

Finally, the Djibouti Agreement makes provision
for justice and reconciliation. Impunity perpetuates
violence. The country should address crimes against
humanity and war crimes committed by Somalis
against Somalis. A national truth and reconciliation
commission could be established, and the Security
Council may also consider the problem through a
commission of inquiry.

Regarding piracy, it is above all a profitable
business. It is linked to the failure of the State on land
and is its extension offshore. It has to be addressed
vigorously to help the security of maritime trade
routes. By drawing attention to the plight of Somalis,
the international naval presence is a show of solidarity
with the country and the whole region. Indeed, to fight
piracy is also to fight many criminal activities -
illegal fishing, waste dumping and trafficking in
humans and drugs. At the same time, there is the need
to consolidate cooperative work to help trace the
pirates' financial resources. At the United Nations
Political Office for Somalia, we plan to do that with
our colleagues at the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime. Finally, while Somalia's sovereignty and
national interests are to be respected, acts of piracy by
private individuals or groups can never be justified.

In conclusion, given the long-standing scepticism
and diehard habits, the struggle for peace will be long.
Therefore, the first priority in Somalia is to liberate the
hijacked Somali peace agenda, held hostage for so
long. I would argue that with the Djibouti Agreement,
the country has passed the crossroads. It is on a one-
way street going forward. The price of regression to
the conflict is too high for Somalia, the region and,
indeed, the international community.

