Mr. Garcia Moritan (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Jan

Pronk, for his comprehensive briefing, of which we
would like to emphasize the following elements. First,
the observations concerning the limited progress in the
parties' fulfilment of their obligations under the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement are not reassuring.
We believe that further progress in key areas is
necessary, such as with regard to the obligation to
share power and wealth, especially as concerns oil.

We would also like to mention that legislation
necessary to establish the national human rights, civil
service, land and electoral commissions is still
pending. At the same time, even though some of the
various ceasefire bodies are working well and have had
a significant role in the peaceful resolution of several
incidents that have occurred, the authorities continue to
impose restrictions on the activities of the monitors of
the United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) in
Abyei, which constitute a clear violation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement.

Those restrictions are among the instances of
non-compliance with the commitments entered into by
the Government in the status-of-forces agreement.
Others include, for example, the arrest and detention of
UNMIS national staff. We urge the authorities to fully
comply with their commitments, and we urge the
parties to implement fully, and not selectively, the
provisions of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement.

We also urge the Government to immediately lift
the restrictions imposed on humanitarian access,
especially in the states of Kassala, Red Sea and
Gedaref, and to coordinate with UNMIS the assistance
necessary to relocate communities, in order to avoid a
recurrence of incidents like the one that occurred in
Dar Assalam on 16 and 17 August.

As Mr. Pronk indicated, the implementation of
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement has entered a
new phase that is full of challenges, and substantial
progress should be made in the areas of security-sector
reform, police reform and restructuring and preparing
for the return of internally displaced persons, the
national census and future elections, while continuing
active disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes to reduce the scourge of the grave
problem of the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons. All of that, without any doubt, will contribute
to bringing the population closer to realizing the
benefits of the peace for which they have been hoping
for so long.

However, that peace will be possible only if the
entire country is at peace, once the critical situation
that we are all aware of in Darfur ends in the
framework of a lasting solution that is not based on
coercion and violence.

The state of coma that Mr. Pronk has just
described with regard to the Darfur Peace Agreement is
of great concern. Mr. Pronk was very clear that it is
necessary to support the forces of the African Union
Mission in the Sudan (AMIS), and that the Government
of Khartoum must give its consent to the deployment
to Darfur of United Nations forces as well - in other
words, the immediate implementation of resolution
1706 (2006). We should not forget our responsibility to
protect, and we must, therefore, respond.

The Comprehensive Peace Agreement is the
bedrock on which the implementation of the Darfur
Peace Agreement must be built. It is necessary that
both instruments enjoy the support of all parties,
because they constitute negotiated political solutions of
both conflicts. Only in that way will it be possible to
leave behind conflict and instability and lay the
foundations for a society based on equality and respect
for human rights for all.

