Mr. Dacic' (Serbia) (spoke in Serbian; English text provided by the delegation): At the outset, I would like
to express my gratitude to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Zahir Tanin, for presenting
the report (S/2016/666) of the Secretary-General and to
congratulate the President of the Security Council for
his successful stewardship of the affairs of the Council
during the month of August. I also extend my greetings
to all the members of the Security Council.

The members of the Security Council deal with
issues that pose security threats as they strive to fulfil
the principal task entrusted to them by the Charter of the
United Nations, namely, safeguarding of international
peace. In doing so, they often encounter problems
whose causes date back decades, even centuries.
Presumably, members of the Council are not familiar,
nor can they be, with all of the details, especially the
minute ones, and all the facts relating to each and every
problem that they are called upon to resolve. That puts
an even greater obligation on those who come before the
Council to present only true facts - facts that they have
checked. Serbia's representatives have always made
every effort to address the Council in a constructive
manner, as they wish to contribute to the process of
reconciliation and to the stability of the region, as well
as to the dialogue conducted in Brussels. Pristina's
representatives, however, continue to overload the
Council with falsehoods and lies, and lately they have
even engaged in outright propaganda.
At the previous meeting (see S/PV.7693) of the
Security Council on the situation in Kosovo and
Metohija, on 16 May, in addition to other fabrications,
we heard that Albanians in Kosovo and Metohija were
denied the right to play and that Albanian youngsters
had been beaten and arrested by the Serbian police just
because they were playing football. An uninformed
listener might have thought that what was being
described was a scene in a territory controlled by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. The next image he
could have conjured up was that of a public execution
of players on the sports field.

As in most countries in the world, football is the
most popular sport in Serbia. Surely, the most Widely
known club from the southern Serbian province is the
Pristina Football Club; its golden era was the mid-1980s
when it competed in Yugoslavia's Federal League
I. Pristina's best player ever was Fadil Vokrri, the
current President of the so-called Football Association
of Kosovo. That very same Fadil Vokrri decided in
1986, when he finished his season with Pristina, to
join no other club but the Partizan of Belgrade. Not
the Partizani of Tirana, but the Partizan of Belgrade,
where he played for three full years, while, incidentally,
Slobodan Milosevic was in power. During that period,
Fadil Vokrri won caps 12 times while playing for
Yugoslavia, and in a match with Flamurtari of Albania,
he scored a goal and was voted the best player of the
match. He says today that he still supports Belgrade's
Partizan team. In addition to Vokrri, other Kosovo and
Metohija Albanian footballers have played for Partizan,
some of whom are legends in that club.

Does it sound believable that a player, allegedly
abused, beaten and discriminated against simply
because he was a member of a national minority,
would play for the national team and a major club from
the capital of that country for years? Some Council
members are, I suppose, surprised, if not astonished,
to hear such facts, considering what was heard at the
previous Council meeting. Nothing can surprise me
now, and I am expecting to hear, in a few minutes, new
falsehoods, new lies, new propaganda outbursts.

One of the mantras always repeated by all
representatives of Pristina is that Kosovo and Metohija
Albanians were loyal and good citizens of Yugoslavia
before Slobodan Milosevic took over the reins of
power. That contention is simply another historically
unfounded fabrication propagated throughout the
international community in order to win support for
the separatism and ethnic cleansing systematically
conducted in Kosovo and Metohija over the past 100
years.

It is clear that systematic nationalism and separatism
are at work in Kosovo and Metohija, the ideological
backbone of which has, for years, been the League of
Prizren, founded in 1878, which had the single goal
of unifying all territories in the Balkans populated by
Albanians into one State, bringing into question the
territorial integrity not only of Serbia, but also of the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Greece and other countries in the region. Unfortunately,
it is patently obvious that some individuals, countries
and international organizations have played a role in that
regard, as revealed by the example of William Walker,
former Head of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe's Kosovo Verification Mission.
On the basis of his hastily cobbled together assessments
about Radek, a decision was taken to bomb Serbia and
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. Today, 17 years
later, William Walker is considered an honorary citizen
of Albania, a hero of Kosovo, on whom Pristina has
awarded multiple decorations. William Walker is one
of the few people who openly oppose the establishment
of an expert court to try the crimes committed by the
Kosovo Liberation Army, the establishment of which
has been supported by the Security Council. He
recently stated on Albanian television's top channel
that he supports the idea of a greater Albania, that is,
the unification of Albania and Kosovo.

Ms. Citaku will presumably again speak about
genocide and ethnic cleansing; however, that is simply
the propaganda that she typically indulges in at Council
meetings. I would like to warn the Council in advance
to expect propaganda and lies. The basic definition of
genocide, war crimes and ethnic cleansing is that of
the destruction or expulsion of a population. Serbia's
representatives are on record as stating, millions of
times, that each and every crime should be punished.
However, history has failed to record a genocide after
which those people who allegedly committed genocide
have dwindled to 10 times fewer than before, while
the number of people against Whom that genocide was
allegedly committed has grown substantially higher
than before.

I would like the Council to remember that out of
427 localities, the Serbs have been expelled from 311.
That is indeed ethnic cleansing of Serbs, however. The
statistics make for disturbing and painful reading. The
data I shall present are not from Serbian sources; they
are drawn from the 1981 census at the time of Tito,
before Milosevic, and from the census taken in Kosovo
by the Pristina authorities in 2011.
Pristina, as the Council is aware, is the seat of the
Pristina authorities and the largest city in Kosovo. In
1981, just 35 years ago, there were 43,875 Serbs living
in Pristina, and according to the 2011 census there
remained just 430 - only 430. Therefore, 35 years
ago there were 43,875, and now the number is 430. If
one can count and deal with numbers, that is 100 times
fewer people. In 1981, 140,043 Albanians lived in that
city, and in the year 2011 the number ofAlbanians grew
to 194,953. What kind of genocide or ethnic cleansing
of Albanians can be demonstrated here?

In Urosevac in the year 1981 there were 18,285
Serbs, and in the year 2011 - listen carefully - there
were just 32. That is 600 times fewer people. In 1981,
17,791 Serbs and Montenegrins lived in Pee, and in the
year 2011 just 332 Serbs lived there. The town of Pee
is where the Serbian Orthodox Church was established
in the thirteenth century, and the Patriarchate of
Pee, which is included in the UNESCO list of World
Heritage Sites, is also located there. In the year 1981,
1,898 Serbs lived in Bakovica; today just 17 Serbs live
there. In Podujevo they numbered 2,242; today there
are 12, almost 200 times fewer. In the town where I was
born, Prizren, the fourteenth century throne of Serbia,
there were 11,651 Serbs living there in 1981, and by 2011
just 27 of them remained, according to United Nations
statistics. Remember, the latter figures are drawn from
United Nations statistical data, published in United
Nations documents. Today there are only 27 persons,
which is 400 times fewer.

What else can I say? Any comment seems to be
vacuous in the face of this truth, these statistics and
these facts. But we will let the representative of Pristina
engage in her propaganda; no doubt she will. However,
I want the Council to realize that what I have shown is a
realistic picture of the Serbs living in Kosovo. After all
those events and centuries of problems in Kosovo and
Metojiha, the situation today is that the ethnic cleansing
of the Serbs has practically occurred. We are not even
comparing statistics for the last one or two hundred
years. We are comparing the results of the 1981 census
that counted more than 40,000 Serbs living in Pristina.

Let me now turn to the report (S/2016/666) of the
Secretary-General. The current and every future report
of the Secretary-General on the work of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) should be also viewed in that broader
historical context, which attests to the complexity of the
situation in Kosovo and Metohija, and may contribute
to a better understanding ofthe genesis of this question.
The report before us has been structured
somewhat differently from previous ones. It introduces
new sections - on the normalization of relations
between Belgrade and Pristina and on partnership
and cooperation, for instance. In the part related to
the normalization of relations, the importance of the
association/community of Serb majority municipalities
is presented inadequately. It appears to be reduced to
an administrative item; and it is fleetingly referred to
in paragraphs 18 and 19 of the report. As is known, the
association/community has not yet been established.
Let me recall also on this occasion that the quest for an
agreement in Brussels was motivated by the urge to find
a way to protect, systematically and institutionally, the
Serbian community in Kosovo and Metohija because of
the non-existence of proper institutional mechanisms
to effectively protect its interests. Under the Brussels
Agreement, it is precisely the association/community
of Serb majority municipalities that is charged with
that task, which substantively builds on Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999). Instead of being the
central issue to be implemented as soon as possible,
its establishment has been the subject of political
blackmail. After all, the United States Vice-President
Biden also said during his recent visit to Belgrade
and Pristina that it was necessary to establish the
association/community of Serb majority municipalities
expeditiously as a condition for the process of regional
stability and reconciliation.

I have to note that this report makes no mention
of the situation of the Serbian and other communities
south of the Ibar River either, where the majority of
the Serbs of Kosovo and Metohija live. In doing so, I
would like to emphasize that not all problems are, nor
can they be, related exclusively to the area north of
the Ibar River. Disregard for the human rights and the
problems encountered by the Serbs and the members of
other communities, especially the Goranci, south ofthe
Ibar River serves to amplify their feeling of isolation,
neglect and hopelessness. The manner in which the
concept document of the Kosovo authorities relating to
returns is mentioned in the report creates a fictitious
picture that Pristina is doing something serious in that
regard. However, past experience gives us cause to
believe otherwise. The absence of credible census data
is invoked as a reason, or an excuse, for a whole range
of concrete problems, from returns to the failure to
adopt budgets in the four municipalities in the northern
part of the province. All along, however, the following
fact is glossed over, namely, that a census engineered
by Pristina, one politically motivated, is unacceptable
for a number of reasons. Such a census could hardly be
used to improve the situation of the Serbs. After all,
the situation could be improved even without a census
if goodwill alone existed. And the incorporation of the
sections on the rule of law and human rights under one
heading glosses over the issue of the human rights of
members of the minority communities.

To note simply that the level of returns is
unacceptably low is not good enough; concrete reasons
are needed to explain why the situation is so worrisome.
Let me mention just some of them, including the
administrative, institutional and legal obstacles to
returns and the lack of security for the internally
displaced persons to integrate locally in central Serbia
-which is not the result of a conscious choice, but
of the absence of any other alternative. The question
of returns is inseparably linked to the protection
and realization of the property rights of the Serbian
population, including internally displaced persons.

The self-defeating fact is that sustainable returns
have been realized only by some 4,000 persons, or
1.9 per cent. A tedious regurgitation of partial statistics
related to the assaults on the life, security and the
property of the Serbs and other non-Albanians is
tantamount to casting a shadow of relativity on their
civilization fipersecution on an ethnic or religious
basis that is unacceptable. The numerous cases of
desecration, destruction and attacks on Serbian cultural
and religious sites and the spreading of falsehoods,
such as the one that mass graves are located next to
the Church of Christ the Saviour in Pristina, are also
unacceptable. Those fabrications have been spread for
years now. The Director of the Institute of Forensic
Medicine in Pristina said on 14 June that a witness had
come forward who testified that excavations had been
carried out 12 and 13 June 1999 and that there is reason
to believe that the bodies of Kosovo and Metohija
Albanians were buried at that location.

At Belgrade's request, excavations were undertaken
on two occasions, on 13-14 and 27 July this year. The
excavations were attended by Kosovo representatives
alongside officials from the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo and representatives from
Belgrade. It was established that there were no human
remains or graves at the location. The spreading of
the misinformation primarily served the purpose of
seizing space in downtown Pristina Where the Church
of Christ the Saviour and the land are located, but also
to discredit the Serbian Orthodox Church. And just
to recall: the Church has never been completed; the
Pristina authorities turned it into a public lavatory and
a podium to shoot music videos featuring scantily clad
singers, which is telltale evidence of Pristina's attitude
towards the Serbian cultural and religious heritage.

The returns realized thus far attest to the fact that
all the actors involved have failed the return process. It
behooves all of us to change that and create conditions
in which displaced persons will be given the choice of
return or local integration, not only in words but also
in deeds. To do so, however, elementary conditions
in places of return regarding personal and property
security, infrastructure and access to public services
must be fulfilled. In that sense, I salute the call made in
the report to the leaders of all sides to refocus on safe
and sustainable returns of internally displaced persons.

What all the reports of the Secretary-General,
including this one, have in common is the failure to
characterize the incidents in Kosovo and Metohija as
ethnically motivated. The report says, in one short
sentence alone, that 86 incidents affecting members of
minority communities were reported during the period
under review; most of the victims were reported to be
Kosovo Serbs. Not a single other word appears at all. An
account of the reaction by relevant police, prosecutorial
and judicial authorities is missing. Short of that, all
attacks and other criminal offences against Serbs are
depersonalized and reduced to statistics. The ultimate
and most dangerous consequence of such an approach
is gradual acceptance by all, including the international
community, of virtual impunity for criminal offences
committed against the Serbs and other non-Albanians,
including murder. Pristina's ban on the import of Serbian
language textbooks into Kosovo and Metohija shows
the extent to which Pristina is prepared to go to deny
the Serbian community their rights. That practice also
existed before, albeit sporadically, but the confiscation
of all books in the Serbian language became a regular
practice at the beginning of June when the St. Vitus
Day Book Fair, scheduled to take place at Graeanica
from 15 June to 1 July, had to be cancelled.

Security in Kosovo and Metohija has always been
unstable. The radicalization of the political climate and
the worsening ofthe security situation because ofthe rise
of political and religious extremism only increased the
instability. The report in front of us contains references
to fighters from the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
who come from Kosovo and Metohija. With respect
to the size of population, the Kosovo and Metohija
Albanians account for the largest percentage of those
fighting in the ranks of that terrorist organization. It is
unnecessary to speak about the troubling consequences
of that situation.

In the interests of regional stability and ever-better
Serbian-Albanian relations, the Republic of Serbia will
continue the dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina.
We shall continue the policy of the peaceful settlement
of conflicts by addressing the normalization of
relations responsibly and implementing the agreements
reached in Brussels fully. The question of Kosovo and
Metohija transcends the issues of territorial integrity
and national identity. It is the tipping point that will
define, long-term, the Serbian-Albanian relations,
on which the stability and economic prospects of the
entire region depend. Irrespective of the frequent
lack of constructiveness on the other side, we shall
continue to work arduously on strengthening relations,
building confidence and promoting European values
and perspectives for both peoples. We do not want the
situation in Kosovo and Metohija to be a latent threat
to the stability and progress of Serbia and the region.
We shall work in good faith on resolving disputes
peacefully, well aware that a long process lies ahead
and that - to make things worse - we often lack an
interlocutor to share with us a vision of a prosperous
and politically forward-looking region.

I therefore call on the countries that have not
recognized the unilateral declaration of independence of
Kosovo to persevere, despite the pressures that many of
ythem are exposed to, as part of their consistent respect

for international law, the Charter of the United Nations
and the supreme authority of the Security Council in
maintaining international peace and security, including
resolution 1244 (1999), which upholds the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the Republic of Serbia. Bear
in mind that support by the international community
is of key importance for success in the dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina, one of few successful
examples of the peaceful settlement of disputes in the
world. Change in the position of States that have not
recognized the unilateral declaration of independence
of Kosovo would affect negatively the continuation of
the constructive attitude of the parties in the dialogue
and the implementation of the agreements reached so
far. That is what we ask for: an opportunity for dialogue
and agreement in full accordance with international
law, instead of unilateral acts and disrespect for the
norms of the international legal order. Let me recall
that international law is universal and that it applies
to all, which is true also of its violation. What Serbia
has experienced since 1998-19999 may befall any other
country in the world.

At the same time, I call on the countries that use
their statements in this organ to call for the violation
of its legally binding resolutions not to do so. Let
me repeat: under resolution 1244 (1999), adopted in
accordance with Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations, Kosovo and Metohija is part of the
Republic of Serbia, under interim administration by
a United Nations mission. The resolution continues to
be the valid legal basis of the administrative regime
in Kosovo and Metohija, which can be changed only
by the adoption of a new Security Council resolution,
which has not happened thus far. I take this opportunity
to call also on the countries that have recognized the
unilateral declaration of independence of Kosovo to
reconsider their decision against the background of all-
important facts.

