Mr. Kasse (Mali) (spoke in French): Allow me
at the outset to reiterate the warm congratulations
addressed to you, Mr. President, by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs, African Integration and International
Cooperation, His Excellency Mr. Abdoulaye Diop,
when he spoke (see S/PV.7468) in support of the report
(S/2015/426) of the Secretary-General on the situation
in Mali. Allow me also to reaffirm the gratitude of the
people and the Government of Mali, as instructed by the
President of the Republic, His Excellency Mr. Ibrahim
Boubacar Keita, to all those who, directly or indirectly,
contributed to the success of the inter-Malian peace
process, which officially began in Algiers on 16 July
2014.

Today I have the honour of addressing the Security
Council on the occasion of the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2227 (2015), which, it is worth noting, is
primarily focused on the effective and comprehensive
implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali emanating from the Algiers
process. The delegation of Mali welcomes the adoption
of this resolution under Chapter VII of the Charter of
the United Nations, the seventieth anniversary of whose
signing in San Francisco we have just commemorated.
My delegation also welcomes the adoption of this
resolution, which is of great political and historical
significance and which takes into account the core
concerns of the Malian Government, which were
expressed from this same rostrum by Minister Diop on
23 June.

We are therefore gratified to note that the Security
Council, in its great wisdom, has listened to what we had
to say and has responded by shaping the new mandate
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) around
the effective and comprehensive implementation of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, with
a particular focus on the following priorities: support
for the political process and national reconciliation;
the strengthening of national ownership of the peace
process; support for the re-establishment of the State's
authority and the return of the armed and security
forces to the northern regions of Mali; support for
the Government's efforts in the areas of security,
stabilization and the protection of civilians; the
enactment of targeted sanctions against those who seek
to obstruct or prevent the effective and comprehensive
implementation of the Peace Agreement; support for
security-sector reform, the promotion and protection
of human rights and humanitarian assistance; and the
strengthening of collaboration and cooperation between
the Malian armed forces and MINUSMA, at both the
strategic and the operational levels.
Similarly, the Government of the Republic of Mali
is also grateful to the Security Council for having
taken into consideration of the following concerns:
the security aspect of the Agreement, including the
cantonment and disarmament of armed groups; the
operationalization of the battalions that are intended
to serve as the rapid-reaction force within MINUSMA;
the operationalization on the ground of the resources
made available to increase the effectiveness of
MINUSMA; the use of all available means to prevent
and counteract the threats posed by and the return
of terrorist groups, narco-jihadists and other forces
hostile to the implementation of the Agreement; the
requirement for the armed groups that are signatories
of the Agreement to distance themselves from the
activities of terrorist and narco-jihadist groups; the
requirement that troop-contributing countries ensure
that their contingents have the appropriate equipment;
the strengthening of cooperation between MINUSMA
and the Barkhane force in the fight against terrorism;
and the operationalization of the monitoring committee
of the Agreement.

Against that backdrop, it is clear that resolution
2227 (2015) endorses the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali, which is the result of eight
months of intensive inter-Malian negotiations in the
context of the Algiers process.

It would be regrettable, therefore, if all of the joint
efforts made were to be jeopardized by the enemies
of peace, who have been ramping up their terrorist
activities all over our country since the signing of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
in Bamako. This is evidenced by the terrorist attacks
perpetrated on 27 and 28 June, which targeted,
respectively, the Nara military camp, just 30 kilometres
from the Mauritanian border, and the city of Fakoula, in
the south of the country.

Faced with those attacks, the Government of the
Republic of Mali reiterates its call to all parties that are
signatories to the Agreement and to the international
community to dovetail their efforts and pool their
intelligence so as to rid their national territory of a
common enemy, namely, terrorist and narco-jihadist
groups, which seek only to fulfil their criminal goals
by means of fear and terror.

I should like here to express our solidarity and
compassion with Chad, France, Tunisia, the United
States of America, the United Kingdom and the
Kingdom of Belgium, and with all victims of terrorism.

It would be remiss of me to conclude without
reiterating the determination of the Government of
Mali to honour the commitments it shouldered under
the Bamako Agreement and to work in an inclusive
manner with all Malian stakeholders to ensure that the
process is Malian-owned, including by civil society. In
that respect, over the next few days the Government will
establish a national mechanism for the implementation
of the Agreement.

Finally, I would like to urgently appeal to the
international community to continue its support and to
honour its commitments with a view to ensuring the
effective, speedy and comprehensive implementation of
the Bamako Agreement.

The meeting rose at 10.10 a.m.
