Mr. Snoussi (Morocco) (interpretation from French): At the outset I should like to convey to you, Sir,
our warmest congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council and to wish you every
success in your functions. I should like also, if I may, to
congratulate your predecessor for his able and
clearsighted guidance of the work of our Council last
month. The skill and wisdom with which he conducted
the consultations and the actions of the Security Council
at a time when the world feared the worst have won the
admiration of one and all and will remain in our
memories, and in the memory of our community, for a
very long time. Lastly, I should like also to welcome the
presence of Omar Muntasser, the Foreign Minister of the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.

In their statements, my colleagues had the
opportunity to thoroughly discuss legal aspects and the
new light that the recent Judgments of the International
Court of Justice have shed on this unfortunate Lockerbie
affair. My country and my Government bow respectfully
to the memory of those who fell victim to those
unforgivable acts, which took the lives of more than 200
innocent people. At the time of the adoption of the
original resolution on the sanctions, we denounced the
acts of terrorism that had led to that tragedy of vast
proportions.

Libya, for its part, has denounced and deplored such
acts and has consistently, in a manner that has been
deeply appreciated, contributed to combating terrorism in
all its forms - a phenomenon denounced by the entire
world. This clear determination to cooperate with the
international community, as requested by the Security
Council, was not, unfortunately, accompanied by any
easing of the sanctions regime that has been imposed on
the fraternal Libyan people, who have already paid a very
heavy price. The countries of the Maghreb themselves

 

have also suffered from the consequences of the sanctions
imposed on Libya.

As for the suspects, who, in the view of international
public opinion, still remain suspects, I should like to note
that we have witnessed - first as a member of the Security
Council and then as a member of the Arab Group, the
African Group and the Non-Aligned Movement - all the
attempts that have been made to find a just solution that is
acceptable to one and all and that respects international
laws and customs.

Libya has never refused to have the suspects brought
to trial. It simply maintains a different position - a
warranted one, we believe - with respect to the venue for
the trial of those suspects. Very reasonable and serious
proposals have been put forward in this connection.

Libya proposed to initiate, under the auspices of the
Secretary-General, negotiations with the countries
concerned in order to organize the trial of the suspects in a
neutral country acceptable to both parties - but in vain.
Libya also suggested that the Secretary-General be
charged with setting up a collegial body, composed of
judges well known for their neutrality and their integrity, to
determine the truth of the charges levelled against the two
suspects, and that if their guilt were to be established, they
would be handed over to a third country under the
supervision of the Secretary-General. Lastly, Libya
proposed that the matter be brought to the League of Arab
States, the Organization of African Unity, the Organization
of the Islamic Conference, or the Non-Aligned Movement,
in accordance with Article 33 of the Charter.

The various regional groups, for their part, proposed
options aimed at finding a solution that would put an end
to the dispute and to the sufferings that have been imposed
on the innocent Libyan people.

They all proposed these options: to hold the trial of
suspects in a third and neutral country to be determined by
the Security Council; to have the suspects tried by Scottish
judges at the seat of the International Court of Justice at
The Hague, in accordance with Scottish law; or to establish
a special criminal tribunal within the International Court of
Justice to try the suspects.

We are convinced that the recent decisions of the
International Court of Justice, in contributing to the
culmination of the efforts made by the international
community, will afford the Security Council a better grasp
of the true dimensions of this conflict in which an entire
people continues to suffer and to be punished.

In voicing the hope that this debate will take place,
the various players involved, such as my country, are
motivated by the desire to see the Council consider new
approaches and new procedures. The initiative taken
recently by the Secretary-General in the matter of the
inspections in Iraq undoubtedly is a good omen. The
assistance, the openness and the understanding that has
been displayed by the parties to the conflict we are
dealing with today should be emphasized and should
inspire us with fresh hope.

The decisions taken by the International Court of
Justice in connection with this matter are not intended as
either a challenge or an act of hostility towards the
Security Council or its prestige. The Judgments of the
International Court of Justice should be regarded as a
success indeed for the United Nations and all of its
organs, because those decisions are strengthening in a
timely manner our credibility and our ability to remain
objective and impartial.
For these reasons, it would seem highly desirable for
us, having heard the views of numerous countries from all
corners of the globe, to take a moment to reflect on how
inhuman and inequitable is the systematic procedure of
simply renewing the sanctions every 120 days. We should
also realize that, given the various proposals that have
been made, both before and after the decisions of the
International Court of Justice, a solution is within our

grasp.

These decisions are, above all, an opportunity for the
international community to find an equitable and legally
respectable solution to a conflict in which the Libyan
people have been, as we have said, unjustly punished. In
the meantime, the greater part of the international
community will deem it completely logical, wise and
justified that the sanctions be suspended, if not outright
lifted. It has been 10 years that relatives have been
waiting and six years now that the sanctions have
inflicted great suffering upon an entire people. And if this
situation continues while we overlook what happened at
the International Court of Justice, the very prestige of this
Organization may well be called into question.

Let us not lose any more time. Let us, therefore, put
an end to the sufferings a people and assuage the grief of
all those families who all want to know and want to see
justice - real justice - done.

 

