The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of South Africa.

We wish to thank Under-Secretary-General
Mr. Pascoe for his briefing statement on the report of
the inter-agency assessment mission on the impact of
the Libyan conflict and how it has been handled in the
neighbouring Sahel region (see S/2012/42).

The report confirms South Africa's long-held
View that the manner in which resolution 1973 (2011)
was implemented in the Libyan conflict was going to
have dire consequences for the countries in the region.
South Africa is deeply concerned that the proliferation
of lethal arms in Libya, and in the Sahel in general,
will no doubt take a long time to address in a
comprehensive manner. There is no denying the fact
that the region has for some time had its own
challenges, but the manner in which the outbreak of the
conflict in Libya was approached further compounded
the problems of the region.

Of further concern to South Africa is the increase
in criminal and terrorist activities in the region, as
evidenced in the recent concentration of terrorist
groups and extremists in the region. The amassing of
arms and ammunition is a real concern in that regard
and the heightened activities of groups such as Boko
Haram are further testament to that.
What started as a conflict in one country has now
spilled over to become a regional problem with
unprecedented consequences. The international
community should therefore take responsibility and not
leave the people and Governments of the region to deal
with these challenges, including the scourge of
terrorism, alone.

We support the recommendations for a multi-
pronged approach to the problems at the national,
regional and international levels, in particular
regarding the need for close cooperation and
collaboration between the United Nations and the
African Union (AU). This would be a practical
application of cooperation and coordination envisaged
under resolution 2033 (2012), which was adopted
recently by the Council.

It is unfortunate that the zeal of some members of
the international community to resolve the Libyan
crisis militarily ignored our warning of consequences
too dire to contemplate, which have now placed that
region and Africa in their current quagmire. We should
avoid easy answers and claiming that the Sahel has
always faced such challenges, when in actual fact it is
well known that they were not previously of this
magnitude.

It is clear from the report that the joint
collaborative efforts of the United Nations and the AU
were well received by the leadership and peoples of the
countries Visited by the assessment mission. South
Africa has repeatedly emphasized the need for a
strategic political process to resolve the crisis in Libya
and beyond that would include the central role of the
AU. The report shows that clear political will exists
among the States of the subregion to find common
solutions to their common problems.

Looking forward, we would urge the United
Nations system to address these challenges in a
coherent and integrated manner, working in partnership
with these countries in accordance with their national
and subregional structures. The international
community, through the coordination provided by the
United Nations system, has an important role to play in
facilitating support and technical assistance in the
various areas identified in the report. These systemic
interventions, managed in an integrated and coherent
manner, will constitute an investment in the long-term
stability of the subregion.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I call on the representative of Niger.

