Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
today's debate. I listened carefully to the briefing of
Ambassador Sangqu of South Africa on the Security
Council's visit to Timor-Leste. I also wish to thank
Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Reske-Nielsen for his briefing. We also welcome
Mr. Jose Luis-Guterres, Minister of State and Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Timor-Leste, to
today's meeting.

This year marks the tenth anniversary of Timor-
Leste's restored independence. China is very happy
to see that, through the efforts of the Government
and people of Timor-Leste and with the support
of the international community, Timor-Leste has
made continuous progress. Nation-building efforts
are on track and economic and social development
is proceeding steadily. Successful presidential and
parliamentary elections have been held, establishing
a new parliament and Government and promoting the
maintenance of stability and development. As Timor-
Leste's national development enters a new stage, the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) peacekeeping operation is about to close
successfully.

I would like to emphasize three points. First, China
highly appreciates the fact that the Policia Nacional
de Timor-Leste is now officially and fully responsible
for domestic security. Th efforts of the Government
to build national institutions and improve governance
capacities have made encouraging progress. China
staunchly supports the Government of Timor-Leste
in its efforts to enhance capacity-building in national
institutions and to safeguard national security and
stability.

Secondly, economic development and improved
standards of living are crucial if countries are to achieve
long-term stability and security. The international
community should support Timor-Leste in improving
its capacity for independent development and help
the Government to strengthen development in areas
such as infrastructure, education and health care in
order to encourage inclusive, equitable socioeconomic
development. China hopes and trusts that Timor-Leste
will return to the path of sustainable development as
soon as possible.

Thirdly, since its inception UNMIT has worked
very effectively and contributed enormously to the
maintenance of security, stability and the promotion
of economic and social development. It is a successful
example of United Nations peacekeeping. Following
the withdrawal of UNMIT, we hope that the United
Nations, fully consulting and respecting the opinions
of the Government of Timor-Leste, will jointly discuss
future cooperation between them.

As a friend and cooperation partner of Timor-Leste,
China will continue to provide assistance and support
to Timor-Leste within our capacity.

