Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I could not agree more with the opening comment by
the Ambassador of Japan, specifically the quotation
from Churchill and the five minutes. It is a topic I am
obsessed with, I must admit. We talk too much, with
not many initiatives carried to success. We do not
implement things properly.
For that reason, ifI may, allow me to mention that
in the last open debate in which we spoke on working
methods (see S/PV.7516), Spain carried out a new but
important exercise, namely, gathering the opinions of
the broader membership. Those views were reflected
in a document that I circulated among all members.
I think those are good working methods - when we
speak little in the Chamber and yet take full advantage
of what was actually said in the Chamber.

Since this is the first wrap-up session since August
2015, and so I therefore feel I can speak about what has
happened between August and today. I quite agree with
Mr. Gerard van Bohemen that it is better to improvise
with certain ideas and to share reflections, rather than to
give a lengthy account of everything that has happened.
I would like to differentiate between where I think the
Council has had success and conducted itself well and
where I think it needs to improve. I think that, since
August, the Council has conducted itself very well in
many cases, especially in two.

The first was in the adoption of resolution 2242
(2015), on women and peace and security. I do not
simply say that because it was adopted during the
Spanish presidency of the Council, but because,
working very well with the United Kingdom, and
starting with very wide-ranging positions among those
at the table, we were able reach overall consensus on
a very ambitious and important text that, among toher
things, sets up an informal working group that will
enable the implementation of resolution 2242 (2015) to
become an actual reality.

The second area where I think the Council was
successful was the nuclear agreement with Iran. I say
that because I had the weighty responsibility to be
the facilitator of the new mechanism established in
resolution 2231 (2015), which presupposes major efforts
from the Spanish Mission as facilitator, as well as for
the Secretariat and other institutions. Let me say that it
is my intention to hold an open briefing to all Members
of the United Nations no later than within the next two
weeks, so that the membership can properly understand
how the new mechanism is going to operate when it
comes to commercial relations with Iran. I will make a
very general announcement.

On the negative side of things, in the first place, we
obviously have the question of Syria. When it comes to
Syrian policy, we have not been able to put an end to the
war there. We have our fingers crossed that the meetings

in Geneva today will conclude successfully. They have
not begun as we would have hoped, but they have begun
anyway. On the humanitarian front in Syria, although
it is a real pleasure to work with Gerard and with our
friend Amr from Egypt, unfortunately, we cannot give
ourselves good marks, as the humanitarian statistics are
becoming increasingly worse. For that reason, the three
of us have come up with mechanisms to ensure that
there are no more Madayas, as well as to improve the
response levels of the Syrian Government to requests
from the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs. Those are two important priorities.

On the chemical weapons front, that is working well
because very soon we will be getting the first results
from the Joint Investigative Mechanism. That leads me
to mention at this important forum that we are in the
middle of an important process of reviewing resolution
1540 (2004), which will conclude in December. My
goal in that review process, with the help of Council
members, is to ensure that resolution 1540 (2004) is
sufficiently effective to truly halt the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction to non-State actors.

In my notes, on the negative side, there is also
Burundi. In that context, let me say that, although the
results of the Council's trip were not what we expected,
I will say the Council has performed well, insofar as
we managed to carry out a trip at an important time
to prevent a situation we all fear. I think we should
be satisfied with our conduct in that regard. Results,
however, are a different matter.

There are various other initiatives that have gone
very well. I will just touch on resolution 2261 (2016),
on Colombia, which shows that States have trust in
the Security Council. That is an important matter. I
would mention as well as the important resolution 2249
(2015), on combating terrorism, as well as resolution
2253 (2015), on the financing of terrorism.

To conclude, so as not to exceed my five minutes,
Mr. President, I congratulate you for the excellent work
you have done in the Council in your first month. I also
commend you for following the tradition we began a
few months ago with Toledo-style wrap-up sessions,
such as the one that will take place at 3 o'clock today.
Such sessions make it possible to have a more informal
exchange on the opinions about our work with the wider
membership of the United Nations.

