Mr. Owada (Japan): After many years of intense
internal strife, the situation in Somalia remains a source
of grave international concern. The failure of all the
various factions to join together in the search for a
comprehensive and lasting settlement continues to rob the
people of Somalia of the right to pursue their livelihoods
and embark on the long process of national reconciliation
and reconstruction.

Ongoing, sincere efforts by a number of countries
and international organizations are beginning to show
some promise, however. We were particularly encouraged
by the opening of talks in Nairobi last October among
three faction leaders - Hussein Aidid, Ali Mahdi
Mohamed and Osman Atto - at the initiative of
President Daniel arap Moi of Kenya. In this connection,
however, it is to be noted with great regret that Mr. Atto
has been excluded from the talks, which have continued
since the beginning of this month in Mogadishu, within
the framework of a joint commission on reconciliation.
My delegation believes that, as the leader of an important
faction, Mr. Atto's participation is crucial to the
advancement of the comprehensive peace process.

 

Another encouraging step forward is the High-level
Consultative Meeting of Somali Political Movements, which
was convened in Sodere in January on the initiative of
Ethiopia. One significant result of that effort was the
formation of the National Salvation Council, which has
decided to convene a National Reconciliation Conference in
June this year.

My Government also wishes to express its gratitude to
Egypt for its recent effort, on behalf of the League of Arab
States, to bring the leaders of rival factions together. We
also pay tribute to Italy for the contributions it has made,
through its Special Envoy, to advancing the peace process.
The United Nations Political Office for Somalia (UNPOS)
is also to be commended for the vital role it has been
playing as a liaison between the United Nations and the
various factions and in encouraging the leaders of those
factions to seek a negotiated settlement to the conflict.
Each of these endeavours is a necessary and valuable
contribution; they do not by themselves, however, add up
to a comprehensive solution. What is essential is that the
Somali faction leaders now summon the political will to
join together and meld these separate efforts into a unified
drive to achieve a comprehensive and lasting settlement.
The international community should redouble its efforts to
induce the faction leaders to do so, and in particular to
induce Mr. Hussein Aidid, the leader of a faction that
claims to control most of the country, to enter into
negotiations with all parties. Japan, for its part, is prepared
to cooperate in such mediation efforts.

Demanding our urgent attention under the present
circumstances is the humanitarian dimension of the situation
in Somalia. In many parts of the country, and especially in
the area around Mogadishu, indiscriminate acts of violence
continue to jeopardize the safety of the civilian population,
as well as that of United Nations personnel and others
engaged in international humanitarian relief efforts. We in
the international community should call upon the faction
leaders to abide strictly by international humanitarian law
and other norms in the humanitarian field, and control the
actions of their subordinates, in order to guarantee the
safety and human rights of civilians, as well as the freedom
of movement of international relief workers. We should
also urge them to cooperate in reopening the seaport and
airport of Mogadishu in order to facilitate the delivery of
much-needed food and medical supplies.

It is important that the international community extend
full support and assistance to the process of national
reconstruction and rehabilitation once a comprehensive
peace settlement is achieved. Japan, for its part, in 1996
contributed $1.7 million to the World Food Programme to
assist internally affected people in Somalia and 700
thousand Swiss francs to the International Committee of
the Red Cross for its activities for Somalia. When
stability is restored throughout the country, it will be
ready to extend social and economic development
assistance as well.

It bears repeating that the achievement of a lasting
and comprehensive peace ultimately depends on the
leaders of the Somali people themselves. Only when all
the factions set aside their rivalries and join together to
advance the peace process can the people of Somalia turn
their efforts to rebuilding their nation. Japan strongly
hopes that they will be given the opportunity to do so in
the near future. When they do, they may be assured that
their efforts will have the strong and willing support of
the international community.

