The President (spoke in Russian): I would like to
take this opportunity to express my gratitude to His
Excellency Mr. Ole Peter Kolby, Permanent
Representative of Norway to the United Nations, for
his work as President of the Security Council in March
2002. I am convinced that I speak for all members of
the Security Council in expressing deep appreciation to
Ambassador Kolby and his entire delegation for the
great diplomatic skill with which the President
conducted the business of the Council last month.

Adoption of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.

The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian Question

Letter dated 1 April 2002 from the Permanent
Representative of the Tunisia to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (5/2002/336)

Letter dated 2 April 2002 from the Permanent
Representative of the South Africa to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (5/2002/342)

The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Algeria, Bangladesh, Brazil,
Chile, Cuba, Egypt, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Israel, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Mauritania, Namibia, Oman,
Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Spain, Tunisia,
Turkey, Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates and Yemen,
in which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Lancry
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table;

Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria), Mr. Chowdhury
(Bangladesh), Mr. Fonseca (Brazil), Mr. Valdes
(Chile), Mr. Requeijo Gual (Cuba), Mr. Aboul
Gheit (Egypt), Mr. Nejad Hosseinian (Islamic Republic ofIran), Mr. Satoh (Japan), Prince Zeid
Ra 'ad ZeidAl-Hussein (Jordan), Mr. Abulhasan
(Kuwait), Mr. Dorda (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya),
Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia), Mr. Ould Deddach
(Mauritania), Mr. Andjaba (Namibia),

Mr. Al-Hinai (Oman), Mr. Ahmad (Pakistan),

Mr. Shobokshi (Saudi Arabia), Mr. Kumalo (South Africa), Mr. Arias (Spain), Mr. Mejdoub (Tunisia),
Mr. Cengizer (Turkey), Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine),
Mr. Al-Shamsi (United Arab Emirates) and

Mr. Al-Ashtal (Yemen) took the seats reservedfor
them at the side of the Council Chamber.


The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter dated
3 April 2002 from the Permanent Observer of Palestine
to the United Nations, which will be issued as
document S/2002/343 and which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council to be held
today, Wednesday, 3 April 2002, regarding the
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including Jerusalem."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting in accordance with the
Council's provisional rules of procedure and with
previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al-Kidwa
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.


The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter dated
3 April 2002 from the Chairman of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, which reads as follows:

"In my capacity as Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, I have the
honour to request that I be invited to participate
in the debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question, under rule 39
of the provisional rules of procedure of the
Security Council."
On previous occasions, the Security Council has
extended invitations to representatives of other United
Nations bodies in connection with the consideration of
matters on its agenda. In conformity with past practice
in this matter, I propose that the Council extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to the Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now continue its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in response to requests contained in a letter
dated 1 April 2002 from the Permanent Representative
of Tunisia to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council, document
S/2001/336, and in a letter dated 2 April 2002 from the
Permanent Representative of South Africa to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council, document S/2002/342.

The first speaker inscribed on my list is the
Permanent Observer of Palestine, to whom I give the
floor.


