Mr. Prodi (spoke in Italian; English text furnished by the delegation): President Sarkozy has
raised very important questions on peace and security
in Africa. I wish to clarify two points immediately.

First, we must be clear which Africa we are
talking about. The Africa that I see is a continent that is
transforming its potential into reality. Just look at its
progress towards achieving regional integration, strong
economic growth, democratic political reforms, an
enhanced strategic role, the courage with which many
of its leaders have spoken out against the death penalty,
and the demographic growth that will soon bring
Africa's population up to the levels of China or India.
In short, Africa is now a protagonist and no longer just
an object of international relations.

Secondly, rather than continue to discuss what we
can do for Africa, let us try to reflect on what Africa at
this moment is asking us to do. In my many meetings
with African leaders, the message that I have heard is
for a relationship between equals to address the
challenges in Africa, as well as the global challenges.

I will now respond to some of the specific
questions raised by the African leaders. I wish to focus
on two particular challenges: Darfur and Somalia, two
grave crises that have been unresolved for far too long,
and that require greater and more timely efforts. I have
seen some signals pointing in the right direction.

The launch of the Hybrid Operation in Darfur is
an important new development that moves in the
direction of recognizing Africa's responsibility in
Africa - which we call ownership - and the offer of
cooperation from the international community -
which we call partnership. If we are successful - and I
am convinced that we shall be - it will constitute a
key formula for the future. Darfur is a test case for the
international community's ability to identify
appropriate responses. Italy is ready to do its part. I
have already indicated to the Secretary-General Italy's
commitment to the joint mission, in terms of both
finances and logistical air support for troop
transportation, in addition to training programmes for
the personnel that will be deployed there.

Let us be clear: the hybrid mission responds
primarily to security demands. Yet, there are other
demands that are of crucial importance to solving the
crisis: political, humanitarian, and those related to the
country's economic development. This is why, in my
recent meeting in Rome with President Al-Bashir, I
asked him for a strong signal to assure the success of
the political negotiations scheduled to take place in
Tripoli in late October. Mr. Al-Bashir assured me of his
commitment to a unilateral ceasefire upon the
resumption of the negotiations. This is an important
signal, but we must all work together to ensure that the
Tripoli meeting arrives at lasting solutions. Italy is also
continuing its efforts to organize a meeting of the
Intergovernmental Authority of Development to
refocus international attention on the stabilization of
South Sudan.

Somalia is another dramatic case that demands a
rapid response and a sense of urgency. It has taken on a
pressing dimension for Italy because of our special
relationship with this country, which is suffering a
political, humanitarian and security crisis.

There are some hopeful signs. The national
reconciliation process seems to have begun, and the
international community is being called upon to
consolidate it, with a view towards restoring
democratic normalcy in the country through the
reconstruction of Government institutions and of the
country itself. Security Council resolution 1772 (2007)
of last month moves in this direction.

I believe, however, that an additional, collective
effort must be made for the emergence of a
comprehensive strategy inspired by the principles of
ownership and partnership. Italy is financially
committed to supporting the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM). But, as in the case of Darfur, in
Somalia too we must be committed to closer
cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union. The International Contact Group for
Somalia, which met in Rome a few days ago, sent a
strong appeal along these lines.
Mr. President, you have asked us for concrete
responses to the challenges facing Africa. What I
consider useful and realistic is to give high priority to
what Africa is requesting: peace, security, support for
alleviating poverty and fostering growth - continent-
wide cooperation.

To promote peace and security, Italy has decided
to support African capacity also through a bilateral
African Peace Facility, a fund that will allow us to
support - and, I underline, at the request of Africa -
the efforts of the African Union and the leading
subregional organizations in favour of peace and
security; rapid-action interventions aimed at
consolidating their institutional and operational
structures; conducting joint United Nations-African
Union actions; strengthening the logistical capacities of
actions decided upon by the African Union; and
dedicating special attention to training human
resources in preventive diplomacy, peacekeeping and
post-conflict rehabilitation. The Sudan and the Horn of
Africa will have top priority. The fund will operate in
close coordination with the fund that already exists at
the European level, because it is clear that our
contribution must necessarily form part of a European
strategy.

Europe must take the lead on defending peace
and security in Africa, as well as on facing other global
challenges that know no borders.

Europe is still Africa's leading partner in trade,
investment and development assistance. But this is no
longer sufficient: we must strengthen and, in some
cases, create institutional, cultural and political
cooperation. In short, we have to move from a strategy
for Africa to a partnership with Africa. In this
perspective, the upcoming Africa-Europe summit can
no longer be postponed. It should mark an important
step towards a strategic partnership between equals,
based on mutual commitments and responsibilities. I
truly hope that this can be done before the end of the
year. Italy is working to ensure that it will spark the
development of a truly European policy.

To honour the millennium commitments that we
undertook here in New York and that have such a great
impact on Africa, I have already indicated my
willingness to sit at a table next year and see where we
are in the achievement of these goals. I am convinced
that those who have more to give should make a
special commitment. Here, the Group of Eight (G-8)
can and must play an important role. I pledge here and
now to make this a central theme of Italy's presidency
of the G-8 in 2009.
