Mr. Rodriguez Arnillas (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I welcome the convening of this open debate
on an issue that my country deems of great importance:
children and armed conflict. I should like to thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/20ll/250) on this
issue, as well as Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy for the
information she provided in her capacity as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
3
and Armed Conflict and Mr. Anthony Lake, Executive
Director of UNICEF.

The Security Council in recent years has adopted
a series of resolutions that have provided the
international community with a legislative framework
for enabling progress to be made in the protection of
children in situations of armed conflict and in the
aftermath of conflict. The progress made in this respect
has been the result of the growing concern about the
issue as well as the political resolve of protagonists to
take concrete action. The resolution adopted today by
the Security Council represents a further step forward
in the gradual process of protecting children in armed
conflict.

However, the situation of children in armed
conflict remains of concern. Hence, in the view of the
delegation of Peru, it is imperative that we should
redouble our efforts to put an end to the recruiting and
use of children in armed conflict and take drastic
measures to punish those who perpetrate sexual
violence, maim or kill children in armed conflict.
Impunity in such cases can in no way be tolerated by
the international community.

In this report, the Secretary-General also referred
with concern to the increasing number of attacks on
schools and hospitals where children are among the
principal civilian victims. My country therefore
welcomes the important decision taken by the Security
Council to allow the Secretary-General to include,
annexed to his report, a list of those parties which in an
armed conflict, in violation of international law,
repeatedly attack schools and hospitals as well as those
who repeatedly attack, or threaten to attack, those who
are protected in connection with schools and hospitals.
Peru therefore believes that the inclusion of this new
criterion will contribute to providing greater and more
comprehensive protection to children in times of armed
conflict.

My delegation reiterates that it is important to
continue to strengthen communication between the
sanctions committees and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
in order to make it possible to adopt measures or
exchange information so as to provide greater
protection to children or impose appropriate sanctions
on those parties that commit serious violations against
them. It is important for the sanctions committees to
consider the possibility of including the situation of
children in its mandates. In that respect, the progress
made in the case of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo can be viewed as a good precedent, as
suggested by the Secretary-General in his report.

It is also important to continue to include in the
mandates of United Nations peacekeeping operations
and special political missions, as well as in
peacebuilding missions, specific provisions with the
clear and specific objective of protecting children.

My country believes that the Peacebuilding
Commission has a fundamental role to play in
supporting plans and programmes aimed at
reintegrating children who are former combatants in
the various spheres of economic and social life in the
aftermath of a conflict. The support of the international
community is therefore essential to support national
endeavours to that end.

As my country has indicated on several
occasions, crucial to addressing this problem and the
issue of sexual violence against children in conflict is
the possession of information that makes it possible to
adopt preventive measures that allow for a rapid and
effective response. It is necessary to continue to
explore mechanisms that allow for a reliable exchange
of information on acts of sexual violence, in order to
take action to reduce and combat this scourge.

My delegation believes that this exchange of
information must be substantively strengthened among
United Nations agencies, the various Security Council
committees and the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict. Of equal importance is capacity-
building and awareness-raising of military personnel
deployed in the field so that they can adequately
respond to situations involving sexual violence.

The establishment of the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict is evidence of the
growing commitment of the Security Council to
protecting children in armed conflict. In that respect, it
is important that the appropriate administrative and
substantive support be provided so that it can carry out
its functions effectively, including field visits, which
are of great importance.

I wish also to acknowledge and commend the
devoted and unflagging work carried out by
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, and the important work being
11-41151
done by UNICEF, the Committee on the Rights of the
Child and other relevant institutions.

Finally, there is a broad international legislative
framework providing appropriate protection to children
in times of both peace and armed conflict. Hence it is
necessary to continue to urge the parties to fulfil their
obligations and to enhance the mechanisms that
promote that process.

We cannot waver in our efforts, allow impunity in
such cases, or yield to circumstances. It is an
undeniable and imperative duty of the international
community to guarantee peace, development and a
climate conducive to the enjoyment of human rights for
future generations. Peru is firmly committed to that
lofty objective.

