I would like to congratulate Saint Vincent and the Grenadines on its historic presidency of the Security Council. Today's debate is an important one. Our world faces a myriad of crises, many of which are interconnected. New non-conventional threats to global security require our global community to take a new approach so as to address emerging crises more adequately. First, one of the best ways to secure and strengthen sustainable peace is by investing in equitable development, particularly in fragile States. The majority of the 58 States identified as fragile are also conflict-affected and low-income States. If current trends persist, by 2030 80 per cent of the poorest States will be living in fragile situations, also making them more vulnerable to insecurity and crises. The intersecting crises that characterize fragile situations can also undermine progress towards the Sustainable Development Goals. As a result, in fragile situations marked by conflict and instability and, in certain cases, increased population pressure, investment in development is particularly critical. Some studies, for example, have linked poverty and illiteracy with radicalization. Terrorism thrives in the breeding ground of poverty. Young people who are out of school are at a much higher risk of being recruited by armed terrorist groups such as Boko Haram, while girls living in conflict-affected areas are at greater risk of sexual and gender-based violence. They are also half as likely to be enrolled in school than girls living in unaffected countries. Access to education becomes all the more important in regions marked by conflict and instability. Without education, children, already deprived of their basic rights, will face a future without real opportunities or possibilities. One of the most serious security threats we currently face is climate change. In addition to food insecurity and environmental degradation, climate change has exacerbated existing vulnerabilities with disastrous consequences, including the fuelling of conflicts, thereby undermining the economic growth and development gains of recent decades while exacerbating humanitarian needs. In the Lake Chad basin, for example, the interconnection between insecurity, poverty and climate change is clearly established. The Sahel region is cited as one of the clearest examples of climate-related conflicts, which also impact migration and forced displacement. Nearly 10 million people depend on humanitarian aid in the Lake Chad region due to armed conflict. More than 100,000 people are displaced in the Diffa region alone, and nearly 250,000 refugees who have fled Nigeria live in the border areas of Cameroon, Chad and the Niger and in other parts of the central Sahel region. The intensifying effects of climate change on ecosystems are exacerbating the precariousness of people's livelihoods, rendering them vulnerable to crises. Addressing those risks would therefore help to secure and maintain stability. The Niger is working with a group of Security Council members to ensure that climate-related risks are taken into account more systematically. Those efforts must continue in order to take into account gender-related conflict factors, given that women and girls face specific abuses. Not only would an integrated approach make our interventions more effective, but it could also help to reduce the recurrence of future crises. It would also be more effective in addressing a world that faces serious inequalities between and within countries. In other words, the climate-related security threat is as much a local issue as it is a global one. Today, the coronavirus global pandemic has reinforced the idea that collective action is vital, that multilateralism is necessary and that a cross-sectoral approach to emerging global problems is the only way to find sustainable solutions. In the aftermath of this crisis, we owe the world a renewed commitment to genuine and inclusive multilateralism. As His Excellency the President of the Republic of the Niger recalled during the high-level segment in September, the global pandemic has highlighted the urgency of rethinking our collective security (see A/75/PV.8). It is up to all of us to work together to draw the necessary lessons and reflect on the indispensable reforms of our global governance systems. Today's debate is part of those necessary reflections. The Niger is convinced that the many threats to international peace and security can be resolved not by individual States, but by collective action by the international community. Taking all of the abovementioned points into account, my delegation would like to make the following recommendations. First, there is a need to better understand the intersectional nature of security threats, including through robust analysis that would provide key information and data to better adapt our work and interventions to the evolving situation. Secondly, there is a need to close the funding gap for the interventions that would jointly address the challenges facing the security and development problems in areas affected by conflicts and fragile situations. Thirdly, the role of regional organizations must be supported and strengthened, given that many crises transcend national borders. Finally, we must place people at the heart of our interventions and reflections It is also important to strengthen the role and participation of women and youth in peacebuilding.
