The United Arab Emirates would like to thank Germany for organizing today's open debate and maintaining the Security Council's focus on the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. We would also like to thank the briefers for their presentations. The United Arab Emirates has long viewed health and security as part of a nexus, with one affecting the other, and both requiring close multilateral attention and cooperation. That understanding has informed our country's international response to COVID-19, including our endorsement of the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire, our contributions to the World Health Organization and the World Food Programme, and the bilateral delivery of more than 1,000 metric tons of medical supplies to over 70 countries, including many on the Security Council's agenda. That understanding is also reflected in our domestic action and our commitment to transparency in public data and free testing and treatment for citizens, residents and visitors alike. We believe in the adage that no one is safe until everyone is safe. As COVID-19 has underscored, an effective pandemic response requires the simultaneous, coordinated mobilization of the Organization's development, humanitarian and security pillars. In the context of the Security Council's work, moving beyond mere recognition of the linkages between health and security requires new and careful thinking. However, the Council can and must play its part. The consequences of the pandemic may bear on the Security Council's mandate, especially for countries on its agenda. Those effects could include the loss of humanitarian access, the displacement and large movements of people, increased recruitment among armed groups, increased violence as a result of induced poverty and the collapse of institutions, and limitations on the ability of peace operations to fulfil their mandate, ultimately endangering the maintenance of international peace and security. Today we would like to share four initial reflections on how the Security Council could substantively respond to pandemics. First, we welcome the adoption of resolution 2532 (2020), which calls for a general and immediate cessation of hostilities in all situations on its agenda and a durable humanitarian pause. The United Arab Emirates was one of the first countries to endorse the Secretary-General's global appeal because we believe that ceasefires have the potential to reduce the spread and toll of the disease, especially by improving humanitarian situations, which are otherwise highly conducive environments for contagion and fatalities. We hope that resolution 2532 (2020) is a turning point and sets a precedent for future Council action on pandemics. Secondly, we echo the resolution's recognition of the important role that peacekeeping missions, in close coordination with host countries, can play in responding to health crises. We note the precedent established during the Ebola response, where peacekeeping missions lent vital support to medical and humanitarian operations in West Africa. Furthermore, peacekeeping staff must be protected from pandemics and, more important, must not contribute to their spread. We welcome the steps taken in that regard and highlight, as one potential solution, the use of the Organization's medical commodities stockpiles for peacekeeping and other staff found in United Nations supply depots, thus allowing for quick, needs- based deployment around the globe. Thirdly, COVID-19 has exposed the fact that pandemics create conditions for increased sexual and gender-based violence, more reason for the Council to be systematically briefed on gender-mainstreaming on the issues under its consideration and to ensure that missions have the appropriate staff and resources to deliver on strong mandates related to gender and sexual and gender-based violence. It is also incumbent upon Member States in the General Assembly, notably the Fifth Committee, to ensure that budgets related to gender and sexual and gender-based violence are protected and to drive progress through mandatory markers and other accountability tools. Fourthly, given the crucial importance of humanitarian access in crisis situations, we see a potential role for the Council in addressing closed borders and ports during pandemics. Such efforts would have to be highly sensitive and must not infringe upon the rights and responsibilities of Member States to regulate the potential spread of disease, but the Council can be in a position encourage the flow of essential medical and humanitarian supplies to serve those most in need. We hope that today's open debate will be one of many discussions on how the Security Council can operationalize the health-security nexus. COVID-19 has shown us that we must take united action in order to protect global health and security as critical public goods.
