Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): I, too,
would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
comments this morning, and Under-Secretary-General
Holmes and Deputy High Commissioner Kang for their
briefings.

The United States thanks you, Sir, and the
Government of Austria for organizing this important
debate and for your leadership on the resolution the
Security Council has just adopted. Resolution 1894
(2009) consolidates a decade of study and effort to
better protect civilians in armed conflict. We also offer
our deepest thanks today to the hundreds of brave
United Nations personnel dispatched to war zones who
have died trying to put our aspirations into practice.

As a result of this decade of United Nations
action, millions of civilians have been saved and
helped through political, peacekeeping, human rights,
humanitarian and development efforts. This is certainly
the case in such places as Burundi, Cote d'Ivoire, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Haiti, Liberia,
Sierra Leone, Sri Lanka, Timor-Leste and other
countries shaken by armed conflict.

But in all too many places, the innocent have still
borne the brunt of conflicts. In this same decade, the
response has sometimes come too late or fallen short.
Millions of Congolese died in the past decade as the
direct or indirect result of armed conflict. In Darfur,
hundreds of thousands of people were slaughtered and
millions driven from their homes. The plight of
civilians in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Darfur and elsewhere in northern and southern
Sudan remains precarious and extremely worrying.
Somalia and its civilian population have been
devastated by decades of violence. Insurgent attacks
still terrorize innocents in Iraq and Afghanistan, and
the Palestinian and Israeli peoples continue to suffer
from the ongoing Arab-Israeli conflict.

Far too many civilians are still threatened and
victimized by violence. The perpetrators - often
rebels, terrorists, extremist groups and other non-State
actors - are unmoved by the law and operate outside
it. War-torn States often lack the capacity to bring
perpetrators to justice and provide security for their
citizens. State security forces that lack the necessary
training and oversight, as well as State forces
integrated with former rebels during the
implementation of peace agreements, can themselves
threaten civilians, as evidenced by the case of the
Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

International peacekeepers can and do
supplement local capacity in countries shaken by
conflict. Eight United Nations peacekeeping missions
are now mandated to protect civilians from physical
violence, but some peacekeepers lack the means to
match their challenging mandates. We must do better.

On occasion, the severity of the threat cannot be
managed by United Nations peacekeepers. What is
needed is much more sophisticated combat capability
and enforcement action. It is especially important that
military forces undertaking such actions abide by the
Geneva Conventions, the sixtieth anniversary of which
we celebrate this year. United States forces are
committed to compliance with the laws of war,
including the Geneva Conventions, even as we face an
enemy that is loyal to no State, that hides among
civilians and that routinely violates laws.

The lives of innocent civilians in all the world's
conflict zones demand our concern, but the situations
in which civilians are imperilled differ radically. As
such, the resolution adopted today addresses a wide
range of actions to strengthen the protection of
civilians. I would like to highlight four of them.

First, we must continue to develop the means to
ensure that the Security Council has prompt access to
accurate and objective information on threats to
civilians in armed conflict, impediments to
humanitarian access, and alleged violations of
international humanitarian, human rights and refugee
law.

Secondly, we must strengthen the tools to hold
accountable those who flout the laws of war. The
Security Council must be prepared to impose
sanctions- whether by freezing assets, banning
international travel or restricting the flow of goods and
arms - on those who violate international
humanitarian law. Establishing accountability and
promoting reconciliation through credible and effective
national courts, when possible, or through international
or hybrid tribunals, when necessary, is essential to
ending impunity. Those responsible must be held to
account.

Thirdly, we need to support the capacity of
countries emerging from conflict to rebuild their
infrastructure and institutions, including those dealing
with protection and security for their citizens.

Finally, members of the Security Council, troop
and police contributors, and the Secretariat all need to
forge a shared understanding of what the protection of
civilians entails in peacekeeping contexts. Mission-
wide strategies to protect civilians, involving military,
police and civilian components, are critical.
Peacekeepers need to be prepared, trained and
equipped to employ force effectively when required, in
accordance with their mandates.

In this regard, we look forward to early
discussions on the study on protecting civilians
recently completed by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, including at the forthcoming
session of the General Assembly's Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations.

We have the tools and mechanisms to protect
civilians in armed conflict, but we still have
considerable work to do to improve them, to develop
new ones and to summon the will to use them more
consistently. We must also consider taking additional
measures to enhance the safety and security of United
Nations personnel undertaking this vital work. And we
must do all of this concurrent with our efforts to
prevent, halt and end the armed conflicts themselves.
Let me thank you once again, Mr. President, for
organizing this meeting on such an important issue. We
regret, however, that, as we have just heard, some have
sought to use this opportunity to promote other
objectives.

