Mr. Gata Mavita wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Madam
President, on Malaysia's assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of August and
to thank Malaysia for taking the initiative to organize
this debate on the plight of children in armed conflict.
I would like to commend Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, and tell her how much we value
her commitment and dedication to children's causes
throughout the world. Finally, I extend my thanks
to His Excellency Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
UNICEF Executive Director Anthony Lake and all
those who took the floor before me for their very
enlightening statements.

Before I proceed, I would like to make some
comments on the part of the report (S/2016/360)
presented to the Council that concerns my country.

The report provides some statistics on the situation
of child soldiers in my country. It is important to
remind the Council, as we have always stressed, that
today there are no longer child soldiers in the Congolese
national army. The children that our army hands over to
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
come from armed groups.

Going back to the statistics to which we alluded,
we would like to draw the Council's attention to the
fact that, as the joint technical working group has
stated every time, these statistics are problematic to
the extent that the statistics presented by MONUSCO
are not necessarily in line with those of UNICEF
and of the European Union's national programme for
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration (DDR),
which are all evolving structures within the technical
working group. During the discussions in the technical
working group, these structures have always insisted
that only the statistics validated by the European
Union's national DDR programme should be taken into
account. In this context, it seems useful to inform the
Council briefly on the following points.

The situation of the 10 children found in the Forces
armees de la Republique democratique du Congo
(FARDC), as mentioned in paragraph 46 of the report,
had been the subject of an investigation ordered by the
National Ministry ofDefence to the Chief of Staff of our
army, who in turn issued the order to the Commander
of the 32nd Military Region. The latter, after verifying
the facts, brought Colonels Ramazani and Kamulete,
the alleged perpetrators, to justice.

With regard to the situation of the 22 children
found in the Angenga prison, they were captured by the
FARDC during military operations against the Forces
democratiques de liberation du Rwanda, to which they
belonged. After they had been identified and there had
been an exchange about them with the International
Committee of the Red Cross, they were immediately
handed over to UNICEF Goma. It should be noted that
five of these children, at a much earlier date, had been
declared adults by child protection agencies in Goma.

The case of the 29 children allegedly killed or
maimed by the FARDC and 9 by the police is noted in
paragraph 47 of the report. MONUSCO did not bring
this case to the attention of the joint technical working
group, which is the appropriate context to exchange
information and to harmonize the views of each party.
The FARDC and the Congolese national police do
not acknowledge these facts, unless they happened
without their knowledge during the fighting against the
armed groups.

Finally, the use of schools for military purposes is
mentioned in paragraph 50 of the report. This practice
is not tolerated within the FARDC, especially since a
directive of the Ministry of Defence has prohibited it
for several years. It should be noted that the troops in all
units of our army now receive training in international
humanitarian law. Moreover, since the Government
and the United Nations signed the action plan,
awareness-raising campaigns have been conducted
and the contents of the plan are on the curriculum of
all the military academies in our country. In order to
demonstrate our determination never to use schools for
military purposes, my country endorsed the Oslo Safe
Schools Declaration.
Having provided these explanations, I would like to
say that the issue of child soldiers is of concern to my
Government, which, under the leadership of the Head
of State, has decided to ban the recruitment and use of
children in our armed forces and our security services.
To translate this political resolve into action, the Head
of State has set up a structure to combat sexual violence
and the recruitment and use of children. The senior
State official responsible for managing this structure
works closely with authorities in the military, judiciary
and the Ministry for Gender, Women and Children.

Among the actions taken by the Government in the
context of this struggle I can cite the following. There
is an operation to identify military staff by setting
up a biometric database to manage soldiers' personal
data, especially their age. An action plan has been
signed with the United Nations comprising a series of
commitments to put an end to the recruitment and use
of children by the army and to sexual violence against
children. Every six months the situation is assessed, in
collaboration with various partners, to take stock of the
progress achieved.

Two important directives have been signed by the
Minister of National Defence and the Deputy Head of
the National Intelligence Agency. The first is for the
armed forces and instructs the commanders of military
training centres to facilitate access to military barracks
by the United Nations child protection country teams,
as well as by child protection agencies for verification
purposes. This directive empowers the military
hiearchy to punish with disciplinary action and to
bring to justice any soldier under their command who
is guilty of committing serious violations of children's
rights. The directive also requires that awareness
campaigns and training be held in all military garrisons
of the country in order to allow all military personnel to
become familiar with the action plan and the obligations
flowing therefrom.

Under the second directive, which applies to the
intelligence services, members of the United Nations
response team and child protection agencies are
permitted to work unhindered by and with transparency
from the intelligence services. This directive also
authorizes the release of any child linked to armed
groups and his or her transfer to a child-protection
agency. In addition, we have created two coordination
bodies to monitor the implementation of the action plan.

With respect to the fight against impunity, high-
ranking officers of the army and police who have been
found guilty of violations against children's rights have
been sentenced.

We have opened new courts whose mandate is to
punish serious crimes committed against children, and
the Government has taken a decision not to allow any
person found guilty of six or more serious violations
of children's rights in time of conflict to remain in the
army.

With the financial support of UNICEF and working
in partnership with MONUSCO, the Department of
National Defence held a workshop in Kinshasa from
24 to 25 August 2015 to draft a road map of priorities
to fight the recruitment of children in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The workshop brought together
people from the FARDC, the national police and civil
society from all of the provinces of the country. A
joint technical working group has been set up in areas
affected by armed conflict, namely, North Kivu, South
Kivu and Orientale provinces.

In addition, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
as the report of the Secretary-General highlights,
continues to carry out the United Nations Children,
Not Soldiers campaign, launched by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict and UNICEF. My country has also
taken the initiative of implementing the objectives of
the campaign as they are defined in resolution 2143
(2014).

Undeniable progress has been made in my country's
fight against the recruitment and use of children within
the army and intelligence services. As part of this
fight, 46,087 children linked with the armed forces
and armed groups have been demobilized. Of these
children, approximately 15,365 have been accepted for
formal education and are now attending 208 schools.
The other 30,722 are being given vocational training
within 417 professional apprenticeship structures.

Despite these successes, however, much work
remains to be done. As long as armed groups remain
active, this situation will persist. That is why my
Government remains determined to continue its efforts
to completely neutralize armed groups and thereby put
an end to this phenomenon.

I would be remiss ifI did not express the gratitude
of my country to the United Nations and our numerous
international partners that have always supported
our efforts in combating the recruitment and use of
children. In particular, my country would like to thank
Japan and UNICEF for providing significant financial
support, without which it would have been difficult to
obtain the results we have achieved today.

