Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Gue'henno for his
briefing on the situation in Kosovo and aspects relating
to the situation in other parts of the region, particularly
in Macedonia.

I would first like to comment on the main part of
his briefing, namely, preparations for the elections in
Kosovo. This is one of the most important questions,
and although some progress has been made in this
process leading up to the elections, we must say that on
the whole the situation does not encourage optimism.

As is known, in the registration of members of
the Serbian and other non-Albanian communities in the
province by 17 August, three months before elections
are to be held, just over 2,000 people have been
registered among the Serb, Gypsy, Turk and other
minorities. Two thousand people in all: this figure
speaks for itself.

The reasons for this situation - and this is not
the first year we have been talking about them-
include the fact that the security problem in Kosovo is
not being duly resolved. The return of refugees is not
being guaranteed, and the numbers Mr. Guehenno gave
us on organized returns are paltry. Security is not
guaranteed, nor is freedom of movement for the
minorities in the province. All of this is well known.
Unless these conditions are guaranteed, it is hard to
talk about any real democratic electoral process.

The conducting of the elections in these
conditions in November of this year could lead to an
increase in Kosovo separatism. The United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and KFOR must robustly increase their activities in
order to resolve the security problem there, the
problem of returns and freedom of movement; they
must do this well ahead ofthe elections.

We can say that the main thing is that the
Government of Yugoslavia has unambiguously called
upon the Kosovo Serbs to participate in the elections.
But to expect that this is going to resolve all the
problems is naive, to put it mildly. We note that the
United Nations Mission is taking certain steps to
establish dialogue with the Government of Yugoslavia.
But these steps are obviously not enough.

At the same time, the head of UNMIK is taking
other decisions that are creating additional irritation in
relations between UNMIK and Belgrade. I am referring
in particular to the creation of tax collection posts on
the administrative border with Serbia. And I refer to
the imposition of the 96-hour notification regime for
travel to Kosovo by officials from Yugoslavia. We are
troubled that UNMIK has not managed to establish
normal relations yet with the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia Committee on Kosovo. We share the hopes
of many regarding the appointment of Mr. Covic as
leader of the coordination centre of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and of Serbia on Kosovo.
However, it is clear that this appointment, in and of
itself, cannot resolve all the serious problems
remaining.

Ultimately, the main guarantee of success is the
scrupulous and comprehensive compliance of all with
resolution 1244 (1999). This is possible only if there is
proper cooperation between UNMIK and Belgrade. I
would add that all participants in the process of the
settlement must show as much responsibility as
possible.

In this connection, the decision taken by the head
of the mission of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) does not add any
optimism that they are able to certify for participation
in the elections the extremist party known as the
National Movement of Kosovo. Clearly that is a
mistake, and that mistake has to be redressed.
Otherwise, we might get the impression that the OSCE
was officially recognizing the legitimacy of a structure
that represents Albanian extremists, and that the OSCE
was actually trying to encourage such structures.

The situation in Kosovo - and this point has
been made before by Mr. Guehenno and Ambassador
Hume - cannot be seen in isolation of the situation in
the region as a whole. It is clear to all that there is a
link between the conflict in Macedonia and the
situation in Kosovo, since Kosovo has basically
become a rear base for Albanian armed groups in
Macedonia. All this sheds stark light on the failure to
find a solution to the problem of disarming Kosovo
militants and eliminating their illegal armed
formations. We are convinced that the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and the Kosovo Force (KFOR) must take additional
robust steps in this area.
We have no doubt that it is still important to halt
the spillover of extremists from one part of the region
to another and their use of various covers to conceal
their terrorist activities. To cite just one example, on 13
August, Russian KFOR troops arrested two Kosovo
Albanians in the region of Kosovska Kamenica on the
administrative border with Serbia. One of those
detained had an automatic weapon, ammunition, a
bullet-proof vest and a National Liberation Army
(NLA) uniform. He confessed that he was part of the
111th company of the NLA brigade, which had
conducted battle activities in Macedonia in the
Aracinovo region. This June, he was one of the
militants allowed to leave the buses that were being
blocked by the Macedonians in the Aracinovo region.
Now he had turned up in Kosovo on the administrative
border with Serbia with his weapons and his uniform.
That is just one example that shows that the problem is
still there. It has to be resolved.

We know that during the operation that has just
started in Macedonia, the NLA is supposed to be
handing over the weapons that its militants possess.
Those who are carrying out operation Essential Harvest
have to be sure not to repeat the unfortunate experience
of Kosovo, in which it was ceremoniously proclaimed
that the Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA) had been
disarmed, stripped of its uniforms and disbanded. But
in fact, it turned out, of course, that the KLA retained
its organizational structures, its weapons, its access to
new arms deliveries and its ability to destabilize
various parts of the Balkan region.

Talking about Macedonia and about the current
operation there, I would add that we are disquieted by
information we are receiving about efforts to create in
Macedonia another army - an Albanian national
army- which is trying to unite under its banner the
most militant fighters and to retain a battle-ready core
of extremists. That cannot be allowed. We have
repeatedly stated that we are in favour of lifting the
arms embargo imposed by resolution 1160 (1998)
against the Government of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, and we support the appeal by Ambassador
Hume to resolve this question as soon as possible.
While reaffirming that position, we think it necessary
to stress once again also that the international
presences in Kosovo will have to take very decisive
action to cut off any possible flows of weapons
destined for Kosovo Albanian terrorist groups, because
the military embargo with regard to these groups must
remain in full force.

All this is necessary in order to cut off the
channels of financial and material assistance from the
territory of Kosovo to extremism, terrorism and
separatism in the Balkans. We are convinced that the
lasting settlement of the Kosovo Macedonian pockets
of tension in the region is possible only in a general
Balkan context, and that that goal should be promoted
by the implementation of the Russian initiative: to
conclude a legally binding agreement to strengthen the
security and the sovereignty of all countries of the
region, and to that end to convene a Balkan summit,
with international participation. We believe that that
Russian proposal remains relevant.

