Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): Madam President,
I thank you for having organized this open debate on
reform of the Security Council working methods.

In the light of the number of crises that the world
is facing, it is imperative that enhancing the Council's
working methods be done with urgency and relevance,
taking the right approaches. Each of the areas included
in the working methods - transparency and access,
efficiency and implementation, the rule of law, the use
of the veto, peacekeeping operations, accountability
and the Council's relationship with the General
Assembly, as well as with regional arrangements and
agencies - are interlinked or overlap with one another.
They are also closely intertwined with the revitalization
of the General Assembly. My delegation would like to
draw attention to some salient points in key areas of the
working methods.

First, we call for an increase in the number of
the Council's open meetings. The degree of openness
will always be the central focus for non-Council
members. We also call not just for openness but also
for transparency and communication with the broader
United Nations membership.

Secondly, greater collaboration with troop-
contributing countries (TCCs) is needed with regard to
decisions pertaining to their troops and to the mandates
of the peacekeeping missions in which they are
deployed. More regular open debates on peacekeeping
operations and improvements in the relationship
between TCCs and the Council are the best way to
increase coordination and understanding.

Thirdly, there is a great divergence of views
regarding the right to veto and its application. My
country supports the notion that the veto should not be
used in cases of genocide, crimes against humanity or
serious crimes against international humanitarian law.
But to make it practical, we have to bridge fundamental
differences in defining our perceptions of the
aforementioned concepts of genocide, crimes against
humanity and serious crimes against international
humanitarian law. My delegation hopes that this issue
can be resolved by the permanent members by taking
into account all their approaches on the basis of
goodwill and compromise.

Fourthly, incoming non-permanent members must,
during the interim period after their election and before
they assume membership, be allowed to attend all
meetings of the Council and its subsidiary bodies and
the informal consultations of the whole, or at least for
a period of six weeks immediately preceding their term
of membership, and they should be given full support
for their new role.

Fifthly, regarding sanctions, there is evidence that
they are not always applied rigorously by the Security
Council or Member States. This must be done with
clear mechanisms for monitoring and evaluation. We
ask for consideration of the long-term establishment
of the office of the Ombudsperson with an extended
mandate and full support for her office. Likewise, we
propose that an independent advisory body be created to
provide inputs to the work of the sanctions committees.

Sixthly, there is a widespread preference and
desire that the annual report of the Security Council
to the General Assembly be more analytical, reflecting
complexities and intricacies in decision-making, rather
than being a long summary of the year, thus adding to
the process of transparency.

Finally, the United Nations Charter specifies that the
General Assembly and the Security Council are equal
bodies. Therefore, greater dialogue and collaboration
between the two will enhance both entities, especially
the Council, as it gains new perspectives from the
Assembly's membership. At the same time, many of the
countries that have little or no power in the Council
see the General Assembly as their only avenue for
influencing the United Nations.

What is most needed is not just reforms but
changed attitudes. The national interests of Member
States must be balanced with greater objectivity and
global perspectives. We believe that the Council would
also benefit through greater dialogue with the United
Nations system, regional organizations and specialized
security entities, institutions and civil society, which
play a key role in maintaining peace and security.

