Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): I take this opportunity to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for the month of June.

It is of high importance that the Security Council is
holding a meeting on the current situation in and around
Ukraine. I would like to express my gratitude to our
briefers, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman and Mr. Alexander Hug,
for their important messages on the current situation on
the ground and the measures taken by the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) to
monitor the implementation of the Minsk agreements.

I would like to express my gratitude to all
members of the Council for their dedication to the
implementation of the Minsk agreements. I thank them
for their solidarity.

Two days ago, we listened carefully to a lecture
from the Russian delegation on what Ukraine is doing
wrong. I would like to start by reminding the Russian
authorities that Ukraine has a full right to defend its
territorial integrity and sovereignty, which are being
challenged by Russia's occupation of Crimea and the
aggression against our eastern regions. This right
to defend ourselves is provided by our Constitution
and the Charter of the United Nations - namely,
Article 51 - and includes the right to invite other
countries to help us with self-defence.

What are the legal sources to justify the Russian
decision to send weapons, troops, mercenaries? There
are none. No justification can be found in the Charter
of the United Nations. That is why I would like to
start by drawing the Security Council's attention
to the Russian Federation's and the Russian-backed
terrorists' grave violations of the ceasefire and Minsk
agreements in general, which were explicitly endorsed
by resolution 2202 (2015).

On 3 June, the militants, with the direct backing
of Russian regular armed forces, carried out a massive
targeted assault on Ukrainian forces around Marinka as
well as an attack near Shchastya. Some 1,000 persons,
including Russian regular military cadre, and 30 tanks
were engaged in the assault near Marinka. Ukrainian
forces were shelled 82 times, including 11 times with
the Grad system. Artillery fire was professionally
coordinated, which also attests to the presence of
Russian regular artillery crews.
These attacks were intended to test the defence
and response capabilities of the Ukrainian forces and
to seize control of territory and vital socioeconomic
infrastructure - the Karlovske water reservoir,
the Kurakhove and Shchastya power stations, and
the Volnovakha railway hub. If the attackers had
captured Marinka, they would have been able to seize
positions from which they could impose an economic
blockade on Mariupol, surround Ukrainian forces in
Avdiivka and near Donetsk airport, thereby enabling
a larger offensive along the front line. The Ukrainian
anti-terrorist operation forces fought off these assaults.
However, five servicemen were killed in action, four
of them in Marinka, and 38 were wounded. Moreover,
three civilians were reported dead.

Meanwhile, after the failure of the 3 June
assault, Russian-backed terrorists continued attacks
overnight. In the direction of Mariupol, the terrorists
shelled Shyrokyne with artillery, mortars, grenade
launchers and small arms. In the direction of Luhansk,
the militants attacked Donetske, Novotoshkivske,
Stanytsya Luhanska and Krymske. In the direction of
Artemivsk, the terrorists shelled Zolote with grenade
launchers and Leninske with small arms. In the
direction of Donetsk, the terrorists attacked Pisky with
mortars and Novotroitske with grenade launchers.

Russia and its proxies in Donbas have repeatedly
violated the Minsk agreements of 5 and 19 September
2014 as well as of 12 February 2015. The assault near
Mariynka became the second large-scale assault after
the flagrant assault on Debaltseve in February. It
occurred immediately after Russia's attempt to disrupt
the meeting of the Trilateral Contact Group and its
thematic subgroups in Minsk on 2 June. We are sure
that the massive targeted assault around Marinka was
planned in advance by the Russian Federation, and the
conclusions of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission
prove it. In particular,

"Between 2230 hours on 2 June and 0530 hours on
3 June the [Mission] observed the movement of a
large amount of heavy weapons in the so-called
Donetsk People's Republic in a westerly direction
towards the contact line i close to Marinka,
preceding and during the fighting".

The Mission observed and tracked, inter alia,
movements of armoured vehicles, including battle
tanks, heavy artillery, military trucks and more. It is
noteworthy that the Mission made several attempts
to contact the high-ranking leaders of the so-called
Donetsk People's Republic in order to facilitate a
cessation of the fighting around Marinka, but without
success. The so-called leaders did not respond to the
Mission.

Ukraine has consistently and in good faith lived
up to the Minsk agreements in full and tried to use all
possible diplomatic leverage to deter escalation. Thanks
to the Ukrainian Army's effective defence, Ukraine
has avoided new wave of conflict escalation in Donbas
and discouraged the Kremlin's attempts to subvert
the provisions of both the resolution 2202 (2015) and
the Minsk agreements by making accusations against
the Ukrainian side. I would like to underscore that we
promptly informed the OSCE Mission that Ukrainian
armed forces' heavy weapons would be returned to the
contact line in order to deal with the real threat posed
by the fighting in Marinka and to defend civilians
living in the local areas.

The recent provocative steps taken by the Russian
side clearly indicate Russia's intentions to escalate the
conflict and disrupt the Minsk process. The recent
assaults are an attempt by the Russian side to exert
military pressure on international players on the eve of
important international events. The task of the Security
Council is to prevent the aggressor from taking further
destructive actions in this direction. We have to use all
possible political and diplomatic leverage in this regard.

It is not only the OSCE Mission that continuously

witnesses the deterioration of the situation on the ground.
A few days ago, the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights published its tenth report on the
human rights situation in Ukraine. It is important that
the report clearly highlights the responsibility of the
Russian Federation for the deterioration of the situation
in certain areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions
of Ukraine. In particular, it takes note of the Russian
Federation's supplying modern types of heavy weaponry
and mercenaries and widely confirms that crimes
and human rights violations have been committed by
militants with Russia's support. The difficult human
rights situation in the temporarily occupied Crimea is
also reflected in the document. The Office notes that the
so-called Crimean authorities continue to restrict the
rights of ethnic Ukrainian and Crimean Tatar people.

Let me go back to where I began. Taking into
account Russia's serious violations of resolution 2202
(2015), I would kindly request that Security Council
members promptly react to those provocations and
violations and make every effort to promote a peaceful
resolution of the conflict. The international community
previously stated that an assault on Mariupol would be
a red line which, if crossed by Russia, would trigger
an immediate and resolute response. In the light of the
events of 3 June, the same approach should be applied
to the Marinka case.

At the same time, we urge the Russian Federation
and its proxies to immediately start fulfilling their
obligations under the provisions of the Minsk
agreements and resolution 2202 (2015). We demand that
Russia withdraw its armed forces from Ukraine, stop
fortifying the terrorist organizations with personnel
and weapons, cease its destabilizing and provocative
actions in Ukraine, and release all hostages. Russia
must also end its occupation of Crimea, which remains
an integral part of Ukraine.

