Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes the adoption of resolution 2285
(2016). Although the past few weeks have been
regrettable, today's resolution must mark a turning point
in the urgent efforts to bring the United Nations Mission
for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO)
back to full functionality. MINURSO's work, including
its vital civilian component and political reporting
function, is critical to the stability of Western Sahara.
Recent events have rendered it unable to deliver on its
mandate over the past six weeks.

Let me be clear. The Council has the responsibility
to protect the integrity of its peacekeeping missions
and to preserve their ability to implement their
mandate. MINURSO is no exception. In that regard,
resolution 2285 (2016), adopted today, contains two
important elements. First, it emphasizes the urgent
need for MINURSO to be returned to full functionality.
Secondly, it contains a review mechanism in the form
of a briefing by the Secretary-General within the next
90 days to ensure that that reinforcement happens and
an undertaking for the Council to consider how best
to achieve that outcome, if it is not fully functional.
In the meantime, we urge the resumption of productive
talks between Morocco and the United Nations, so that
the Council can be satisfied that MINURSO is again
fully functional.

Our collective focus must also return to the United
Nations process and to finding a lasting and mutually
acceptable political solution for Western Sahara, one
that provides for the self-determination of the people of
Western Sahara. The United Kingdom position on that
issue remains the same. The United Nations process
will continue to have our full support.

As Western Sahara illustrates, there are too many
intractable long-running disputes on the agenda of
the Council, so today we urge the parties to engage
constructively with each other and with the United
Nations process, so that together we can find a solution
and settle the question of Western Sahara once and for
all. Doing so is not only of the utmost importance to the
Western Saharan refugees, who continue to suffer from
the protracted dispute, but also for the security and
economic prosperity of all countries and all peoples in
the Maghreb region.

