Ms. Menendez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I
would first like to thank Mr. Egeland for his very
interesting and comprehensive briefing. My delegation
would also like to express its thanks to the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs for their
work in developing a culture of protection, which we
feel is at the heart ofthe issue, in particular because we
are speaking about innocent victims - civilians. We
would like to join Mr. Egeland in expressing our
sadness and our condolences for the numerous recent
victims among United Nations personnel and
humanitarian workers.

Spain has often expressed its commitment to
protect civilians in armed conflict, both through
relevant legal reforms in Spanish law, as well as
through our work and efforts to ensure such protection
within the framework ofinternational law. The Spanish
Constitution explicitly states that the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and international treaties
and agreements ratified by Spain will be the reference
point for interpreting norms relative to fundamental
rights and freedoms. Under the umbrella of the Geneva
and Hague Conventions, our internal legislation
codifies crimes committed against persons and
protected goods in cases of armed conflict in our penal
code. Those provisions are in addition to specific
regulations for military personnel, which are codified
in the military penal code.

In addition to legislation, however, measures need
to be taken that will ensure the development of the so-
called culture of protection in cases of armed conflict,
in particular for needy civilian populations. In that
context, my delegation firmly supports the updated
aide-memoire on the protection of civilians and calls
for its endorsement by the Security Council. The
incorporation of the experience of different
departments within the United Nations system, as well
as the interactive dialogue that facilitated the drafting
of the aide-memoire, ensure that the measures included
in the aide-memoire will be effective. In that
connection, Spain wishes to express its thanks to
Mr. Egeland and welcomes the lO-point platform that
he presented, based on the areas ofthe road map.

Undoubtedly all efforts to safeguard the
protection of civilians are important, but I wish to refer
to some areas which Spain views as a priority in that
regard. First is the question of improving humanitarian
access to civilians in need. As we have always done in
discussing situations related to armed conflicts in the
Security Council, we have urged - and today we will
do so once again - all parties involved in conflicts to
ensure unhampered access of humanitarian
organizations to civilians. Similarly, my delegation
places particular importance on an idea that we have
supported on a number of occasions - that United
Nations peacekeeping operation mandates should
include the facilitation by United Nations forces of
access by humanitarian organizations to needy civilian
populations.

Another priority matter is the question of
children. As distinct from the consideration of the
civilian population as a whole, assistance and
protection provided to children deserves special
attention. Spain supports the work of the Council in
that regard, and appeals for cooperation to ensure the
protection of girls and boys in compliance with its
resolutions 1261 (1999), 1314 (2000), 1379 (2001) and
1460 (2003) on children in armed conflict.
Furthermore, my delegation believes that we need to
support and encourage all efforts to ensure the
demobilization and disarmament of girls and boys,
reinforcing regional disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation programmes.

Another priority area is that of violence against
women in armed conflict. Unfortunately, women and
girls continue to be subject to abuse and violence. In
addition to measures taken to avoid those heinous acts,
Spain has firmly supported gender training
programmes for humanitarian and peacekeeping
personnel. The situation also calls for an increase in
gender advisers in peacekeeping operations, as well as
clear change in attitudes and behaviours that would
underscore the active role that women can play in
conflict resolution.

I cannot fail to mention the issue of impunity. All
existing legal resources, including the International
Criminal Court, need to be used to put an end to
impunity.

Finally, I would, as a matter of course, like to
affirm my delegation's association and agreement with
the statement that Italy will subsequently make on
behalf ofthe European Union.

