The Russian Federation abstained in the voting on resolution 2548 (2020), on the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO), put forward by the United States of America. We did so due to the fact that the process of elaborating and endorsing that document was neither transparent nor consultative. None of our principled and well-substantiated considerations, including those of a compromise nature, that we repeatedly brought to the attention of the United States was taken into account. A whole range of practical proposals articulated by other Security Council members was also left unanswered. As a result, the text remains unbalanced. All this adds to doubts regarding arrangements on informal penholdership of country files at the Security Council. In recent years, resolutions on the renewal of MINURSO mandate received amendments that, in our view, affect the Security Council's unbiased and impartial approach to the issue of Western Sahara. Substitution of fundamental principles of the Western Saharan settlement by general remarks about the need to stick to realistic approaches and seek compromise produces ambiguity, undermines trust in our work and obscures prospects for resuming the political process. The attempt to boost the peace process by using language that blurs previously agreed parameters of the Western Saharan settlement would rather produce the opposite result. We had not agreed to this amendment before, and we were not able to support it today. Once again, we would like to reiterate our consistent position with regard to a settlement in Western Sahara. We stand for a well-balanced and unbiased approach, support direct negotiations between Morocco and the Frente Popular para la Liberacion de Saguia el-Hamra y Rio de Oro (Frente POLISARIO). In our capacity as a permanent member of the Security Council and a member of the Group of Friends of Western Sahara, we maintain active contacts with all interested stakeholders - we work with Moroccans, Polisarians, Algerians and Mauritanians. We call on all the parties concerned to refrain from taking any unilateral steps that could undermine efforts to relaunch substantive political dialogue. We are convinced that only a political solution based on relevant Security Council resolutions can overcome disputes and ensure a just and sustainable Western Sahara settlement. The final formula must be based on compromise and mutual agreement by Moroccans and Polisarians alike, and envisage the self-determination of the people of Western Sahara in the framework of procedures and in line with the goals and principles of the Charter of the United Nations. This concept is central to the Western Saharan settlement, and it must not be replaced by other formulas. Like other members of the Security Council, we look forward to the appointment of a new personal envoy of the Secretary-General, and to progress in resuming the negotiation process between sides towards a Western Saharan settlement, with the participation of neighbouring States. However, we have to warn all that the document adopted today may, contrary to the expectations of its authors, have a negative effect on the efforts of the future personal envoy. Russia will remain an unbiased actor for a Western Sahara settlement, maintaining contacts with all regional sides. We reiterate our support for MINURSO, which plays a pre-eminent stabilizing role in creating a favourable environment on the ground for resuming dialogue between Morocco and the Frente Polisario, and in promoting the peace process.
