Mr. Trautwein (Germany): Mr. President, I
would like to begin my remarks by thanking you for
having convened this open debate and by especially
thanking the Under-Secretary-General Egeland for his
comprehensive and detailed statement, in particular the
outline of the 10 action points that build on the road
map. I associate my delegation with the statement that
will be delivered by the Italian Ambassador, on behalf
ofthe European Union.

The time of traditional warfare is past. While in
World War I, the "Great War", the overwhelming
number of victims were soldiers, the situation today is
entirely different. Indeed, combatants today are in the
minority when we talk about war victims. Civilians
bear the brunt when it comes to casualties. They are
unprotected and defenceless, exposed to violence
entirely beyond their control. Human suffering has
become a key issue in wartime, yet it does not receive
the attention it deserves.

Clearly, the rules and international treaties aimed
at the protection of civilians in war situations, which
came into force during the twentieth century, no longer
provide sufficient protection in the twenty-first century.

We have to develop new ways of coping with the
continuing menace to the well-being of civilian
populations during war and combat. Fortunately, the
past few years have brought an increased awareness of
the problem, beginning with the Secretary-General's
report on the situation in Africa in 1998, in which he
identified the protection of civilians in armed conflict
as a humanitarian imperative. Subsequently, the
Security Council has repeatedly dealt with the subject
and receives a briefing by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) every
six months. Also, the Secretary-General has issued
three reports to date on this subject. Thus, public
awareness has been increased.

We very much welcome these developments.
They are a sign of new thinking. OCHA has become
the key player and focal point whenever the concept of
effective protection of civilians is raised. Thus, we aim
to create a culture of protection, as the Secretary-
General has called it. The Security Council,
responsible for the establishment and maintenance of
international peace and security and for legitimizing
power for peace missions, is the main actor when it
comes to determining which actions to take to secure
civilians in war situations. No mandate for peace
missions should be drafted without the protection of
civilians in mind. Sanctions need to be imposed with
the consequences for civilians in mind.

However, the awareness of the need for
protection of civilians must not be confined to New
York, Geneva and some capitals. The five regional
workshops held to date represent a commendable effort
to broaden awareness in the field. Education, it seems
to me, is another important factor if we want to gain
the widest possible support for a culture of peace. This
involves early incorporation into the respective
educational curriculums.

Allow me to make a remark on two particularly
vulnerable groups: children and women. The
phenomenon of child soldiers in crisis regions is
increasingly common. To force children to take up
arms, rather than to let them develop peacefully and
enjoy a proper education, is a crime not only against
the individual, but also against the future of a whole
society.

Women, similarly, are very vulnerable in wartime
and are frequently subjected to cruel and degrading
treatment. But we need not think of women only as the
weak ones, as victims. They can assume an important
role in preventing conflicts and in post-conflict peace-
building. We need to stress this role more and we need
to recognize its vast potential. The General Assembly's
resolution on the prevention of armed conflict has
reminded us ofthis.

Governments need to be motivated to make every
effort to protect their civilians sufficiently from
combat. If those Governments are unable to do so, they
must not impede those who are legitimized to help in
accordance with international law - that is,
humanitarian organizations. To create safe havens and
zones of temporary security is often essential when
combat activities force people from their homes. All
humanitarian organizations need the necessary access
in order to help. Civilian populations must not be taken
hostage by warring factions trying to deny that access.
Combatants acting in such a manner must realize that
they are acting against fundamental principles of
humanity. Likewise, acts directed against humanitarian
personnel must be considered as being directed not
only against individuals, but also against the civilian
population in need of that humanitarian aid. In this
context, Germany supported the unanimous adoption of
Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) on the
protection of United Nations humanitarian personnel.

Let me conclude by pointing out that civilians in
wartime cannot be protected solely by the efforts of
humanitarian organizations, including the United
Nations. Combatants who violate the principles of
humanitarian law, be it by acts directed against
civilians or against humanitarian personnel, need to
know that their acts eventually will come underjudicial
scrutiny from national or regional tribunals or from the
International Criminal Court. I therefore call on all
Member States to strengthen the tools which already
are at hand in this respect.

