Ms. Nassau (Australia): I thank Special
Representative Zarif for his presentation and for his
continuing efforts in supporting stability, security
and human rights in Kosovo. I also welcome Foreign
Ministers Mrkie and Hoxhaj and thank them for their
remarks.

Australia supports an ongoing transition in
Kosovo that provides for longer-term political stability
with inclusiveness for all parties and that effectively
integrates Kosovo within the region. The Security
Council's role is to support practical progress towards
stability and security. That will eventually enable the
United Nations Interim Administration in Kosovo to
complete its mandate.

We welcome the progress made to date by the parties
in fulfilling their obligations under the 19 April first
agreement on principles governing the normalization of
relations. We also welcome the 28 June decision by the
European Union to open accession negotiations with
Serbia by January 2014 and to launch negotiations for
a stabilization and association agreement with Kosovo.

The priority for both parties now is the
implementation of all 15 points of the April agreement,
fully and within the agreed timelines. To that end,
we welcome the establishment of liaison offices in
Belgrade and Pristina on 17 July and the placement
of a management team for the implementation of
the Brussels agreement in northern Mitrovica. We
welcome the Belgrade-Pristina working group's efforts
to implement the agreement, particularly their focus on
policing and on election preparations.

With regard to the negotiations in the complex
areas of telecommunication and energy, we note that
progress on practical areas such as these can translate
into genuine confidence-building measures with a long
lasting impact on security and stability.

A robust framework for guaranteeing human
security, the rule of law, human rights and respect for
cultural heritage is essential to the long-term prosperity
of Kosovo and the welfare of its citizens. The local
elections in the northern municipalities on 3 November,
facilitated by the the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, will be a critical step towards
political inclusion for Serbs residing in northern
Kosovo within a sustainable and viable institutional
framework. We welcome efforts by the Governments
in Belgrade and Pristina to encourage all citizens
living in northern Kosovo to take full advantage of that
opportunity to build local democratic institutions that
have the potential to be credible and legitimate. We note
the steps that have been taken to date, including on the
difficult issue of amnesty, in facilitating the transition
of northern Kosovo's security and political structures
into a coherent Kosovo-wide framework.

Australia also continues to encourage the safe and
Viable return of internally displaced persons. Australia
is encouraged by the close cooperation among the
Kosovo police, the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo and the Kosovo Force (KFOR),
particularly in responding to security incidents in
ethnically mixed areas in northern Kosovo. Ensuring
security will continue to be vital for the success of the
elections.

Australia welcomed the visit to Kosovo by United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights Pillay
on 19 and 20 June. Australia is encouraged that she
noted continuing positive dialogue between Pristina
and Belgrade. We are pleased that High Commissioner
Pillay found that a good legal and institutional human
rights framework was in place. Important next steps
in building community confidence will be addressing
the weaknesses of rule-of-law institutions in Kosovo,
including ensuring the independence of the judiciary
and addressing the lack of execution of judicial
decisions.

Sustained efforts to improve inclusive education,
and human rights education in particular, will also
be vital for Kosovo's future generations. Australia
welcome's Kosovo's commitment to protecting
religious and cultural sights. In that regard, we note the
ongoing transfer of responsibilities for the protection of
religious and cultural heritage from KFOR to the newly
established Kosovo police unit. It is essential that the
work of that new police unit retains the confidence of
Serbs throughout Kosovo. Australia condemns acts
of vandalism, desecration and theft from all sights of
cultural or religious significance. We commend the
establishment of a cultural heritage council in Prizren
on 2 July and hope that a similar council will soon open
in Rahovec/Orahovac.

Australia continues to support ongoing dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina. The sustained
engagement of the international community will be
crucial to ensuring that agreements are faithfully
implemented. We continue to support measures
to address the sensitivities of local communities,
particularly in northern Kosovo, and stress the
importance of encouraging the development of strong
institutions to ensure a stable and peaceful Kosovo.
