The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, in which she requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President,
Mrs. Kalajdzisalihovic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina) took
a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Members of the Council have received photocopies of
a letter dated 14 February 1997 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
transmitting a communication dated 14 February 1997
from the High Representative, enclosing the decision
adopted in Rome today by the Arbitral Tribunal for the
dispute over the inter-entity boundary in the Brcko area,
which will be issued as document S/ 1997/ 126.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council notes the announcement
of the decision on 14 February 1997 by the arbitral
tribunal on the disputed portion of the Inter-Entity
Boundary Line in the Brcko area, pursuant to Article
V, Annex 2 to the General Framework Agreement
for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
Annexes thereto (collectively the Peace Agreement, S/1995/999, annex).

"The Security Council reminds the parties to
Annex 2 to the Peace Agreement of their obligation
to be bound by the decision of the arbitral tribunal
and to implement the decision without delay. The
Council underscores the importance of prompt and
full cooperation by the parties to the Peace
Agreement in carrying out their commitments to
implement the Peace Agreement in its entirety."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1997/7.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.25 pm.

