Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): I thank you, Mr. President,
and the delegation of the United Kingdom for initiating
this timely discussion on United Nations peacekeeping
operations and for the valuable ideas and insights
contained in the concept paper. Under-Secretaries-
General Mr. Alain Le Roy and Ms. Susana Malcorra
and General Martin Agwai have enriched the debate
with their invaluable statements, and we are grateful to
them.

Representing a major troop contributor with an
unflinching commitment to United Nations
peacekeeping, the Nigerian delegation welcomes the
intensified and concerted efforts to address the major
challenges confronting United Nations peacekeeping
operations. We appreciate the efforts of the Security
Council towards sustained dialogue, oversight and
evaluation with regard to peacekeeping operations. We
also acknowledge the New Horizon non-paper, an
insightful and reflective work calling for further
appraisal and the unrelenting engagement of all
stakeholders.

The Nigerian delegation believes that reform of
United Nations peacekeeping is inevitable, given its
rapid expansion, complexity and multidimensional
scope. However, such reform must be anchored in
concrete actions that address the problems of
inadequate logistics, lack of political will and
insufficient funding. It must also address gaps in
mandates, fluid exit strategies and the imprecise
relationship among the troop-contributing countries,
the Secretariat and the Security Council.

Indeed, the protection and welfare of
peacekeepers should be at the core of such efforts.
Even more significant, reform must preserve the
fundamental guiding principles on the basis of which
peacekeeping, as a tool for the preservation of
international peace and security, was developed.

Nigeria underscores the importance of enhanced
and transparent triangular cooperation among the
Security Council, the troop-contributing countries
(TCCS) and the Secretariat. While the responsibility for
planning and mandating operations lies with the
Council, the TCCs must be active participants in the
planning, review, drawdown and closure of operations.
Indeed, they should be involved in the determination
and review of mandates.

Today, it has become increasingly necessary to
broaden the base of United Nations peacekeeping
operations. In that regard, my delegation believes that
Member States should not only cultivate, but also
demonstrate, greater political will to share the burden
of peacekeeping operations, particularly the provision
oflogistics and personnel.

Peacekeeping and peacebuilding are coterminous.
As the Council mandates a peacekeeping operation, it
should also establish a peacebuilding mission as a vital
component of a well-conceived exit strategy. No less

critical is the strengthening of international, regional
and local conflict resolution mechanisms, particularly
the mediation mechanism advocated in the Prodi
report. Indeed, peacekeeping must be complemented by
predictable funding, unrelenting political bargaining
and social and economic reconstruction. The reform
efforts should also be directed at strengthening the
relationship between the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States and other
subregional bodies on the continent.

Nigeria unequivocally supports the protection of
civilians in all peacekeeping situations and calls for the
provision of adequate logistics capacity, including air
power and information, to discharge that responsibility
effectively.

Perhaps the time is ripe for a robust approach to
United Nations peacekeeping. Robust peacekeeping
means more than an enforcement mandate under
Chapter VII of the Charter. It implies the total and
unimpeded commitment of resources and a credible
demonstration of political will to ensure the success of
all operations.

