Ms. Blum (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, and the
delegation of Mexico on the effective manner in which
you have conducted the work of both the Security
Council during the month of April and the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict. My delegation
appreciates your initiative in convening this debate of
the Council.

In the political Constitution of my country, we
give priority to children's rights, since we consider that
their protection is in society's highest interests. This
precept is reflected in our institutional structure, which
permits the implementation of public policies aimed at
protecting children and, in particular, those children
whose rights have been infringed.

In the context of our comprehensive child welfare
policy, in December last year Colombia voluntarily
accepted the monitoring and reporting mechanism
provided for in Security Council resolution 1612
(2005). The voluntary nature of its acceptance is based
on the fact that the situation in Colombia is covered in
annex II of the report of the Secretary General
(S/2009/158) and is not on the Security Council's
agenda.

In accepting the monitoring and reporting
mechanism, my country recognizes the contribution
that the United Nations can make to the national
Government's primary duty to protect children affected
by the actions of illegal armed groups.

The Colombian State has established a
comprehensive strategy to address the prevention of
the recruitment and use of children by illegal armed
groups, as well as the protection, release and
reintegration of children who have been rescued from
such groups.

The first of these aspects, prevention, is the main
objective of the intersectorial commission created by
the Government of Colombia in December 2007. The
strategies of this commission, led by the Vice-President
of the Republic, include promoting the transformation
of family, community and institutional environments
into factors that safeguard children's rights. The aim is
to consolidate protection networks that can reduce
children's risk of exploitation by illegal armed groups.
Since its creation, the commission has focused its work
in 61 municipalities with high social and economic
vulnerability, where illegal armed groups are present
and the risk of recruitment has been reported.

In terms of the protection and restitution of the
fundamental rights of children rescued from illegal
armed groups, the Colombian Institute for Family
Welfare has provided assistance to 3,940 such children
to date. The programmes of the Institute seek to
provide comprehensive physical and psychological
care and to prepare children and youths for complete
reintegration into society.
My delegation has taken note of the eighth report
of the Secretary-General to the Security Council on
children and armed conflict. As we have indicated on
other occasions, we do not consider it appropriate to
include references to criminal organizations or gangs in
the Secretary-General's reports, as such organizations
do not fall within the purview established in the
Council's resolutions. One example of this is the case
of criminal groups devoted to drug trafficking.

Furthermore, my delegation wishes to express its
concern over some passages in the report that go
beyond existing provisions of the Security Council's
resolutions concerning children and armed conflict.
This applies particularly to references to Colombia
included in paragraph 147 and in the listing on page 38
of the report. The mechanism in Colombia is about to
be implemented. It is therefore inappropriate to
evaluate it in advance, even more so when this goes
beyond the framework established by the Council's
resolutions.

Allow me to make some observations on the
recommendations of the Secretary-General in his
report.

The Security Council resolutions on children and
armed conflict have established a clear distinction
between situations that are on the agenda of the
Council and those that are not. The existence of
annexI and annex II in the report of the Secretary-
General is sufficient embodiment of this distinction,
which should therefore be maintained.

Likewise, the Council should continue to attach
greater weight and priority to the fundamental issue
that led to the creation of the mechanism - the
recruitment and exploitation of children. Also, any
implementation of targeted measures must be in
accordance with Chapter VII of the United Nations
Charter.

Colombia, for its part, rejects every form of
sexual violence, including rape and other
manifestations of sexual abuse. They are even more
reprehensible when they prey on children. My
delegation considers that Security Council resolutions
1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008) constitute the guiding
compass on this matter.

Allow me to conclude with an unequivocal
reiteration of the commitment of the Government of
Colombia to the protection and promotion of children's
rights. The reference point of that commitment is the
framework established by the Security Council, as well
as the existing mechanisms and procedures. In that
spirit, we will maintain a continued dialogue to
advance towards the goals identified.

