Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): First, a quick
personal note of thanks to you, Mr. President. I have
just received the revised programme for the month, and
I am glad that you have agreed to our suggestion to
move the wrap-up session from 27 to 21 December. As
we said, that is an important occasion for the members
who are leaving the Council to give us their reflections
before they leave, and I think 21 December will be the
best date to listen to them. I thank you for that,
Mr. President.

Turning to the debate we are having today, this is
clearly a very important and timely debate. Many
significant developments have taken place in West
Africa, especially since the last open debate we held on
the subject, on Monday, 14 May 2001, which I think
was presided over by Ambassador Jim Cunningham. It
is good to get an update on what is happening. I must
say that the comprehensive briefing by Mr. Fall was
more eloquent testimony than anything we can say on
the significant number of developments we have to
digest.

Before turning to the substantive points that were
raised this morning, I just want to raise a couple of
procedural points that I hope are not minor. The first,
of course, is that since May we have made progress in
some areas, and in some areas we have not. In fact, ifI
heard Ambassador Valdivieso correctly, he began his
opening remarks by saying that his delegation felt that
not enough consideration had been given to Mr. Fall's
report. In that regard, it is sometimes useful, when we
have such a debate, to actually get some kind of a piece
of paper that tries to assess whether or not we have
made substantive progress on the subject we have
discussed.

By the way, I said exactly the same thing in May
this year:

"Perhaps, to add value each time we discuss West
Africa, we should begin by asking ourselves:
What have we done in the past? What decisions
have we made? Which have been implemented
and which not? And in the case of those that have
not been implemented, why not?" (S/PV4319, 
p. 27)

The problem we have sometimes is that, when one
makes specific recommendations like this, they seem to
fall into a deep hole, without any action being taken. I
hope that the next time we discuss West Africa we will
get some kind of progress report before we meet.

The second point I would like to make - and,
frankly, I think that we, in today's meeting, may not be
able to do full justice to the very comprehensive
briefing given to us by Mr. Fall, as it touched on many
key points - is that another procedural suggestion
could be for the gist or a summary of the key points to
be given to us in advance - for example, the
challenges spoken about by Mr. Fall. If those could be
given to us in advance, we could weave them into our
statements when we speak.

On a final procedural point, like Ambassador
Jerandi of Tunisia, of course we support the suggestion
of having a presidential statement issued quickly. We
agree with you that it should be issued before the
ECOWAS summit, and we are confident that all the
views expressed here will be taken on board, including
those that will be put forward by colleagues from the
region who will be speaking after us.

Let me now turn to the substantive issues at hand.
I would say that the most significant element we have
in today's debate is that there has clearly been a change
of mindset in the approach to West Africa. This is the
one area where I think we are beginning to
acknowledge that we have to work with the region as a
whole.

This change of mindset did not come easily, of
course. It began with the Security Council mission that
went to the region in October 2000. In paragraph 54 (d)
of the report (S/2000/992), it was noted,

"No lasting progress can be made in Sierra Leone
without comprehensive action to tackle the
current instability in the West African region, in
particular in the Mano River Union member
countries."

This was followed up by the Secretary-General in a
message (SG/SM/7665) addressed to the ECOWAS
summit meeting on 15 December 2000, in which he
said,

"The United Nations is determined to help West
Africa solve its problems. Together, we can make
sure that the region returns to the path of peace
and development to which all people aspire."

This was followed up, as we know, by the May
meeting. At that meeting, all those who spoke -
including Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, Ms. Carolyn
McAskie and Mr. Fall - also emphasized the need for
an integrated approach. In fact, Mr. Fall told us even
then,

"In that regard, during our Mission we took note
of concerns expressed by ECOWAS heads of
State facing the need to envisage, in the overall
context of an integrated approach, the
peacekeeping and security operations in
particular in the region of the Mano River Union,
in a way that takes the interrelationships into
account." (S/PV4319, p. 11)

Fortunately, this was followed up by the very
constructive meeting organized by the Permanent
Mission of Colombia during its presidency, and I am
glad that Ambassador Valdivieso referred to the
International Peace Academy paper of August 31,
2001, because I was going to quote exactly the same
sentence that he mentioned: "West Africa is ripe for a
regional approach to conflict management." A change
in the mindset has clearly taken place.

Our challenge today is to convert these words
into deeds and to ensure that when we speak about an
integrated approach, we do so not just in our words but
in deeds. We see some challenges here. First, if you
take an integrated approach, it means that if you have
good news in one area and bad news in other parts of
the subregion, which is what we seem to have in West
Africa, then you have to show that you have taken note
of this change by being able to transfer the resources to
the different parts. Here, to use a medical analogy,
treating West Africa as one body, if you have a left arm
that is bleeding and a right arm that is fine, then it
makes sense to use all your resources and bandage your
left arm. But if a year later, your left arm is well and
your right arm is bleeding, then you show the
integrated approach by being able to move your
resources from one arm to the other. This is where,
frankly, our challenge lies. Within the West Africa
region, we must be able to show that in our deeds, we
respond to where the problems lie. I believe that
Ambassador Durrant also referred to this need to be
flexible.

One concrete area where we can apply this is in
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR).
Again, everyone that has made a statement today so far
has referred to the need to implement DDR after the
peace agreements, and everyone agrees that the key is
resources. I am glad that when Ambassador Durrant
spoke earlier, she mentioned that we should perhaps
look to the regular peacekeeping budgets to find DDR
programmes. But I note that our colleague from
Norway, Ambassador Kolby, had an innovative
suggestion when he said that we should look for
income-generating programmes to be put in the DDR
programmes.

As we talk of resources, it is clear that the region
as a whole does not seem to lack the ability to generate
resources. If one looks at the total amount of money
that the United Nations has committed to West Africa,
it is actually quite massive. I have just read, for
example, from the report of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, which
came out a month ago, on 14 November 2001, which
says in paragraph 5:

"The Advisory Committee was informed that
amounts totalling $1,040.2 million have been
assessed on Member States in respect of the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL) from its inception to 31 December
2001".

The United Nations as a whole has raised $1
billion to spend on UNAMSIL, and that is a very
significant amount of money, if compared, for example,
with the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) core funding for West Africa, which is only
$70 million. It is clear that we are able to raise money
if we have to. While we are able to raise money for
peacekeeping budgets, we are not able to raise money
for the elements of any programmes that come before
or after peacekeeping.

At some point, somebody is going to ask the
question, why is this so? Why are we able to raise $1
billion, which is not an insignificant sum - it is as
large as the regular budget of the United Nations? For
one dimension of what is happening in West Africa,
why can we not apply some of it to other areas which
are equally important in the region?

This applies, frankly, to the key, concrete
recommendations that will come out of today's
meeting. This is the establishment of the Office for
West Africa. We have all seen the letter contained in
document S/2001/1128 that was sent to us by the
Secretary-General on 29 November, three weeks ago,
where he says,

"I have the honour to refer to my letter of
25 June 2001 to the President of the Security
Council concerning my intention to establish a
United Nations Office for West Africa."

That Office is scheduled to start work from
January 2002 - in 13 days or so. As of now, we have
no indication whether the resources will come in time
for such an Office to be set up. I hope that when Mr.
Fall responds to the comments made he will perhaps
give us a bit more information on how the financing
will come. My understanding is that it is supposed to
come from the regular budget. The regular budget,
however, is a tight and closed circle. There is no room
for expansion in the regular budget. If you create a new
programme, you have to delete a programme
elsewhere. That is how the budget is maintained at its
present level. So if we are to create a new office in
West Africa, where will the money come from?

I know there is sometimes some discomfort in
discussing issues of money in a place like, but the best
way of demonstrating our commitment to some of
these things is by deploying resources. If we issue the
words and say we are prepared to set up an office, but
do not deliver the funding for it, then, frankly, how can
people listen to us? Will they listen to our words or
look to see what deeds we carry out? This is where I
hope that the next time around - and I know that there
will be another debate on West Africa in a few
months- we will have before us a set of concrete
indicators we can refer to which show how much
progress we make each time we discuss West Africa so
that we do not end up saying the same things that we
have said the last time. We can actually demonstrate
that with each passing debate we have actually taken a
few steps forward.

