Mr. Briz Gutierrez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome the initiative taken by your
delegation, Mr. President, in convening today's open
debate. My delegation welcomes the concept paper that
has been drawn up and the statements by the
representatives of the Secretariat this morning. We are
sure this will all contribute to achieving the necessary
strengthening of our collective capacity within the
United Nations for conflict prevention and resolution.

Guatemala's own experience has taught us
lessons that place us in a privileged position to
comment on a number of the concerns appearing in the
discussion document circulated by the presidency.
Something we have learned through our discussions
and exchange of lessons learned is that reducing risk
and taking preventive action to avoid threats to peace
are the best ways of attenuating irreparable and
irreversible harm.

Prevention is a shared responsibility embodied in
the principles of the United Nations Charter, Article 1
of which calls for effective collective measures to
07-4920]
prevent and eliminate threats to peace. Likewise,
conflict prevention is best reflected in Chapter VI,
particularly through the peaceful means contained in
Article 33.

Prevention is a fundamental responsibility of
States. The United Nations and the international
community play a subsidiary support role to national
endeavours. In that sense, we draw attention to the
importance in any prevention endeavour of building
national capacity in those areas, and the need to
promote dialogue with all actors and to include the
valuable contribution of civil society.

In terms of preventive measures, we are of the
view that conflict prevention should be dealt with from
the perspective of the fullest protection of the rule of
law - the essential concept for the stability of any
democratic State guaranteeing human rights and
fundamental freedoms. Moreover, the measures should
focus primarily on countering the underlying root
causes of conflict, including socio-economic, cultural
and religious causes, the management of natural
resources and sustainable development considerations.

Attention should also be given to the fact that
preventive action calls for attention to gender equality
and the situation of children, among others. For that
reason, my delegation considers it particularly useful
that the most recent report of the Secretary-General on
the causes of conflict and the promotion of durable
peace and sustainable development in Africa is to be
welcomed. It is encouraging to note the progress that
has been made over the last year on the African
continent as a whole, although much remains to be
done. Further activity should be undertaken in order to
avoid a recurrence of crises and to ensure the peace
that has been won with such difficulty in countries
emerging from conflict.

The Peacebuilding Commission should also work
hand in hand with the Security Council, in particular in
assessing the progress that has been made and in
evaluating the numerous factors that may determine its
course. Among other issues we might mention the
nature of the underlying conflict, the identification of
vulnerable groups such as indigenous peoples,
children, the situation and the role of women, the
consequences of peace agreements for the rule of law,
together with the different traditions that may coexist
in a given country and which have an impact on the
3
development of the system of justice and on the
adaptation of legal rules in the country.

Guatemala has always supported the importance
of a firm and determined approach to endeavours to
build prevention capacity within the Organization in
keeping with the principles and objectives of the
United Nations Charter and international law.

Allow us to take this opportunity to congratulate
the new Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on
Africa. We trust that the Office will carry out its work
within the mandate established by the General
Assembly as it has to date.

I wish to briefly touch on some of the
recommendations highlighted in the concept paper.
With regard to the recommendation of the Secretary-
General that the Group of Friends for the prevention of
conflict be institutionalized and made into a formal
forum, Guatemala is of the view that there are already
enough formal forums addressing the matter and that
what is needed is to close the unacceptable divide
between discourse and reality.

We have analysed the report of the Secretary-
General on the prevention of armed conflict and are of
the view that there is a lot of redundancy. For that
reason, we feel that instead of establishing a new
forum, it would be important to strengthen
coordination and coherence within the system.

My delegation believes it is premature to discuss
the possible role of the Mediation Support Unit
adopted within the Department for Political Affairs
(DPA), since the unit has not yet been set up. It is
difficult to see, as yet, how the unit will deal with
conflict prevention matters when, as we understand it,
the Secretariat has not yet filled all of the vacant posts
approved by the General Assembly. We understand that
the DPA will be very soon submitting to the General
Assembly a report on the restructuring of that
Department. We hope that in the report the Secretary-
General will explain in detail to the General Assembly
his ideas on the role that may be played by the unit in
conflict prevention.

Guatemala wishes to take this opportunity to
welcome the appointment of Mr. Ian Egeland as
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General. It is certain
that his experience and training will ensure that he can
make considerable progress in conflict mediation. We
hope to see the outcome of his work in synergy with
the Mediation Unit.

Guatemala wishes to congratulate Liberia for the
progress made in that country and the positive steps
that have been taken. That is a real example of stability
and strengthening in the region and an example that
makes us feel optimistic regarding the future progress
of our brothers in the region. We also congratulate the
Government of Sierra Leone for the peaceful
environment in which the recent presidential and
parliamentary elections were held, since the
withdrawal of the United Nations mission in December
2005.

Guatemala welcomes the memorandum of
understanding signed in Addis Ababa on 16 November
2006 between the United Nations and the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission, with the acceptance
of the Government of the Sudan, regarding a hybrid
operation in Darfur and consequently the adoption by
the Security Council of resolution 1769 (2007).
However, we believe that it is necessary for the
Security Council, when focusing on Darfur, not to put
aside the situation between the north and south of the
country. While a ceasefire has progressed successfully,
it is necessary to tackle the causes of the conflict.
Otherwise, there is a danger that hostilities may
resume, not only between the north and south but also
throughout the country.

Lastly, I wish to reiterate my country's
commitment to the peacekeeping operations of the
United Nations in Africa. Guatemala is proud to be
taking an increasingly active part in all peacekeeping
operations in the region, since we are certain those
operations will benefit the Organization in fulfilling
the objectives and principles of the Charter.

