Mr. McKell (United Kingdom): At the outset, I
would like to thank President Meron, President J oensen,
Prosecutor Brammertz and Prosecutor Jallow for the
reports that they have presented to the Council today.
I would also like to reiterate the United Kingdom's
continued support for the very important work being
carried out by both Tribunals as indpendent judicial
bodies.

With regard to the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), we note that Serbia,
Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina continue to cooperate
with the Tribunal. Regional cooperation remains
essential if the ICTY is to be able to complete its
mandate and deliver justice for the many Victims of
the conflicts in the former Yugoslavia. We welcome
the news that the judgements in the trials of Karadzic',
Mladic' and Hadzie are all expected to be handed down
on the anticipated dates. We commend the Tribunal for
its work to minimize delays.

We note that the Prosecutor's main concern
is, once again, the slow progress of war crimes
prosecutions by national institutions within the former
Yugoslavia, particularly in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The Prosecutor's assessment that that poses a risk to
the deadline specified by the Bosnia and Herzegovina
National War Crimes Strategy is very valid. The timely
completion of such cases should remain a top priority.
The offices of the Bosnia and Herzegovina State, entity
and cantonal prosecutors have received additional staff
to help expedite those proceedings. The Prosecutor's
Office is supported by the European Union, which is
contributing €15.5 million through the Instrument
for Pre-Accession Assistance to build capacity and to
help reduce the processing backlog. It is hoped that the
backlog will be reduced by 50 per cent over the course
of five years.
Moving on to the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR), 2014 marks the twentieth
anniversary of the Rwandan genocide, which was a
tragedy of global significance that has influenced the
international community's approach to peacekeeping,
mass atrocity prevention and international justice.
Between April 1994 and July 1994, in 100 short days,
approximately 1 million people were killed in the most
horrific manner. Rwanda's transformation since those
dark days has been truly astonishing.

We would like to take this opportunity to
congratulate the ICTR ahead of its upcoming twentieth
anniversary in November and to thank everyone
invloved in the Tribunal for their work to ensure that
those most responsibile for the Rwandan genocide
be held accountable. The work of the ICTR has been
fundamental in helping to deliver justice.

The apprehension of the nine fugitives remains a
cause for serious concern. The ICTR's work cannot be
completed until those individuals have been brought to
justice. We continue to encourage all States to provide
the ICTR with their full cooperation in order to ensure
that all those fugitives are apprehended and face justice.

The problem of relocating the acquitted indiviuals
from Arusha also remains unresolved. We thank and
commend the ICTR for its continued efforts to try and
resolve that issue. Once again, we encourage all parties
to work together to try and find an acceptable solution
as quickly as possible.

The United Kingdom greatly appreciates and
supports the work of the ICTY and the ICTR on
tackling crimes of sexual and gender-based violence.
The Foreign Secretary of the United Kingdom has
made ending sexual violence in conflict a priority and
will host the Global Summit to End Sexual Violence
in London from 10 to 13 June. It will be the largest
summit ever held on the issue and will seek agreement
by States to practical steps to shatter the cultural
impunity surrounding crimes of sexual violence once
and for all.

