Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): Let me first of all
congratulate you, Madam President, and the United
States on assuming the presidency of the Council for
the month of December. I would also like to thank the
United Kingdom for the leadership that it showed in
the month of November.

At the outset, I would like to thank the Presidents
and Prosecutors of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for their
briefings. In my statement today, I will first give an
update on the activities of the Security Council
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals,
which Austria has the honour to chair. Subsequently, I
would like to make some very brief remarks in my
national capacity.

Since the last briefing on 18 June 2010 (see S/PV.6342), the Working Group has continued to meet
on a regular basis, and it has held 14 meetings. The

latest meeting with the Presidents, Prosecutors and
Registrars of both Tribunals took place on 1 December.
The members of the Group have also continued the
informal dialogue with affected countries of the
Tribunals. In particular, they had several meetings with
representatives of Rwanda regarding a proposal to
invite international judges to sit in Rwandan courts to
hear cases transferred by the ICTR.

During the past six months, the Working Group
has made important progress and is now close to
finishing its discussions on a draft resolution on the
establishment of an international residual mechanism
for the criminal tribunals. The Group completed its
third and fourth readings of the draft texts in mid-July
and early November, respectively. On 24 November,
the Chair presented a package consisting of the
following elements: first, a resolution to be adopted
under Chapter VII, in which the Security Council
would decide to establish a residual mechanism with
two branches - one for the ICTR and one for the
ICTY - to continue certain essential functions of the
Tribunals; secondly, annex l of the resolution,
containing the statute for the residual mechanism; and,
thirdly, annex 2 of the resolution, containing
transitional arrangements for determining the transfer
of functions and competences from the Tribunals to the
mechanism.

In his recent report to the General Assembly on
8 October (A/65/188), President Byron made a strong
call for an early adoption of the draft resolution on the
residual mechanism so as to help the ICTR to prepare
for a timely and smooth transition to the mechanism;
and today, he made that point again. Under the current
trial schedule, the ICTR expects to complete all
pending first instance trials in Arusha by 31 December
2011. If the ICTR branch of the mechanism is not
established in time, the ICTR will need not only to
complete all pending appeals but also maintain a full,
although potentially inactive, trial capacity to deal with
the eventual arrests of fugitives and related functions,
as President Byron explained today.

An analysis shows that that will entail significant
costs for the ICTR, which would be considerably
higher than the costs envisaged if the mechanism took
over the trial function of the ICTR at an early date.
Under any scenario, an overlap of the existence of the
Tribunals with the mechanism for some time is
inevitable. There is a sense of urgency for the Council
to reach an agreement now, so as to allow for sufficient
time to make the necessary arrangements for a smooth
transition to the mechanism, while avoiding any
increase in costs.

After two years of negotiations, a final agreement
on the establishment of the residual mechanism is
within reach. Last Friday, the Working Group
conducted a final reading of all draft texts. There are
some questions still under discussion, all of which can
be resolved with the necessary flexibility and political
will. I am therefore optimistic that we can reach an
agreement before the end of this year.

In addition to the discussions on the residual
mechanism in May and June of this year, the Working
Group also considered various requests by the
Presidents of the Tribunals for extensions of judges'
mandates. On 29 June, the Council adopted resolutions
1931 (2010) and 1932 (2010), in which it extended the
terms of office of the trial judges until 31 December
2011, and the terms of office of the appeals judges
until 31 December 2012. In resolution 1931 (2010), the
Council further underlined its intention to extend, by
30 June 2011, the terms of office of the ICTY trial
judges based on the Tribunal's projected trial schedule,
and requested the President of the ICTY to submit to
the Council an updated trial and appeals schedule no
later than 15 May 2011. Both resolutions also called on
States to intensify cooperation with the Tribunals and
noted the importance of retaining experienced staff.

By letters of September and November, the
Presidents of the ICTY and ICTR submitted new
requests to allow some judges to complete their cases
notwithstanding the expiry of their mandates by the
end of 2010. The Working Group is currently preparing
two draft resolutions, which are scheduled for adoption
on 14 December.

Before concluding with this part of my statement,
I would like to express my personal gratitude to
Minister Konrad Biihler, the legal counsel of the
Mission, who has effectively chaired the major part of
the meetings of the Working Group. It is therefore to
him and his instrumental efforts that the results
achieved so far - and, it is hoped, will continue to be
achieved to the end of this year - are due.

Turning now to the statement that I wish to make
in my national capacity, I would like to reiterate
Austria's strong support for the work of the ICTY and
the ICTR, which carry out the crucial task of bringing
to justice those responsible for the most serious crimes.

Austria fully supports the efforts of the Tribunals to
complete their work at the earliest possible date.
However, we note with concern that the most recent
reports reflect yet further slippage in the trial and
appeals schedules, suggesting that the Tribunals' work
is not likely to be finished before 2014, or in one case
even 2015.

We urge the Tribunals to take all possible
measures to complete their work expeditiously. My
delegation is prepared to work constructively to assist
them in achieving this goal. In this context, we
acknowledge the importance of staff retention to
preventing further delays and stand ready to help
develop adequate strategies. I also want to recall
resolutions 1931 (2010) and 1932 (2010), which call
upon the Secretariat and other relevant United Nations
bodies to continue to work with the Registrar of the
Tribunals in order to find practicable solutions to
address this issue.

The arrest of the remaining 12 fugitives,
including Ratko Mladic, Goran Hadzie and Felicien
Kabuga, remains a top priority for the completion of
the Tribunals' work. We call on all States concerned to
fully cooperate with the Tribunals.

With regard to the ICTY, the outstanding issue of
fugitive arrests is specifically mentioned in the
Prosecutor's report regarding the cooperation of
Serbian authorities. Nonetheless - and I wish to
underline this - the report stipulates that Serbia
reported both in a timely manner and adequately in
connection with all other requests made by the Office
of the Prosecutor.

As to the cooperation of Croatia, the decision of
the Trial Chamber of 26 July constitutes an important
new development. Austria welcomes the continued
commitment of the Croatian Government under Prime
Minister Kosor to support the work of the inter-agency
task force established in October 2009. In particular,
we welcome the fact that the task force has begun to
explore important new avenues suggested by the
Prosecutor. We appreciate the regular dialogue and
communication between Croatian authorities and the
Prosecutor and remain confident that the work of the
task force will help to resolve the outstanding issues.

With regard to the ICTR, we appreciate the
Prosecutor's filing of three new applications for the
referral of cases to Rwanda, as this might contribute to
the completion of the Tribunal's work. We further
welcome the Prosecutor's report about his recent
contacts with Kenyan authorities on the question of
locating and arresting Felicien Kabuga. We reiterate
the call on Kenya to render all the necessary assistance
to the ICTR.

In conclusion, as this will be my last briefing in
my capacity as Chairman of the Working Group, I
would like to take this opportunity to thank the
Presidents, Prosecutors and Registrars and all of the
staff of the Tribunals for their important work for the
cause of justice. I would also like to express our
gratitude to all members of the Working Group for
their active and constructive engagement, as well as to
the Office of Legal Affairs and the Secretariat for their
invaluable support.
