Mr. El Othmani (Morocco) (Spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, let me thank the Australian delegation for
taking the initiative to convene this meeting on the
situation in Yemen. Our hope is that it will serve as an
additional measure by the Council to support Yemen
and the international and regional efforts to manage
and overcome this sensitive and decisive period in the
history of that brotherly country.

We would also like to thank Mr. Jamal Benomar,
Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Yemen,
for his comprehensive briefing on the latest results and
developments, particularly those related to issues linked
to the National Dialogue in Yemen. We welcome Mr. Al
Zayani, Secretary General of the Gulf Cooperation
Council (GCC), and thank him for his briefing on
the ongoing implementation of the initiative signed
on 3 April 2011. We would also like to welcome the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Yemen, Mr. Al-Qirbi.

In January 2011, Yemen entered a new phase, with
the fear of a civil war and an uncertain future. That
fear gave way to optimistic hopes, although within a
setting of division, a difficult humanitarian situation
and a regional climate that had seen successive
turmoil. Even so, the people of Yemen demonstrated
self-confidence. Despite all the challenges, the Gulf
initiative and the National Dialogue have brought about
positive results within the framework of a peaceful
political transition, amid the challenges and obstacles
that arose at various times. We welcomed the initiative
of the Gulf Cooperation Council and the good offices
undertaken by our brothers from the Gulf. King
Abdullah Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud was the pillar of the
transition leading to the framework for addressing the
disputes in Yemen via constructive and frank dialogue.
We welcomed resolutions Council 2014 (2011) and 2051
(2012).
There have been gains; no one can deny that. The
United Nations clearly has played a role. Mr. Benomar,
the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General, has
undertaken efforts to deal with the challenges and
open the door to a solution, one we have reached today,
which is a democratic leadership that has taken clear
decisions. Civil society, particularly women and young
people, are aware of that sensitive phase. The Council
and the international community have supported those
efforts and are determined to deal with those who
would wish to see a complete failure in Yemen.

Measures have been taken, and while remaining
obstacles continue to impede consensus in Yemen
despite the gains, the country is also facing a number
of ongoing challenges, including in terms of security,
proliferation of arms and armed groups, terrorism, acts
of vandalism targeting economic sites, and the survival
of its citizens.

All ofthat has caused considerable damage. Yemen's
economy is in shambles and the number of refugees
and internally displaced persons has increased. The
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees counted 46,000 in the first month of the year.
The United Nations has issued repeated warnings about
the humanitarian situation in Yemen, which is teetering
on the precipice. Only 44 per cent of the pledges of
assistance to meet the basic needs of its citizens has
been honoured. However many donors have met their
pledges, including the Gulf Cooperation Council and its
States members. Once again, we appeal to everyone to
honour their pledges and to provide further assistance.

As Mr. Benomar and Mr. Al Zayani stressed,
Yemen is facing a difficult period and its challenges
must not be underestimated, but my country firmly
believes in the capacities and abilities of its people,
who have left their mark on world history. They have
the ability to meet their historic responsibilities for
protecting Yemen's stability and the interests of its
citizens. We will continue to support Yemen, and all
efforts to ensure its sovereignty, territorial integrity
and the prosperity of its population.

