Mr. Petritsch: I greatly appreciate the support
expressed by the representatives of the Security Council
here today and I consider it to be very important
encouragement for our work in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

There were a number of questions asked and I
should like to undertake to answer them.

There was first a suggestion on the part of the
representative of France with regard to the format of the
reporting to the Security Council. First of all, I need to
say that, of course, the report has been complemented by
my presentation today. Secondly, I consider this a very
pertinent and important suggestion which we will look
into, since, as I expressed in my presentation, we are now
engaged in an effort to streamline the agenda by having
adopted three priority areas. We might as well follow this
streamlining in our reporting technique.

In regard to the questions asked by the French
representative, I should like to answer as follows. When
we talk about drawing distinctions, I believe it is
important to point out that what we are trying to achieve
in the field of economic reform is pertinent to this. This
is a separation of the economy from political influence.
This is the development of an attractive business climate.
Of course, the privatization process must be conducted in
a transparent manner and the creation of an institutional
framework is necessary for a modern market economy, as
is a judiciary framework, which we need to pay attention
to. In short, what we are looking for is a system wherein
the economic regulation, the regulatory system, is in place
in regard to bank supervision, tax reform and
enforcement, to give just a few examples.

Regarding the prospects for the fall elections, I
should just like to say that I am expecting further
progress in terms of people realizing how important the
bread-and-butter issues of their daily life are, as opposed
to the ethnic agenda that was put forward far too many
times in the past. I also expect from the election that a
new generation of politicians is going to enter politics in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. There is concrete hope for a
generational change, for an infusion of fresh blood into
Bosnian politics.

Now, when it comes to reinforcing cohesion in
politics in the system of Bosnia and Herzegovina, I
believe that we need also to look at some of the issues of

 

reconciliation. I believe that this will add to the
cohesiveness of society. The arrest of war criminals and
education reform need to be pushed much harder than they
have been so far. This is, of course, a long-term project, but
it is a necessary one. We have started to develop core
curriculums to see to it that the nature of multi-ethnicity is
represented in the schools, the school books and so on.

The return of refugees and displaced persons is also,
of course, adding to the cohesiveness of society. Above all,
there is, again, economic growth, which will contribute to
a making a more prosperous country, to the fact that the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina will realize that they
have a stake in this process: economic and social
prosperity. Then, too, there is tolerance - coexistence as
a first and realistic step towards a better future there.
By this, I do hope that I have also answered the
question posed by the representative of Canada as well as
one that was asked by the representative of the United
Kingdom.

Now, in regard to the question on the election law
posed by the representative of the United Kingdom, the
status of the discussions on the election law is such that we
will, immediately after the Peace Implementation Council
at the end of this month, revisit the issue and see to it that
the State Parliament of Bosnia and Herzegovina takes on
this issue. The next elections this fall will, however -
according to this new election law, which, as we know, has
not been adopted by the State Parliament - be conducted
according to the provisional rules and regulations of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), which, most likely, pending the decision of the
Permanent Council this coming 11 May, will be conducted,
organized, supervised and financed by the OSCE. Again, I
have to underline that this is a decision still ahead of us in
the Permanent Council.

Turning to other questions posed by Canada in regard
to the support for voters to move away from nationalism,
I think that three points have to be made in this context.

First, elections are important. We need to exploit the
election opportunities. We need to point out to the people
time and again that change is possible and that democratic
change is being brought about by elections.

Secondly, we need to emphasize economic reform.
This is what I would call economic empowerment. People
want jobs and opportunities for themselves and for their
children, and we at the Office of the High Representative,
we the international community, need to ally with the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina in insisting that the
leaders take responsibility for economic reform. It is
important for the international community, with regard to
economic reform, to maintain conditionality.

Thirdly and lastly, I believe that public diplomacy
could be very supportive. We have initiated some
programmes to support and encourage domestic
journalism to be more forthcoming when it comes to
getting and telling the story as it is. Investigative
journalism is very important in this context. We need to
stress the importance of independent media, particularly
in a country where the media played such a terrible role
in the course of the war.

Let me now turn to the questions posed by the
representative of Ukraine.
First, with respect to military reform, I believe it
important to stress that the perspective of unified armed
forces in Bosnia and Herzegovina is a long-term one. We
need a longer-term perspective. Factually and basically,
the armed forces in Bosnia and Herzegovina still consist
of three groups. We need to consolidate them.

I believe it is also important to stress the aspect of
human security. We need to put this into place. It is, of
course, a gradual process, in which the institution of the
Standing Committee on Military Matters, a common
institution at the State level, is playing a key role.

Finally, we need to reduce military spending. We are
now in the process of a 15 per cent reduction in terms of
units and budget, which will go on through next year as
well. In this context, I should like to point out that the
new Government in Zagreb was extremely helpful in
getting more transparency into external support -
Croatian support - for the military in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. This is a very welcome addition to our
efforts in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Last year, as I have mentioned, I imposed property
laws. This year we are actively pursuing their
implementation, and so far we have seen quite good
progress. But there is still some obstruction, and I am, of
course, prepared to remove officials who obstruct this
process. This is an absolutely necessary precondition in
order to facilitate and improve on our performance in
refugee return.

Some donors, particularly the United States, have
given money in order to strengthen the local capacity to

 

implement the property laws. This is a very welcome
addition to our efforts. I should like to point out that over
the past few months, as a measure, the housing offices in
the communities all have been reinforced by an
international representative. There are more than 150
housing offices throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina. They
are the ones who facilitate property legislation and thus
refugee return. Each has now been beefed up with an
international representative, who is seeing to it that the laws
are being implemented properly.

The next point raised by Ukraine was the prevention
of social and economic discrimination against returnees
with respect to identity cards. We at the Office of the High
Representative are pursuing a policy aimed at ensuring the
full enforcement of laws regardless of the ethnic
background of the persons concerned. We have intervened
to force the issuance of documents when local authorities
refuse to do so. I will give just one example of the way we
are reacting to refusal or non-compliance: just a few
months ago, I removed the Minister of the Interior of
canton 10 in part because of his refusal to apply the law
equally and to protect all the people.

Finally, I should like to add that the Stability Pact
focuses on regional return. We have established a very
close working relationship with the Pact, which is basically
following our practice of refugee return implementation. I
can assure the Council that we have established an excellent
relationship. I am confident that the Stability Pact will add
to our efforts in the region, because refugee return is not a
question that can be resolved within one country only, such
as Bosnia and Herzegovina. We need to keep in mind the
whole region of South-Eastern Europe.

In response to the question posed by Ukraine as to
social and economic rights, let me say that we are working
on this also in terms of accessing pensions and securing
employment. We are also trying to eliminate discrimination
against minorities and returnees when it comes to some of
the utility companies in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Now, finally, let me come to the delegate from
Jamaica. These are of course highly technical issues that
you have raised. I can say that with regard to the laws on
asylum and immigration that were passed last November,
these contribute remarkably and substantially to our overall
efforts to regulate these issues. It might be of interest to
you to note that Bosnia and Herzegovina, which - if I
may say so - is basically a contributor to emigration, has
in the course of the past year taken in refugees from
Kosovo.

Regarding the judicial training, the joint advisory
board that was formed by agreement at the meeting of the
Council of Europe in Strasbourg in February of this year,
as the delegate of Jamaica has pointed out, is a very
important contribution and active support on the part of
the Council of Europe to try to accelerate progress in the
area of social and economic rights in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

I might also note that we are now in the process of
getting Bosnia and Herzegovina closer to accession to the
Council of Europe. I do hope and I am confident that the
three basic conditions that were set two years ago will be
met in the course of the next month by the authorities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. This would basically give the
green light for entry into the Council of Europe - a very
important step towards European integration for Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

I would like to close by again thanking the Security
Council and you, Mr. President, for having been such an
attentive audience here. I would like to thank the Council
also for the support it has expressed. This is what we
need in our work in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

