The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.

It is my genuine pleasure to take stock of the
Council's work this month, during which we have held
the presidency. As Council members have known from
the outset, the December agenda has not only been
busy, but also condensed, due to the periodicity of the
reports due this month, and also because the end of the
year is approaching. We were scheduled to close our
work on 22 December, but constraints and unforessen
circumstances have forced us to delay our closure to
23 December.

During our presidency, we have adopted four
presidential statements and eight resolutions, including
our own. Two public debates were held, on 16 and
19 December. The first, under the presidency of His
Excellency Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and African Integration of the Republic
of Chad, addressed cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations,
with particular stress on the United Nations-
African Union partnership, particularly in the field
of peacekeeping operations. Presidential statement
S/PRST/2014/27 was adopted at that debate. We trust
that the report requested of the Secretary-General on
the question will allow this strategic partnership to
develop further to the benefit of the two organizations.

The participation did not meet our expectations.
However, some 40 delegations attending stressed
the importance and relevance of the theme, and we
commend them for that. We also regret the fact that
after the expiry of the silence procedure, we returned
to the halted negotiations on the presidential statement.
We would like to emphasize that the silence rule was
thus bent, a bad precedent that unfortunately threatens
to set a precedent itself.

The second open debate (see S/PV.7351), also
presided over by His Excellency Mr. Moussa Faki
Mahamat, was devoted to the growing and dangerous
intersection between terrorism and cross-border crime.
The resolution adopted unanimously at this high-
level debate (2195 (2014)) emphasizes strengthening
cooperation between States and United Nations
capacity and coordination in efforts to combat these
two phenomena. In that regard, it is important that
Member States be called on to reinforce the mechanisms
available to fight those scourges, which requires serious
synergy and close cooperation in the actions of all those
involved. The huge participation of Member States in
this debate was a clear demonstration of the subject's
importance and underlined the serious threat posed by
terrorism and transnational criminal networks not just
for Africa but for the whole world.

Beyond these two high-level debates, another on
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(see S/PV.7347) was also presided over by our Minister
for Foreign Affairs in accordance with resolution 2145
(2014), which provides for quarterly reports from
the Secretary-General and a briefing by his Special
Representative in Afghanistan on the situation in the
country. Our Foreign Minister's participation in three
debates has affirmed our firm commitment to the cause
of peace and is an achievement that will go down in the
participation record books, as the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Australia highlighted.

We considered it important to give the Force
Commanders of the United Nations the opportunity
to participate in consultations, including through
video teleconferencing, in order to be able to respond
directly to questions. Similarly, we made an exception
in order to enable the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs to take part in almost all our
consultations, thus giving it the opportunity to ensure
that a closed debate did not mean that humanitarian and
human-rights issues were short-changed.

Besides the two aforementioned major debates,
during our presidency the Security Council examined
other current situations of no less importance. The
first week was devoted to the situation in Syria, more
particularly the implementation of resolution 2118

(2014), focusing on all the equipment and material
linked to chemical weapons, as well as the situations
in Darfur (see S/PV.7326) and Kosovo (see S/PV.7327).
During the second week, we looked at the situation
between the Sudan and South Sudan and held three
briefings on the United Nations Multidimensional
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic,
Yemen, the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa, and the Lord's Resistance Army. We
also adopted a resolution on sanctions relating to
Liberia (2190 (2014) and devoted two meetings to the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2127
(2013) concerning the Central African Republic (see S/PV.7329) and the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2140 (2014), on Yemen (see S/PV.7336).

In the same week we held a debate on the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(see S/PV. 7348), as well as three briefings on the
United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel (see S/PV.7335), the International Criminal Court vis-a-vis
the Sudan and Darfur (see S/PV.7337), and the subsidiary
organs of the Security Council (see S/PV.7331). Two
meetings with countries contributing contingents to
the United Nations missions in Liberia (see S/PV.7330)
and the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
(UNDOF) in the Golan Heights (see S/PV.7333) were
held with the participation of military attaches.

Last week we held three briefings on the Middle
East, including the question of Palestine (see S/PV.7339)
and the humanitarian situation in Syria (see S/PV. 7342), as well as consultations on UNDOF. During
that week, we adopted two resolutions extending
the mandates of the judges and prosecutors of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (2193 (2014) and 2194 (2014), both introduced by Chile, as
well as others renewing the mandates of UNDOF (2192 (2014)) and the United Nations Mission in Liberia (2190
(2014)), with one member abstaining on the first of
these. The Chair ofthe Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006) also gave his quarterly report
on nuclear non-proliferation in Iran (see S/PV.7350).

Regarding sanctions regimes, the Chairs of the
2127 Committee, on the Central African Republic, and
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011) concerning Libya also presented their
committees' reports. The programme of work was
strictly observed and carried out and the meetings were
held on time. We note that at the request of 10 members
of the Council we have added the question of the
situation in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
to the agenda in a meeting scheduled for this afternoon.

During our presidency we concluded the efforts
begun by Australia regarding the issue of the
Peacebuilding Commission. The mandate that began
in 2010 will end on 31 December and had to renewed
with new pilot countries for a case study. To that end,
together with the President of the General Assembly we
signed ajoint letter addressed to the Secretary-General.

Before concluding my remarks, I should express my
heartfelt thanks for members' valuable contributions to
all the debates. My thanks also go to the Secretariat
of the Council and the entire staff, without forgetting
the interpreters and the security officers who have
supported us throughout our presidency. I would also
like to pay warm tribute to our colleagues from the
delegations of Argentina, Australia, Luxembourg, the
Republic of Korea and Rwanda, who are leaving us after
completing their two-year term on the Security Council
with brio. We will console ourselves with the arrival
of five new members, who are Angola, Malaysia, New
Zealand, Spain and Venezuela. They can count on our
full support.

In conclusion, I wish every success to the delegation
of Chile, which will preside over the work of the Council
in January, and assure them of our unreserved support.
And I wish everyone a great holiday and my very best
for the new year.

There are no more names inscribed on the list.

The meeting rose at 12.20 pm.
