Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): We begin by extending our gratitude to Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock, not only for their updates this morning, but also for their continued commitment to the people of Yemen. The situation in Yemen demands urgent action, and now, more than ever, we must maintain our engagement. While the window of opportunity for peace has not yet closed, it is quickly narrowing. I recall Mr. Lowcock's previous caution to the Security Council in which he stressed that if we do not help now, Yemen may fall into the abyss (see S/PV.8753). We must act expeditiously to save Yemen and its people, who have been affected by years of conflict and now are assailed by the coronavirus disease pandemic, the threat of famine, torrential rains, economic adversity and an underfunded humanitarian response plan. These are the perfect conditions for the realization of Under- Secretary-General Lowcock's grave warning. In this regard, we urge all donors that have pledged funds to make the necessary disbursements as soon as possible. We recognize that humanitarian aid is not a solution, but it is indeed an avenue through which we can provide relief to the people of Yemen until a sustainable solution can be achieved. The security situation remains extremely tense and volatile, and we reiterate the need for an inclusive Yemeni-led and Yemeni-owned political process. This point cannot be overstated. The only solution is a political one, and there will be no durable political solution unless it is inclusive of all people and groups, regardless of gender, ethnicity, religious belief or other demographic variables. Of equal importance to sustainable peace is accountability for all infractions of international law, including human rights abuses. We encourage the international community and all relevant actors to support Yemen's justice system through capacity- building to allow for the effective prosecution of these crimes and to promote justice and reconciliation. We call on all parties to take concrete steps to address the issue of the FSO SAFER oil tanker. To this end, we make a resounding appeal to all parties to prioritize the environment and the people of Yemen and of the wider region. The threat posed by the FSO SAFER oil tanker is avoidable, and inaction on this issue can only be regarded as reckless. It is with a great sense of urgency that we encourage actors with influence to actively engage with the parties to make progress on this issue. We reaffirm our support for Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and his team, as we stand in solidarity with the people of Yemen. Finally, I must add that I am tired of saying the same thing and hearing the same thing over and over and over again in response to the reports of Mr. Griffiths and Mr. Lowcock of the fast-approaching catastrophic point of no return. I am heartbroken and frustrated. Last night on CNN, I was reminded of the horrific inhumanity when I saw the painfully disturbing images of emaciated children - countless children sick and dying of starvation - and of helpless mothers pleading for us to step up our efforts. Yes, where is our compassion? Children are dying. People are suffering. Famine in the twenty-first century is unacceptable and will be an utter disgrace - a stain on the international community. More must be done, and more must be done now. Time is not on our side. I agree with what the Permanent Representative of Indonesia just said: it is time to make better choices.
