Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): Let me join others
in thanking the Secretary-General for his briefing on
his proposals and for his report on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
(S/2008/354). We would also like to welcome
Mr. Boris Tadic', President of the Republic of Serbia,
and Mr. Fatmir Sejdiu and to thank them for their
statements.

We have consistently underlined that the Council
must always inform itself fully and build a common
and shared understanding on how evolving
developments impact the work and policy of the
interim administrator of Kosovo, namely UNMIK. We
are aware that operational adjustments and fine tuning,
in response to developments and changes on the
ground, are inevitable in any United Nations mission,
including in Kosovo. In the case of the latter, these
efforts have to be consistent with the operational
framework established under resolution 1244 (1999).
We appreciate, therefore, the extraordinary and
thought-through efforts of the Secretary-General to
employ his good offices with the parties and key
stakeholders in order to identify a status-neutral
solution which would address the current challenge and
manage the situation effectively on the ground.
Indonesia is mindful of the importance of the package
of ideas communicated by the Secretary-General on
UNMIK's reconfiguration - moving the region in the
direction of peace and security, while ensuring the
legacy and continuous role of the United Nations.
Synergy in the efforts between the United Nations
and the European Union (EU) merits our support. The
European Union's efforts to play a greater operational
role within the status-neutral framework should be
encouraged and supported, as this will provide further
stability to the region. Indeed, such a role puts into
effect the recently and often discussed theme of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations, as envisioned in Chapter VIII of the
Charter. It is our view that regional organizations can
provide meaningful and constructive contributions to
address regional issues. This has been the case in
Africa, the Americas and Asia, and it applies equally to
Europe.

Elsewhere, however, synergy of efforts with the
United Nations is key. For this reason, it is important to
establish a clear organizational linkage between the EU
office, the international civilian operation and the
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General. The Council in this regard needs to stay
abreast of the activities of the EU and the international
civil operation on the ground, as well as the regular
briefings of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the written reports of the
Secretary-General.

Once again, the two entities have to work within
the framework of resolution 1244 (1999). I will share
some final thoughts before I conclude. We wish to
underline the fact that resolution 1244 ( 1999) remains
in force. Dialogue and negotiation remain essential for
the resolution of the question of final status. Indonesia
has and continues to maintain that position. The
Security Council must collectively transmit a clear and
unified message to all the parties to continue to
exercise restraint, and it must exercise its leadership on
the issue. We believe that the Secretary-General should
continue to engage all parties in the region to find a
mutually acceptable solution in line with resolution
1244 (1999).

Finally, I conclude by thanking the Secretary-
General and his team for their relentless efforts, and
the personnel of UNMIK for their continued dedication
and their pursuit of peace and security in line with
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999).

