Mr. Chambas: Let me start by thanking the United
States and Cete d'Ivoire for organizing today's briefing.
lntercommunal violence is a vast theme. I will attempt
to highlight some of the dynamics in West Africa
and the Sahel, as well as relevant responses that have
brought together local, national and regional actors.

As Security Council members are aware, the
region has been shaken by unprecedented violence in
recent months. Last week's horrific attacks against the
lnates military camp in the Niger continue to haunt
the region. The Heads of State of the Group of Five
for the Sahel yesterday reiterated their call for stronger
alliances and support. They also emphasized that the
trio of the Government, the population and the security
and defence forces should not yield. Relentless attacks
on civilian and military targets have shaken public
confidence, while international forces in the region
have also endured significant losses. We must salute
the courage and the unbroken spirit of the defence
and security forces working across West Africa and
the Sahel.

Incidents in the region show how terrorism,
organized crime and intercommunal Violence can
easily intertwine, yet it is essential to avoid confusion
and distinguish among the drivers of the Violence.
Indigenous factors of local conflicts have been
documented, including governance deficits, the poor
management of natural resources, inequalities and
marginalization, corruption and the broader failure of
Governments to deliver their regalian functions, notably
security and justice, especially in peripheral areas.

Concerning violent extremism, the strategy and
objectives of armed groups in the region are in the
public domain. The use of local dynamics to spread
extremism was explicit in AI-Qaida's instructions to its
militants in Timbuktu as early as 2012. Among their
tactics was the leveraging oflocal grievances and of the
domestic movements of persons. State weaknesses have
been thoroughly exploited. Extremists provide safety,
protection, social services and justice in the areas that
they control. According to their perspective, long-
standing grievances serve their purposes.

Conflicts related to transhumance constitute some
of the most violent local conflicts in the region, and
extremist groups have managed to implicate themselves
in in their resolution. An economic and Islamic tribunal
near Gao rules on compensation and sanctions in
such conflicts. Arrangements between herders and
extremists have led to deep societal divides across
the region. Yet we need to avoid generalities. Their
relationship differs greatly from one country or region
to the next. Man-made factors and the prevalence of
weapons combined with a harsh natural environment,
as well as expanding desert areas and climate change,
are significant issues related to transhumance. But let
us bear in mind that close to 70 per cent of people in
West Africa remain dependent on agriculture and the
rearing livestock for their existence. Finding ways
to ensure peaceful coexistence between herders and
farmers is therefore imperative.

Other forms of communal violence are triggered by
the nature of the fight against terrorism itself in many
of the countries of the region. Furthermore, they do not
have the sufficient security forces to provide adequate
geographical coverage. Resorting to sub-contracting
local defence forces or vigilantes is a double-edged
sword. The United Nations Office for West Africa and
the Sahel (UNOWAS) has been advocating for improved
legal frameworks and longer-term approaches with a
number of Governments that are aware of the risks.

With regard to religious violence across the region,
this year has been particularly brutal. Burkina Faso
especially has seen unprecedented anti-Christian
attacks. The perpetrators, together with other violent
extremists, and through the use of internal communal
violence have driven hundreds of thousands of
people away from their homes in the northern and
central-north regions. That exodus has caused the
flow of internally displaced persons to reach 500,000
people, as compared to about 50,000 during the same
period last year. This year we have observed similar
patterns of targeted religious violence around Tillberi
and Diffa. Ideologically motivated violence can feed on
conflicts, tearing apart communities over land or water
disputes. That violence, however, has its own causes
and rationale, and therefore needs to be addressed
differently. Governments, local actors, regional
organizations and the international community have
mobilized to address that multidimensional violence.
I would like to summarize some of the concerted
responses and the existing strategic framework.

The United Nations response in the Sahel has,
under the Secretary-General, increased its cross-pillar
focus. Across West Africa and the Sahel, multi-agency
initiatives bring together security, development, rule
of law and human rights interventions. Our approach
is anchored on supporting national Governments in
their implementation of the Sustainable Development
Goals and on building partnerships towards greater
synergies. We now have useful instruments in place,
including the compliance framework for the Group of
Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) Joint Force and a renewed
focus by United Nations country teams on governance
issues. Weak justice systems remain some of the
critical deficiencies with regard to national responses.
National Governments fully welcome the efforts to
strengthen justice and police institutions under the
various initiatives by the Group of Seven and the Sahel
Alliance. The United Nations system should also be
mobilized in that regard.

Regional organizations remain our first
counterparts for conflict resolution in the region. The
recent African Union conference on access to natural
resources and conflict between communities held with
the assistance of United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Bamako in
November provided a framework for the prevention and
resolution of local conflicts. Ahead of Commissioner
Chergui's recommendations, I would like to call on
the Council to support the implementation of the
Bamako declaration. The Council should also extend
support to local initiatives. We have seen progress in
recent months in curbing violence between herders and
farmers as a result of grass-roots dialogue initiated in
Mali, the Niger and Nigeria. The Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) is also gathering
best practices from the region, drawing on traditional
dispute resolution mechanisms. Remedies to violent
extremism in particular are being put in place in many
West African countries. They consist of common
denominators, political will, courageous local actors
and the involvement of women and young people.

As Security Council resolution 2250 (2015)
emphasizes, youth are at the heart of such responses.
Social and traditional media have a key role to play in
curbing violent ideologies and religious intolerance,
as a means to address hateful narratives. There are
many grass-roots initiatives in that regard, such as the
interfaith coalitions in the Borno, Adamawa and Yobe
states in Nigeria that actively work to curtail Boko
Haram from recruiting members. Local peacemakers
also benefit from the support of the Finland-based
Network for Religious and Traditional Peacemakers,
launched in 2013. Bilateral assistance at the country
level throughout the region is also increasingly looking
into grass-roots reconciliation initiatives.

The Council can play a decisive role in supporting all
those efforts. In addition to donor and technical support,
assistance on security-related and law enforcement
matters remains vital. Curbing the financial and
support corridors used by armed groups and their links
with illegal trade requires international cooperation.
Targeted sanctions and other measures recommended
by panels of experts are relevant for leverage in this
case. Illegal trafficking in gold in particular has been
increasingly documented and exposed. The ECOWAS
summit held in Ouagadougou in September and
yesterday's G-5 Summit in Niamey, as well as the
discussions planned for the ECOWAS summit to held
on 21 December in Abuja, highlight the undeterred
regional solidarity and the commitment to bring this
violence to an end.

The Security Council's support for the region
cannot falter at this juncture. The presentation of
the Secretary-General's report and consultations on
UNOWAS'S mandate in January will provide us with
more opportunities to review the complexity of the
security dynamics in the region and pathways to peace
and security.

