Let me start by expressing our thanks to Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for his briefing. We also thank Ms. Amany Qaddour for her insightful remarks on the bleak reality on the ground. What we have been witnessing in Syria since 2011 is nothing less than an all- out war by the regime against its own people. The deliberate targeting of medical facilities, doctors, schools and children, the use of chemical weapons and the bombing of humanitarian aid convoys killed hundreds of thousands of Syrians and displaced millions. Critical infrastructure has been destroyed, resulting in the lack of shelter, in addition to broken health and education systems. Today, the humanitarian situation remains as dire as ever. The situation in the north-west remains one of the most acute and severe humanitarian crises in the world. Due to regime's military campaign, Idlib's entire population is squeezed into a small area along our borders, in makeshift tents. We have repeated on many occasions before the Security Council that a potential outbreak of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) would gravely affect the already dire humanitarian situation in the north-west. We have also drawn attention to the severely weakened health system and the imperative to renew the cross-border humanitarian mechanism. Since the first COVID-19 case was recorded on 9 July, 23 people have tested positive in the region - and this is while testing capacity remains very low. In scaling up the volume of the cross-border operations over the recent months, with the facilitation of Turkey, the United Nations and its partners took precautions against the potential spread of the virus. Yet, the situation remains precarious. Millions of people living in the region rely entirely on the humanitarian assistance channelled through cross-border operations from Turkey. It is regrettable that, at this critical time when more humanitarian access is needed, lifeline cross- border operations have been reduced, leaving vulnerable people on the line amid r ' the regime's aggression and the ongoing global pandemic.ist'We take note of the extension of the cross-border mechanism by the Council with only Bab Al-Hawa crossing for a period of 12 months and regret that Bab Al-Salam crossing was excluded from its scope. The exclusion of that crossing point will make humanitarian access to 1.3 million Syrians in northern Aleppo, who continue to depend on United Nations assistance for their survival, extremely difficult. In June, 25 per cent of all United Nations cross-border aid into the north-west came through Bab Al-Salam. The remaining Bab Al-Hawa crossing will not be a feasible alternative to reach those people in need due to insecurity, distance and related costs and access constraints. In any case, cross-line access will not be a viable option. The United Nations has reported on several occasions that cross-line is not functional in the north-west. In the absence of an alternative, the exclusion of Bab Al-Salam from the mechanism will have major consequences for the region and increase the humanitarian responsibility that Turkey has been shouldering for more than nine years. The Security Council's failure to renew the mechanism with the inclusion of other available crossings from Turkey, particularly Bab Al-Salam, will only increase the suffering of those in need, in particular, the most vulnerable, such as women and children. There are already widespread shortages of personal protective equipment, ventilators, medicines and oxygen throughout hospitals in the north-west. The ongoing shortage of doctors and other humanitarian workers is also adding to the strain on humanitarian operations. Shutting down the most direct route to food, shelter and medical assistance will not serve the political calculations of those behind it. Turkey will continue to assist United Nations cross-border humanitarian operations at record levels. We will not abandon the Syrian people in northern Aleppo. We will swiftly adapt to the new situation and never turn back on any humanitarian need in the region. In doing so, we will act in coordination and cooperation with all stakeholders, in particular, the United Nations and its agencies, in order to address additional challenges this new situation might create. We are also ready to work with the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and our donor partners to explore new ways to reach these people. It is our joint responsibility to bring the most needed assistance to those in need while the Security Council should urgently consider reauthorizing the use of Bab Al-Salam crossing in light of the increased needs. There can be no sustainable humanitarian solution to the crisis without a political solution based on resolution 2254 (2015). In the absence of any progress on the political track, millions of Syrians continue to be trapped in a vicious cycle of conflict. Turkey has been doing its part on this front as well. The ceasefire in Idlib is holding despite violations by the regime. More than 300,000 displaced Syrians have returned to their homes thanks to relative calm on the ground. Our aim in Idlib is to make the ceasefire sustainable. This is essential for protecting civilians; improving the humanitarian situation on the ground; mitigating risk of refugee flows towards Turkey and beyond; and advancing the political process. This is also of utmost importance for Turkey's national security. In accordance with the Additional Protocol of 5 March, we have so far conducted 22 joint ground patrols with Russia along the M4 highway, and the entire 72-kilometre patrol route was covered in July. On 14 July, during the recent joint patrol mission, a vehicle-borne improvised explosive device attack targeted Turkish and Russian vehicles alike. Turkey remains committed to the full implementation of the Additional Protocol in order to ensure lasting calm in Idlib. On the other hand, we will continue to combat all terrorist groups, including the Kurdish Workers Party/Kurdish People's Protection Units (PKK/YPG), which seeks to undermine the territorial integrity of Syria and represents a direct threat to Turkey's national security. PKK/YPG continues its infiltration attempts and attacks against civilians throughout northern Syria. Most recently, on 26 July, they targeted a marketplace in Ras Al-Ayn with an improvised explosive device attack, which left five innocent civilians dead and 12 wounded. That terrorist organization also burns crop fields, the sole source of livelihood of a large portion of local population in opposition-controlled areas. We continue to respond in self-defence against PKK/YPG attacks. The ongoing atrocities and humanitarian disaster in Syria can be overcome only by addressing the root cause of the problem: the violent oppression of the democratic aspirations of the Syrians. As revealed by several United Nations reports, the acts of the regime and its backers amount to war crimes and crimes against humanity. The erosion of international law and international humanitarian law, and the continuing violations of human rights across Syria are a serious threat to international peace and security. Syrians should not be left alone by the international community. They deserve our collective action. In taking such action, we should also continue to expose and shame those who are on the wrong side of history and humanity. What we heard from the previous speaker was another futile attempt by the regime seeking to divert attention from the enormous destruction and human suffering it has imposed on its own people. We reiterate our strong will to continue supporting the legitimate aspirations of Syrians and assisting them in meeting their humanitarian needs.
