Ms. Grynspan: Let me start by sharing with the
Security Council our pain over the lives lost in the
vicious attack on our compound today in Mogadishu.
We wish to pay our respects to and express our
solidarity with our staff and we offer our condolences
to the families of those we lost.

The United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) welcomes the opportunity today to examine
how effective and transparent management of natural
resources in conflict-affected States can contribute to
international peace and security. Experience suggests
that being a resource-rich country is both an opportunity
and risk. It is risky to be a resource-rich yet socially
poor country but it is not destiny. We know that the
risk is sizeable but not insurmountable. A lot has been
learned about how to manage the risk effectively and
transparently and how to take advantage of the revenue
generated from higher prices and new discoveries of
oil, gas and minerals to jump-start economies, create
stable societies and improve the lives of people.

Good examples from Chile to Botswana tell us that
our hope is well founded, although many resource-rich
countries have disappointing results, growing in fact
more slowly, experiencing fewer human development
gains, including in poverty rates, and greater
inequality, than countries without natural resources.
Since the 19905, the number of oil-producing countries
with ongoing conflicts has increased, while non-oil-
producing countries have become more peaceful. Over
half of all countries with Security Council-mandated
missions are resource-dependent, that is, with oil, gas
or minerals accounting for more than 25 per cent oftotal
exports. That trend leaves little doubt of the importance
of the extractive sector as an international peace and
stability issue that demands a development response at
the national and international levels.

To face the challenges in least developed and
conflict-affected countries, our development work
needs to support them through an integrated approach in
four areas. First, we must get the legal, institutional and
policy frameworks right and build national capacities
and law enforcement mechanisms to implement them
properly. Secondly, we must support action at the
international level, calling on countries which are
home to multinational corporations or hosting stock
markets where international corporations are listed
to legislate transparency provisions in their laws and
regulations and to fight illicit capital flows, bribery
and tax evasion. The more universal these provisions
are the better. Thirdly, the voice and participation
of affected communities, especially women and
indigenous populations, must be boosted. Fourthly,
we must deal prudently with large revenue flows,
enhance transparency and public information and
invest in sustainable human development to balance
countries' short-term priorities with ensuring long-
term development benefits.

Let me expand. First, we need robust legal and
policy frameworks that enable countries to negotiate
fair contracts and establish clear and transparent rules
of the game to guide both Governments and companies.
Such legal and policy frameworks need also to protect
communities with social and environmental safeguards,
prevent illicit capital flight and tax evasion and build
institutions and governance systems with the capacity
to enforce laws and negotiated agreements. Too often,
good rules go unenforced.

Given the conflicting interests and multifaceted
challenges inherent in the process, UNDP has been
most valuable as an impartial facilitator, working with
the full range of development actors and stakeholders.
We help Governments know what to expect, access
technical support, lessons learned and best practices,
including through South-South and triangular
cooperation, identify capacity gaps, establish concrete
action plans and secure the support they need to narrow
asymmetries.

In Tanzania, Liberia and Sierra Leone, UNDP has
supported Governments in monitoring contracts and
rectifying information and bargaining asymmetries. In
Afghanistan, we supported the Ministry of Mining in
building its national capacities and through it to establish
basic regulations for the sector. In Tanzania, the Sudan
and Zimbabwe, through the Global Environment Fund,
we have introduced cleaner gold mining and extraction
technology as critical environmental safeguards to
protect communities.

The second area demanding more attention is
the involvement and active participation of affected
communities. Countries working with development
partners shouldtake measures to ensure full participation
of communities, especially women, indigenous and
vulnerable groups. We have learned from experience
that the involvement of communities from the start
is critical to preventing misunderstandings, defusing
tensions and preventing conflict.

Through the European Union-United Nations
partnership on natural resources, conflict and
peacebuilding, UNDP works with civil society groups
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda,
Burundi and Uganda to establish conflict resolution
mechanisms that can lessen tensions over land and
revenues. We have also supported the strengthening
of national human rights institutions in the protection
of people's rights and in building the capacities of
communities and civil society so that they can be better
informed as they press for more evidence-based and
thoughtful policies. Those efforts should be expanded
to help companies fulfil their obligations under the
United Nations Guiding Principles on Business and
Human Rights and the United Nations Global Compact.

Thirdly, countries need support in prudently and
transparently managing large revenue inflows and in
investing them well. In that regard, the work of the
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative, Revenue
Watch, Publish What You Pay and the Africa Progress
Panel, whose Chair, former Secretary-General Kofi
Annan, spoke earlier, are critical, and very important
steps forward. The recent Group of Eight meeting
also included an important discussion on transparency
measures. Clear and transparent processes, an
empowered and informed civil society and media can
help ensure remedial action against corrupt practices.
UNDP has a long-standing record in enhancing the
capacity of civil society actors to scrutinize private
and public actions and also to close the gap between
transparency and accountability.

Finally, countries must be supported in their
efforts to effectively invest the revenue generated from
natural resources in sustainable human development
for the long term, especially in health, education and
infrastructure. Benefits must help communities and
allow for the diversification of economies, so resources
do not go only to the big infrastructure projects that end
up concentrating benefits in the same sectors that are
already benefitting from resource inflows.

In Azerbaijan and Mongolia, UNDP supported
efforts to establish insulated investment funds.
Mongolia in particular has established a fiscal stability
fund and a human development fund. In Angola
and Kazakhstan, UNDP has helped to put together
programmes that encourage extractive industries
to break out of their enclaves and work with local
businesses and entrepreneurs to generate needed
skills, provide on-the-job training and involve them in
supply chains. It is important that the extractive sector
generates jobs at an early stage, especially in affected
communities and for ex-combatants and vulnerable
groups. Unfortunately, resource extraction itself creates
few jobs, which is why successful programmes such as
those are so important.

I am confident that conflict-affected countries
can harness the great potential of natural resources
to deliver such results. The world cannot afford not
to deliver the stepped-up support that will require.
Population growth, climate change and scarce natural
resources threaten to conspire to make conflict related
to natural resources a definite threat to global peace
and security in this century. UNDP looks forward to
working with all partners to deliver the development
response it demands.

