Mr. Mangueira (Angola): First, I would like to
congratulate you, Sir, on behalf of my Government and
on my own behalf, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the current
month. I would like also to congratulate the outgoing
President on the able and wise manner in which he
conducted the proceedings of this body during his
mandate.

I also would like to take this opportunity to
express our gratitude for the holding of this open
meeting of the Council on the report of the Panel of
Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of Natural
Resources and Other Forms of Wealth in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and to
acknowledge the presence of the Ministers of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, Uganda
and Burundi.

The report under consideration is a document of
important factual value that describes the various
modalities of the massive pillage and illegal
exploitation of natural resources that is taking place in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and it
particularly focuses on the ramifications and
connections between the funding of such activities and
the persistence of the conflict in that country. We
compliment the group of Experts on their excellent
research.

The circumstances of the presence and the
mandate of Angola and its allies in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo are widely known. The report
actually makes a clear distinction between the role of
the "invited forces" and that of the "invading forces"
when it refers to Angola and Namibia as the two
countries that fund their participation in this conflict
with expenditure money from their ordinary budget and
do not behave in a suspicious way.

In the case of Angola, that distinction shows a
recognition of my Government's policy, which is
based, inter alia, on the principle of the defence of a
country's sovereignty and borders; on respect for the
sovereignty of other States; and on the pursuit of a
policy of good-neighbourliness.

A solution to the Congo issue undoubtedly can be
reached only with the implementation of the Lusaka
accords and their additional protocols, as well as the
implementation of the pertinent resolutions of this
body, which would establish the necessary
prerequisites for a lasting solution to the questions
raised in the report, such as the pillage and illegal
exploitation of natural resources and other riches - a
process in which the international community can play
an important role.

To conclude, it is our understanding that the
recommendations of the Expert Panel are to be the
object of special attention on the part of the Council,
particularly with regard to the adoption of concrete
measures to put an end to the illegal exploitation of
natural resources and to seek compensation and
reparations for damages in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

