Ms. Young (Belize): On behalf of the Government
and the people of Belize, I thank the President and
the members of the Council for continuing to place
importance on the issues of Haiti's stability, progress
and democracy.

Belize acknowledges the Council's unanimous
adoption of resolution 2180 (2014) to extend the
mandate of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH) for one year, albeit with a decision
to reduce the military component by half by July.

Belize also thanks the Secretary-General for his
report of4 March (S/2015/157) on the extended mandate
and expresses thanks for the briefing (see S/PV.7372) on
the Council's 23 to 25 January visiting mission to Haiti,
co-led by Ambassadors Samantha Power and Cristian
Barros Melet. I also thank Special Representative
Ms. Sandra Honore for her briefing today.

The recent Security Council Mission to Haiti
was important to assure the Haitian people and their
Government that the international community is aware
of the difficulties they face and that we support bona
fide efforts to ensure that the Haitian people are able
to benefit from free, fair and inclusive elections.
With the tentative electoral calendar presented by the
provisional Council for three electoral rounds between
August and December 2015, Belize is of the view that
to keep the momentum going, another visiting mission
to Haiti should be arranged by the Security Council, to
take place at least by July of this year.

Belize recognizes that a key contributing factor in
the process of bolstering Haiti's stability and security
has been the role played by MINUSTAH. Belize is
also acutely aware of the serious costs associated with
sustaining the current military level beyond March
2015. The tremendous contribution made by all those
countries that supply military and police personnel is
invaluable.

Yet we are concerned and are of the view that the
reduction of MINUSTAH's military component should
be re-examined, considering that, although the political
situation in Haiti has improved slightly, actual elections
are yet to take place. The elections will be complex,
involving presidential, legislative and municipal seats,
and mobilizing some 6.1 million voters. In addition to
President Martelly's letter to the Secretary-General
dated 9 March, in an interview on Monday, 16 March,
with the Haitian-Caribbean News Network, the
Haitian Minister in charge of the elections within the
Government, Mr. Fritz Jean-Louis, said:

"The withdrawal of United Nations troops
from these regions [meaning six of the 10 electoral
regions] during the elections is a big concern,
not only for the Government, but also for several
countries and other partners supporting the
electoral process".

He went on to say:

"It is true that we want to nationalize the
election process, so that the country and its people
may fully assume the responsibility of dealing with
all aspects of the organization of elections. But this
should be done in a way that allows us first to fill
the deficiencies".

The re-examination should therefore take into
consideration whether a reduced military presence is
sufficient support for the Haitian National Police to be
able to carry out its functions of maintaining public
order and security, especially during the election
process itself. After all the efforts already made, it
would be a shame for the international community to
drop the ball at this stage.

Belize welcomes the launch on 11 March 2015, by
the United Nations, the Haitian Government and its
partners, of the transitional appeal programme for the
sum of $401 million, in an attempt to meet the acute
and urgent needs ofHaiti in 2015 and 2016. It represents
a modest start: modest because it is earmarked to
address issues and structural deficiencies in Haiti,
manifested in displacement, the wanton spread of the
cholera epidemic following its introduction into Haiti,
food insecurity and malnutrition, and weak capacity
to recover from natural hazards and disasters. But it
is very appreciated and will work well, along with the
ongoing European Union financial assistance.
In conclusion, along with the international
community, Belize supports President Martelly's
efforts to strengthen the democratic process in his
Caribbean Community nation of Haiti.

