Mr. Hahn Choonghee (Republic of Korea): Iwould
first like to thank the Egyptian presidency for arranging
today's open debate on countering the narratives and
ideologies of terrorism.

From Paris to Brussels to Istanbul, the spread of
terrorism and violent extremism poses a grave threat
to international peace and security. In their attempt to
establish their so-called caliphate, violent extremists
such as the adherents of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant are imposing a brutal reign of terror and
inciting people to join them. They are also carrying
out ruthless attacks on innocent people in various
parts of the world. They are marketing terrorism over
the Internet, through which they attempt to justify
the ideology of terrorism. Through their strategic
communication and messaging via new media, which
is instant, unlimited, and personal, they are recruiting
potential jihadists, also known as lone wolves, from
all over the world. They are specifically targeting
young people, who are vulnerable and susceptible to
the narratives and ideologies of terrorism. Therefore,
beyond military countermeasures, countering terrorism
demands a comprehensive approach that deals with the
fundamental drivers of the phenomenon, including
addressing the root causes.

First, we must continue our efforts to raise public
awareness of the danger of the narratives and ideologies
of terrorism. The Republic of Korea has been doing its
part by organizing a seminar on countering violent
extremism, in partnership with the Hedayah Center in
the United Arab Emirates last July, and by planning
the hosting of the Korea-ASEAN workshop on the
prevention of violent extremism with Indonesia this
year. Furthermore, Korea will contribute $300,000
to the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate for capacity-building projects for
vulnerable countries.

Secondly, strengthening education deserves more
attention in order to tackle and alleviate the risk of the
radicalization of youth and to give them an alternative
view that is rooted in hope, harmony and peace. In
that vein, in close cooperation with UNESCO, the
international community and civil societies, the
Republic of Korea will continue to work to promote
Global Citizenship Education, which emphasizes the
importance of core values such as human dignity, human
rights, tolerance, diversity and the rule of law. In that
regard, we commend UNESCO, which is now studying
how Global Citizenship Education could contribute to
preventing violent extremism. Furthermore, the theme
of the 66th United Nations DPI/NGO Conference, to
be held in Gyeongju, Korea, from 30 May to 1 June,
is "Education for Global Citizenship: Achieving the
Sustainable Development Goals Together". I hope
this largest NGO Conference will discuss how global
citizenship could be fostered to prevent violent
extremism and radicalization.

Thirdly, we need to reinforce our efforts to
prevent terrorists from abusing the Internet. As we
have observed, their information and communications
technologies and online media strategies increase
the likelihood of youth radicalization. Preventing the
abuse of the Internet and social media for terrorist
purposes has been an important task for the Korean
Government, and Korea will strengthen partnerships
with private companies and civil societies, sharing
relevant information and best practices with other
States Members of the United Nations.

Last but not least, as emphasized in resolution
2178 (2014), the establishment of an effective legal
framework and law enforcement will not only further
deprive terrorists of resources and mobility, but will
also strengthen international cooperation in tracking
terrorist plots and suspects. In that connection, in
March this year the Korean Government enacted and
promulgated the Act on the Prevention of Terrorism for
Protection of the People and Public Safety.

Our noble but arduous endeavour to combat terrorism
demands both multidisciplinary efforts to bring the
Government, non-governmental organizations and civil
society together, but also full United Nations support,
as suggested by Secretary- General Ban Ki-moon in the
Action Plan to Prevent Violent Extremism (A/70/674).
The Republic of Korea will continue to work closely
with the international community throughout the
process and looks forward to discussing and finding
effective strategies and ways to reduce and eventually
end the threat of terrorism.

