Mr. Gonzalez de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I wish first to express the gratitude of
the Spanish delegation to the Rwandan presidency for
having convened this open debate, which allows us to
address an issue of increasing importance, that is, the
cooperation of regional and subregional organizations
in the crucial work that peacekeeping operations are
currently carrying out.

Spain welcomes the growing cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations in the
field of peace and security under Chapter VIII of the
Charter. We believe that this cooperation strengthens
the collective efforts of the international community to
keep and build the peace. These efforts form the basis
of such operations, which always operate according to
the mandate given them by the Security Council.

Spain stresses the need for mechanisms that
ensure greater efficiency of peacekeeping operations,
with robust, clear and appropriate mandates, and, of
course, sufficient resources for their discharge. We also
deem it important to devote attention to the changing
circumstances, needs and challenges faced daily by
peacekeeping operations on the ground. In order to
achieve this, we support the active participation of the
countries and regional and subregional organizations
concerned in the debates and decision-making processes
on such missions that take place in the Security Council.
The work of regional and subregional organizations
has become indispensable to ensuring a rapid response
to difficult situations, so as to meet new challenges and
to strengthen local and regional ownership, which is
essential to the prevention and resolution of conflicts.

We must continue working to deepen and strengthen
mechanisms aimed at improving the coordination and
complementarity of our actions, with the ultimate
aim of increasing their effectiveness and coherence.
Dialogue with regional and subregional organizations
should be ongoing.

Spain is very pleased at the level of cooperation
achieved between the European Union and the United
Nations, at both the institutional and operational
levels, which has produced very positive results on
the ground in countries such as Mali and the Central
African Republic. We will continue to work with other
European Union partners to deepen this collaboration.

The regional approach enriches our understanding
of local challenges and brings us closer to the concerns
and needs of the countries and peoples most directly
affected by conflict, thus facilitating the adoption
and implementation of effective, comprehensive and
sustainable solutions.

We wish here to express our deep appreciation
for the commitment, effort and dynamism shown by
regional and subregional African organizations in
response to the continent's peace and security-related
challenges. Spain favours African ownership and
African-owned solutions through the strengthening of
African mechanisms and capacities for the prevention,
management and resolution of conflicts. We
acknowledge and welcome African political, military
and financial efforts for the resolution of crises on
the continent, including those initiatives taken by the
African Union and subregional organizations such
as the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the Economic Community of Central
African States.

We support the African Union's resolve to obtain
the means and resources necessary to ensure peace
and security in Africa through the African Peace and
Security Architecture. That determination to assume
greater responsibilities must be translated into a greater
role for Africa in all decision-making centres.

Spain is firmly and actively committed to peace
and security in Africa, as this issue affects us directly.
Since my country first participated, in 1989, in a
peacekeeping mission in Africa, we have been present
in more than 20 African countries. This commitment
is currently reflected in our active participation in
European Union missions in Mali, Somalia and, more
recently, the Central African Republic. Furthermore,
Spain has supported the African Union and ECOWAS,
both financially and politically, in order to promote the
development of their responsibilities in that area.

Spain is firmly committed to the essential endeavour
of peacekeeping operations, to which regional and
subregional organizations contribute effectively. We
shall continue working with other Member States and
regional and subregional organizations in strengthening
and improving such cooperation, which has already
generated many positive results and which we hope will
continue to do so in future.

