The President: I shall now make a statement in
my national capacity.

The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMD) in all its aspects, including those regarding
non-State actors, is a major threat to international
peace and security. Countering this threat requires a
continuous common effort by all United Nations
Member States and relevant bodies. By actively
participating in today's debate, a great number of
Members are demonstrating their determination to live
up to the challenge and to contribute to the search for
the best solution.

Germany is fully committed to countering this
threat. Our views are reflected in the European Union's
Strategy against Proliferation of Weapons of Mass
Destruction, which is based on the conviction that
disarmament, arms control and non-proliferation are
mutually reinforcing aspects of the same
comprehensive, cooperative approach.

We fully subscribe to the forthcoming statement
by the presidency of the European Union.

We hope that the new resolution will provide a
useful tool to prevent access by non-State actors to
weapons of mass destruction and to hazardous
materials. We therefore support it and hope that it can
soon be adopted. However, together with all other
Council members, we are trying to further improve the
draft resolution. That would increase its acceptance and
thereby contribute to its full and global
implementation.

I would like to make three points in that context.
First, the multilateral treaty regime provides the
normative basis for all non-proliferation efforts. That is
why the implementation, the universalization and,
where necessary, the strengthening of existing
multilateral disarmament and non-proliferation
agreements are essential. We have therefore suggested
the inclusion of meaningful references to disarmament.
Disarmament and non-proliferation are two sides of the
same coin. The fewer weapons exist, the better they
can be controlled and kept safe from misuse and
proliferation. In addition, we strongly believe that
every effort must be undertaken to ensure effective
verification of compliance with the multilateral treaty
regime. That could also be reflected in the draft
resolution. The same is true of security assurances,
which are an important part of the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) regime.

Secondly, as the resolution will be binding on all
Member States, the Council as a whole must remain the
final arbiter of compliance. Any necessary enforcement
action must be subject to a specific decision by the
Council as a whole, without interfering with the
mandates of relevant institutions or of other bodies
established under international treaties or
arrangements.

Thirdly, a follow-up mechanism in the form of a
Security Council committee, based on a clear two-year
mandate, should be established in order to assist the
Council in its efforts to ensure both a transparent
dialogue with States and an even-handed approach.
This committee should work in cooperation with other
competent bodies such as the International Atomic
Energy Agency, the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons and the Council's Counter-
Terrorism Committee. In our view, that would enhance
its efficiency and credibility.

To conclude, let me underline the fact that the
Security Council has, in the context of counter-
terrorism, already dealt with some key aspects
contained in the present draft. In operative paragraph
2 (a) of resolution 1373 (2001), the Council decided,
inter alia, that "all States shall eliminat(e) the supply
of weapons to terrorists". In operative paragraph 7 of
resolution 1456 (2003), the Council, at the ministerial
level, underlined "the importance of fully complying
with existing legal obligations in the field of
disarmament, arms limitation and non-proliferation
and, where necessary, strengthening international
instruments in this field".

The draft resolution before us should be made an
important step in our common endeavour to prevent
non-State actors, and terrorists in particular, from
gaining access to weapons of mass destruction or to
hazardous materials. The draft resolution should
complement the existing system of international
instruments of global disarmament, arms control and
non-proliferation. We must not forget that this
multilateral treaty regime retains its full validity and
relevance and that that regime is the core instrument
for the preservation of international peace and security.
The obligations contained therein must be fully
honoured and further developed.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

Before giving the floor to the next speaker, I
would like to make a short procedural remark, because
we started our meeting a bit early today and not
everyone was here at the outset. I should like to
reiterate that the Council agreed that all those taking
the floor should limit their statements to four minutes
in order to give all other speakers an equal chance to
make their views known, given the fact that more than
a quarter of the United Nations membership will speak
at this meeting. We kindly ask delegations that have
prepared longer statements to circulate the texts in
writing and to present a condensed version in the
Council Chamber. I thank members for their
cooperation.

I now give the floor to the representative of
Canada.

