Mr. Cherif (Tunisia) (spoke in French): May I
express my congratulations to you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council. I assure
you of my delegation's complete cooperation for the
success of our work. We also convey our sincere thanks
to Ambassador Durrant and her entire team for the
excellent work they carried out at the head of the
Security Council during November.

I join previous speakers in thanking Assistant-
Secretary-General He'di Annabi for his briefing on the
implementation of the mandate of the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH). My
delegation welcomes the report of the Secretary-
General, which notes the important progress achieved
during the period covered by the report.

My delegation believes that advances have been
made in virtually all the fields of action under
UNMIBH's mandate, and also, above all, in all aspects
of the lives of the Bosnian people. The success
achieved to date is a sign of growing maturity and a
profound will to build a shared, prosperous and multi-
ethnic future for the entire population. We agree with
the Secretary-General that accomplishing this progress
has not been easy and that resistance and obstacles had
be overcome. Nonetheless, we continue to believe that
the results obtained are satisfactory and deserving of
the commitment of the entire international community.

To fully achieve lasting peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, it is important now to strengthen the
foundations of efficient, democratic and multi-ethnic
institutions and to help the country's inhabitants in
their efforts to build a new Bosnian society. In this
respect, we believe that the international community
must maintain its commitments in the country to ensure
a peaceful transition that preserves and improves on the
achievements made and takes into consideration the
overall situation in the Balkans and the capacity of
Bosnian society to take charge of its own future.

Allow me to make a few comments on issues that,
in our opinion, are of particular importance for
ensuring peace and stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

First, my delegation welcomes the encouraging
results achieved on police reform. The creation of a
police force in conformity with international standards
of personal integrity and professional competence is a
decisive step for the success of the operation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. It is important to continue the efforts
for better representation of ethnic minorities in the
local police force. In this respect, we welcome the
appointment of a Bosniac to a high-level post in a
police station in the Republika Srpska. This
appointment opens the way to reconciliation and puts
an end to the prevailing distrust.

It should also be underscored that the success of
the operation of reforming and restructuring the police
force remains largely dependent on the neutrality of the
force. It is therefore necessary to strengthen this
quality and to eliminate any political, partisan or ethnic
bias that could hamper the process.

Secondly, my delegation also welcomes the steps
taken by the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
combat terrorism. Indeed, the decision to create a
database on this issue deserves the international
community's support.

Thirdly, my delegation would like to give its
support to UNMIBH's efforts for judicial reform. It is
vital that the judicial service be independent, impartial
and non-discriminatory in dealing with the entire
Bosnian population. Those brought to justice must not
only have legal guarantees during the trial but also be
convinced of the fairness of the decisions handed down
by the judges. We believe that once confidence is
established, the coexistence of all the ethnic
communities of Bosnia and Herzegovina will be more
easily attainable.

Fourthly, we welcome the efforts made by the
State Border Service. We believe that this service has a
great responsibility in combating drug-trafficking,
smuggling and illegal immigration. It has an increased
responsibility today in the fight against terrorism and
arms-trafficking. In this context, we wish to express
our appreciation to UNMIBH for the establishment of
the Special Trafficking Operations Programme (STOP).
This important issue is a major concern of the entire
international community.

Fifthly, my delegation wishes to pay tribute to the
agencies of the United Nations system for their
contributions to the reconstruction efforts in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We encourage the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to
continue its efforts to protect and rebuild places of
worship. We also welcome the assistance given by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees to refugees and displaced persons upon their
return.

In conclusion, as Tunisia, which has always been
attentive to Bosnia and Herzegovina and will remain
so, prepares to leave the Council at the end of this
month, we wish to express the hope that we will at last
see a reconciled, united, multi-ethnic and prosperous
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The country will certainly be
able to look to the future. It will draw strength from the
pain of the past and from the hope nurtured by new
generations.
