Mr. Akram (Pakistan): On behalf of the
delegation of Pakistan, I would like to extend to you,
Sir, our congratulations on Ghana's assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month.
Allow me to also take this opportunity to convey our
appreciation to Ambassador Jean-Maurice Ripert for
the successful French presidency last month.

I would like to welcome in particular the briefing
provided to the Security Council by Mr. Tom Koenigs,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General to
Afghanistan. We convey our appreciation to
Mr. Koenigs on his latest presentation to the Council
and for his sincere and dedicated efforts as the head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) during the past few years.

We have read the most recent report of the
Secretary-General (S/2007/555). It provides a useful
overview of the situation. Obviously, progress is
reported in some areas, which should be welcomed. It
is, however, a matter of concern that the overall trend
in Afghanistan appears to be negative. A multitude of
internal problems continue to strain and challenge the
transition to durable peace and security. At the recent
meeting of high-level representatives in New York, the
challenges facing Afghanistan were well identified.
They include governance, drugs, lack of development
and insecurity.

Drugs are a grave and present danger to the entire
effort in Afghanistan. A comprehensive and fair
strategy to combat the problem of narcotics must break
the link between drug money and the financing of
terrorist and insurgent activity and criminality in
Afghanistan.

Capacity-building of Afghan National Security
institutions and their use for counter-insurgency, and
decreased reliance on foreign forces would be a
positive development. What is required are properly
trained, equipped, paid and ethnically balanced
professional national forces.

We also require capacity-building in the sectors
of governance, rule of law and greater action against
corruption. Also, despite improvement in several

economic and social indicators, particularly in health
and education, the pace of economic development and
reconstruction remains slow and uneven, especially in
the generation of gainful employment in the rural
areas. The resources allocated for economic recovery
and reconstruction are inadequate. There is also a
perennial problem of non-fulfilment of commitments
made to Afghanistan.

Let me say a few words regarding the security
challenge facing Afghanistan. The report of the
Secretary-General notes that at least 78 districts of
Afghanistan are currently rated as extremely risky.
There are large parts of Afghanistan that are
ungoverned space or under parallel structures of
insurgents, as noted by the Russian ambassador. These
are the safe havens within Afghanistan. The report of
the Secretary-General notes that, in addition to
insurgent and terrorist activity, several other factors
cause insecurity and violence, including factional
fighting, criminal activity, warlords and drug barons.
Therefore, in our analysis and response it is important
to resist the temptation to externalize the security
challenges faced within Afghanistan.

We must have a proper understanding of these
complex security challenges. In Afghanistan, there is
first and foremost the core of violence and conflict that
emanates from terrorist groups, foreign militants such
as Al-Qaida and a handful of militant Taliban who are
not prepared to reconcile and give up the path of
violence. These elements must be confronted directly,
but our military strategy must avoid civilian casualties
and prevent the further alienation of the population.

Secondly, there is the phenomenon of the rise of
extremism, hence what has been called Talibanization.
In this context, it should be well understood that the
Taliban are part of Afghan society and have emerged
from that society. Many can be won over. We therefore
welcome President Karzai's offer of dialogue and
reconciliation to the Taliban, and we regret the
rejection by some Taliban leaders. We note
Mr. Koenig's information that several Taliban
commanders are prepared to talk. We hope that the
process of reconciliation, including the peace jirga
between Pakistan and Afghanistan, will be able to
contribute to this objective of reconciliation.

Thirdly, besides these two elements, there is a
common population of Afghanistan that, in certain
areas and for diverse reasons, has gained sympathy for
the point of view of the Taliban and is susceptible to
extremism. It is important for the international
community and for the Government in Kabul to win
over the hearts and minds of this population and to
prevent their further alienation through the strategies
that are followed on the military, political and
economic fronts.

We have long believed that a winning strategy in
Afghanistan would have to be a comprehensive
strategy, one that combines military, political,
economic and administrative measures. Such a strategy
will have to build peace painstakingly, district by
district, region by region, since circumstances in each
area differ from each other.

Pakistan's cooperation with Afghanistan covers
the entire spectrum of our relationship - military,
intelligence, border control, trade, transit and
development cooperation. Many of the successes
against the Taliban, including some of those cited by
my dear brother from Afghanistan, have been possible
because of the intelligence, military and other
cooperation extended by Pakistan bilaterally to
Afghanistan or through the trilateral commission,
including the United States and NATO.

Pakistan has a solemn responsibility not to allow
support for the Taliban insurgency or Al-Qaida to flow
across from our border regions. We have therefore
deployed over 100,000 troops in this region,
established 1,000 border posts, lost over 1,000 military
personnel - more than any other country in this war
against terror - and conducted over 120 military
operations, some of which are ongoing as we speak.
We believe that halting cross-border activity is a joint
responsibility of Pakistan, Afghanistan and the
coalition forces who are present across the border.

In this context, Pakistan, Afghanistan and the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees had
reached an agreement to close down four Afghan
refugee camps that are close to the border, since these
camps served as a source for the flow of cross-border
militants. It is somewhat disturbing to see the account
in the report of the Secretary-General with regard to
the closure of the Jalozai camp, which we believe has
been misrepresented in the report, as have certain other
aspects of the current situation.

The closure of those four camps is being delayed
because of inexplicable reluctance, including on the
part of United Nations agencies, to facilitate the return

of refugees. We expect the United Nations and the
international community to assist in the repatriation of
those Afghan refugees. They should not try our
hospitality or our patience, since we also face the brunt
of allegations of cross-border activities from those
camps. Unfortunately, even the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) has on
occasion displayed a certain lack of political sensitivity
and lack of impartiality in its reports and its actions.

In conclusion, let me say that there are no two
countries that are as close as Pakistan and Afghanistan.
Our peoples have struggled together against heavy
odds and insuperable enemies. Both countries need one
another. Our peace jirga will address the common
challenges we face in terrorism and extremism. But
both countries must be cautious about the machinations
of those outsiders who wish to create mistrust and
mischief between us.

Pakistan wants to see Afghanistan emerge as a
strong, united and cohesive nation that is at peace
within and without. We have a vision for Pakistan and
for the region. We want to see Pakistan develop as a
hub of economic activity linking South Asia, Central
Asia and West Asia through trade, energy and
communications corridors. We cannot play that role
without a partnership with Afghanistan. We therefore
welcome Afghanistan's membership in the South Asian
Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC). As
common members of both SAARC and the Economic
Cooperation Organization, which spans Central Asia,
Pakistan and Afghanistan can hope to play the role of a
land bridge between those vast regions.

As President Musharraf stated at the peace jirga
in Kabul,

"Pakistan desires peace, friendship and
cooperation with Afghanistan based on mutual
respect, sovereign equality, territorial integrity
and independence".

