Mr. Mubarak (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me at the outset to welcome His
Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremic', Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, and Mr. Skender Hyseni. We also
welcome Mr. Lamberto Zannier, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and we thank
him for his very valuable briefing to the Council. We
also wish to commend the Secretary-General for his
report on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) (S/2008/458).

Before turning to the content of the report, I
should like to emphasize the following principles,
which are the essential reasons for the presence of
UNMIK in Kosovo. Resolution 1244 (1999) remains
the legal framework for UNMIK, and the Security
Council is the body with the authority to amend the
mandate of the United Nations mission in Kosovo. The
United Nations presence in Kosovo is of the utmost
importance, at least in the medium term, especially
with regard to addressing the problems, easing tensions
that may arise and fostering peace and stability in the
region.

We are convinced of the importance of the role of
regional arrangements in the maintenance of
international peace and security, in accordance with
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. We
thus commend the European Union for playing its part
in strengthening peace and security in the Western
Balkans and for the support that it has provided to the
United Nations operation in Kosovo. We believe that
the continued cooperation between UNMIK and the
European Union in Kosovo should not exceed the legal
parameters defined in resolution 1244 (1999) and
should take place under the guidance of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General.

Regarding the report of the Secretary-General, we
are concerned at the tension that has characterized the
past three months, especially in northern Kosovo, to
which the Secretary-General refers, when discussing
the political and security situation. Nonetheless, we are
hopeful that the tension and the violence remain
limited to specific areas and we appeal to all parties in
Kosovo work constructively with UNMIK to overcome
the painful events of the past and look towards a future
of tolerance and harmony, with progress and prosperity
for all the people of Kosovo.

Kosovo is not the only place in the Balkans
where religious and ethnic minorities have coexisted.
We urge UNMIK to deploy greater efforts to guarantee
the return of displaced persons of all ethnicities, to
provide assistance to the displaced and to protect
religious and cultural sites. We condemn all actions
taken against all such places or against humanitarian
workers.

Finally, we urge the Secretary-General to
continue negotiations with all the parties concerned
and other interested parties in Pristina and Belgrade in
order to overcome the challenges that UNMIK may
face in Kosovo, with a view to the accomplishment of
a noble goal: the maintenance of peace and stability in
Kosovo through dialogue.

