Mr. Lal (India): Thank you, Sir, for organizing
this debate. We thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Yamamoto and the other briefers
for their insights into the continuing difficult situation
faced by Afghanistan.

The deterioration in the security situation in
Afghanistan over the past few months is a matter of
serious concern. Terrorists continue to attack the most
vulnerable, including the sick in hospitals, children in
schools, worshippers in mosques and even mourners at
funerals. Terrorist groups have also gained territory.
The continued resilience shown by the Afghan people
and security personnel has been exemplary, but the
better future that people hope for still appears distant.

Our regular consultations and the work done by the
Council have not been enough to effectively reverse the
situation on the ground. It has been painfully clear for
a long time that the security situation in Afghanistan
has implications, not only for the region, but also for
the entire world. It is not simply a local problem. While
new threats emerge from Da'esh, the Security Council
cannot even decide whether to list the new leaders of
the Taliban or to freeze the assets of the slain leader of
the group more than a year after the issue was brought
to its attention.

The support for terrorist organizations like the
Taliban, the Haqqani network, Da'esh, Al-Qaida and
its designated affiliates, such as Lashkar-e-Tayyiba and
Jaish-e-Mohammed from outside Afghanistan, must be
forced to stop. All safe havens and sanctuaries available
to such groups outside Afghanistan's borders must end.
The Security Council has an important responsibility
in that regard in our collective interest.

The rise in opium production and the increase in
the areas under opium cultivation in Afghanistan, as
highlighted in the report of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, are cause for serious concern,
especially given their role in perpetuating the cycle of
terrorism. This drug trafficking is not a local concern.
The international networks that control this illegal trade
have to be identified and tackled. The problem needs to
be addressed through verifiable measures and actions.

The Security Council can effectively utilize the
sanctions regime under resolution 1988 (2011) in
the context of funds that the terrorist networks are
generating. This has not happened. We welcome the
recent visit of the Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011) to Afghanistan
and the upcoming visit by the Security Council to
the country early next month. We need to go after
the leaders of the terrorist organizations. We need to
investigate and designate the illicit drug-trafficking
business in the country.

Support for an Afghan-led, Afghan-owned and
Afghan-controlled peace and national reconciliation
process, within the framework of Afghanistan's
Constitution, has to be pursued with all sincerity. Any
meaningful progress requires the cessation of violence,
the renunciation of links with international terrorism,
and respect for the rights of common Afghan people,
especially women and children. While the international
community's commitment to Afghanistan is renewed
every year through various international efforts,
including those of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan, respect for Afghanistan's
sovereignty and its direction and ownership of the
peace processes should be paramount.

We congratulate Afghanistan on its recent,
first-ever election to the Human Rights Council.
Afghanistan's active engagement at the United Nations
on various issues ofimportance continues to grow.

Development cooperation is one of the most
significant aspects of our long-standing friendship
with Afghanistan. Recent visits to India by President
Ashraf Ghani and Chief Executive Abdullah Abdullah
in the past three months have provided impetus to the
wide-ranging new development partnership that both
our countries launched in September. This covers
diverse areas, including education, health, agriculture,
infrastructure, renewable energy, drinking-water supply
and human resource development. Our people-to-
people contacts extend from colleges and cricket fields
to trade and investment.

The importance of connectivity and transit for
trade and energy linkages to bring peace and prosperity
in Afghanistan, a land-locked country, is clear.
Regrettably, normal overland transport and transit
access between Afghanistan and a large economy like
India's have been blocked for many years. This hurts
the welfare of the Afghan people. We are working with
our partners to address this issue. Last month, the first
consignment of wheat-grain assistance from India
reached Afghanistan through Chabahar port in Iran.
This marks the beginning of a new era of enhanced,
reliable and robust connectivity for Afghanistan.

The challenges are well known. The tools available
to the Council and the international community to
address them need to be utilized effectively. This
requires collective will and targeted action.

