Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): 1 would like, through you, Mr. President, to thank all the briefers for their clear presentations, which not only painted a comprehensive picture of the situation in Yemen but also demonstrated the urgent need to act to save the situation in the country. I was particularly touched by the poignant and moving testimony of Ms. Wafa'a Alsaidy regarding the difficulties in daily life in her country. The latest information from Yemen indicates that the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is spreading rapidly throughout the country. With the war-torn health infrastructure, limited testing capacity and shortages of medical supplies and equipment, the escalation of COVID-19 will further exacerbate the humanitarian situation of the population. The underlying conditions of infectious diseases and malnutrition make it difficult for people infected with the virus to recover, leading to an increase in the number of virus-related deaths in recent days. We are particularly alarmed by the number of deaths among health workers, mainly in the Sana'a area. This will undoubtedly severely undermine the fight against the pandemic. In order to successfully combat the virus in the country, the three centres of power should stop blaming each other but must unite to confront this deadly threat. Indeed, the absence of a central authority makes it difficult to implement precautionary measures with which people must comply in a coordinated and consistent manner. Last month, we were somewhat optimistic when we heard Special Envoy Martin Griffiths announce that the parties to the conflict expressed great interest in his proposals for a joint declaration of a national ceasefire, which would pave the way for the resumption of dialogue to end the war in Yemen. Regrettably, this is not the case today given the latest developments on the ground, marked in particular by the intensification of fighting between coalition forces and the Houthis. The Niger is of the view that no progress can be made either in the political process or in addressing the humanitarian situation without a genuine cessation of hostilities. We call on all parties to heed the calls of the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy for a comprehensive ceasefire to address the COVID-19 pandemic in the country and for the resumption of the political process. In that regard, we call on regional actors and Council members with influence on the parties to exert the necessary pressure to advance the Special Envoy's efforts to achieve the declaration of a comprehensive ceasefire, which we earnestly desire. We welcome the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations Mission to Support the Hudaydah Agreement two weeks ago (see S/PV.8747). The Mission plays a crucial role in stabilizing the area and in ensuring the ongoing delivery of humanitarian assistance, which is channelled mainly through Al-Hudaydah. The Niger welcomes and supports the tireless efforts of Mr. Martin Griffiths to silence the weapons in Yemen and to lead the parties to peace in the country, devastated by this senseless and terrible war. As Ms. Alsaidy implored us, we must act in order to end the war in Yemen as soon as possible.
