Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this debate only three months before the end of the
transitional period in August. Allow me to also
welcome and commend the statements made by His
Excellency Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed, President of
the Transitional Federal Government of Somalia, and
Mr. Augustine Mahiga, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Political Office for Somalia, whose briefing was a clear
illustration of the situation and the current challenges.

While we view with optimism the progress made
in the implementation of certain tasks established in
the road map, we understand that the current
humanitarian, political and military situation in
Somalia is not free from risks or difficulties. Given the
fragile situation, we must redouble our efforts to
strengthen the gains we have made in different areas
and to lay the foundations for restoring peace and
stability and fostering sustainable social and economic
development.
Although the security situation, especially in
Mogadishu, has improved, the situation in the outskirts
of the city and in some parts of the south and centre of
Somalia remains unstable. Despite the progress made
by the Somali forces and the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), the terrorist attacks of
Al-Shabaab continue to be a serious threat for the
Transitional Federal Institutions, the AMISOM. forces
and the political process itself.

It is increasingly important to effectively use the
mechanisms established by the Organization, including
the regime under resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907
(2009), to impose appropriate measures on internal and
external actors seeking to undermine the peace and
reconciliation process in Somalia; to identify the
leaders of armed groups who impede the provision of,
access to and distribution of humanitarian assistance;
and to apply the relevant sanctions in order to restrict
the charcoal trade. It is also crucial to step up our
monitoring and identification of arms embargo
violations and to impose selective sanctions, when
necessary, in order to reduce the effects that this could
have in the Somali context.

We acknowledge the significant contribution of
AMISOM. to the quest for peace in Somalia. We note
the progress achieved with the expansion of AMISOM
after the adoption of resolution 2036 (2012) and its
deployment beyond Mogadishu for the first time since
its establishment. Nonetheless, we must persevere in
our efforts to establish a presence in the four sectors
established under the strategic concept. It is also
crucial to continue to provide equipment, technical
assistance and financing for the salaries of the troops
and unconditional financing for the Mission through
the United Nations Trust Fund for AMISOM.

Similarly, we must provide greater technical,
financial and training resources to the Transitional
Federal Government forces so that they can deploy on
land and in coastal waters and play a more important
role in the operations under way.

Taking the long-term perspective, any sound and
lasting solution to the problem of piracy off the coast
of Somalia must be part of a broader initiative aimed at
national institutional capacity-building in which the
economic, security, judicial and penal dimensions are
implemented simultaneously.

We must harmonize and synchronize political and
military efforts with a view to a genuine stabilization
of the situation in Somalia. We therefore feel that it is
important to support the Transitional Federal
Government's efforts to reach areas that were recently
recovered, and in particular the national policy for the
reconciliation and stabilization of the freed areas in the
south and centre of Somalia.

Given the imminent end of the transitional
period, Somali leaders must work together, set aside
their differences, put the interests of the Somali people
before their own personal interests, and thereby
complete the implementation of the road map on
schedule. A commitment in this direction will pave the
way for them to move together towards a general and
lasting solution to the situation in Somalia in this
critical phase of the political process.

While the Transitional Federal Government has
the primary responsibility for restoring security,
political stability, the rule of law and economic
development, it is also crucial that the international
community continue to provide its support for
institutional strengthening and national capacity-
building. The upcoming Conference on Somalia to be
held in Istanbul will be an ideal forum in which to
tackle the immediate challenges facing Somalia and to
begin to plan for long-term solutions that would
establish the conditions to foster sustainable economic
and social development.

In conclusion, I would like to urge the Somali
authorities and other relevant actors to continue to play
a constructive role and to comply with their obligations
in implementing the road map so that the deadlines set
for the end of the transition period in August can be
met. The impetus for and the vision of a stable and
stronger Somali State must be upheld as the primary
long-term objective.

