Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would first like to thank Assistant
Secretary-General Jenca for his informative briefing.
The agenda for today's meeting is "The situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question",
or at least that is what it says on the paper in front of
me. However, the statements of some delegations so far
make me question that. Perhaps they mixed up their
agenda items and thought that today we were discussing
the implementation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action (JCPOA). We too are ready to address that
issue, and we will not be the only ones who will have
questions for some delegations about how they are
implementing the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action.
But some delegations' failure to even mention the
word "Palestine" is alarming and distressing, because
quite apart from the fact that we are not seeing any
progress with regard to a Palestinian-Israeli settlement,
the absence of even a reference to it hardly fills us
with optimism.

Meanwhile, however, we would like to emphasize
that the turbulent events and new challenges and
threats in the Middle East and North Africa should
not overshadow the importance of resolving the
Palestine issue, which is fundamental to the long-
term normalization of the situation in the region. The
continued impasse in the efforts to reach a settlement
is extremely worrying. The current status quo is
incapable of being sustained or lasting. In the absence
of a peace process and a political horizon, the region
is building up an increasingly explosive potential that
could detonate at any moment.

The parties to the conflict are continually resorting
to unilateral steps that hinder the efforts to relaunch
the Palestinian-Israeli negotiation process. That
applies to Israel's settlement activity, the provocative
rhetoric on both sides, the outbreaks of violence and
the difficult humanitarian situation, especially in the
Gaza Strip. Against that background, we hear more
and more often that the prospects for achieving a two-
State solution to the Palestinian question are receding
with each passing day. What is the alternative, if a
one-State option, at least going on the statements of
the parties themselves, is not in the interests of either
the Israelis or the Palestinians? We believe firmly that
there is no alternative to a settlement reached through
direct negotiations leading to the establishment of an
independent Palestinian State, living side by side in
peace and security with Israel.

Russia has consistently emphasized its commitment
to achieving a just and comprehensive settlement in
the Middle East based firmly on international law,
including the relevant Security Council resolutions and
the Arab Peace Initiative. In our view, it is essential to
step up international efforts to try to find ways out of
the current impasse in the Middle East peace process.
We are working on it both bilaterally and through the
Middle East Quartet of international mediators, and we
support the active involvement of regional stakeholders.
We believe that resuming direct Palestinian-Israeli
negotiations on a universally recognized international
legal basis is crucial, and we are therefore not
withdrawing our proposal to hold a summit in Russia
between the leaders of Palestine and Israel.

We note that there have been some positive
developments in intra-Palestinian affairs. The
agreements reached between Fatah and Hamas, in
which Egypt played an active role, should significantly
improve the humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip.
We hope they will be followed by other steps aimed
at ensuring genuine national unity for Palestinians
through the Palestine Liberation Organization's
political platform, and that such a development will
have a positive influence on the situation in the Middle
East. We helped to facilitate the process, and we will
continue helping to overcome Palestine's internal
split through our contacts across the entire spectrum
of its political actors. We greatly appreciate the Arab
Republic of Egypt's energetic efforts in that regard.

The Middle East remains in a situation of systemic
crisis on many levels. The approaching victory over the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in Syria and Iraq
does not mean that the threat of terrorism is about to be
eliminated. Terrorists have spread all over the region
and organized sleeper cells all over the world. We
will need the united efforts of the entire international
community and a truly broad counter-terrorism front if
we are to combat this global threat effectively. There
is work still to be done, and we will have to combine
our regional and international efforts as never before. It
is particularly worrying that extremists are exploiting
ethnic and religious factors to incite discord and
replenish their ranks, and have dealt a serious blow to
Christians and other religious and ethnic minorities
who have lived in the region for centuries.

The current situation in the Middle East and North
Africa shows the importance of developing coordinated
approaches to resolving the acute crises in the region.
We must reject the notion of external interference
and the persistent attempts to impose ready-made
solutions from outside. Conflicts can be resolved
only through political means on the basis of a broad
national dialogue, while respecting the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of every State in
the Middle East, without exception, an approach that
requires us to take into account and fully respect the
traditions, national particularities and aspirations of
the countries in the region.

In conclusion, I would like to go back to where
I started and draw the Council's attention to the fact
that the attempts to dismantle the architecture of the
agreement on the Iranian nuclear programme have
evoked negative reactions throughout the Middle East
and beyond. The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
has been a significant contribution to normalizing the
situation in relation to Iran and has given the efforts to
stabilize the situation in the region extra impetus. The
JCPOA continues to be an important basis for promoting
confidence-building measures, and the commitments
undertaken under the agreement, which was endorsed
in resolution 2231 (2016), should be complied with by
all the parties to it.

