Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for July. I wish you every success. I also wish to thank
the Gabonese delegation for its June presidency and
work.

We are grateful to Mr. Staffan de Mistura for his
substantive and frank analysis of the situation in
Afghanistan and for introducing the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2011/381). We welcome the
statement made by Ambassador Tanin, Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan.

We agree with their assessment of the measures
being taken by the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA), pursuant to its mandate. We
share their evaluation of the ongoing difficult security
situation in Afghanistan, as reflected in a number of
serious incidents over the course of recent months. I
refer first and foremost to the tragic attack in April on
the United Nations office in Mazar-e-Sharif and the
deaths of United Nations staff. We were also shocked
by the killing of former Deputy Minister of the Interior
Daoud in Takhar province in May and by the attacks in
June on the hospital in Logar province and the car of
the Governors of Badakhshan and Parwan provinces, as
well as by the recent Taliban attack on the
Intercontinental Hotel that led to the deaths of innocent
civilians. We strongly condemn all of these terrorist
acts.

These insurgent attacks show that the Taliban
movement is pursuing its attempts to destabilize the
situation in Afghanistan and to undermine the efforts of
the international community towards the post-conflict
reconstruction of the country. The leadership of the
Taliban is neither acting on behalf of the Afghan
people nor working towards lasting peace and a
prosperous, independent Afghanistan.

The Russian Federation is particularly concerned
about the situation in northern Afghanistan, where a
number of high-profile terrorist acts have taken place.
Those acts have had repercussions in Central Asian
States, including our partners in the Commonwealth of
Independent States, the Collective Security Treaty
Organization and the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization. In the light of the continued efforts of
terrorists of the Taliban and Al-Qaida, a targeted and
measured approach is necessary to implement the plan
for national reconciliation.

We hope that the recent Changes to the sanctions
regime pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) will boost
the efforts of the Afghan Government to implement its
national reconciliation strategy, give added impulse to
addressing the problem of an Afghan settlement and
enhance regional security - conditions that were all
agreed to by the international community.

In that context, we note the reaffirmation in
resolution 1988 (2011) of the important principles of
national reconciliation in Afghanistan, including the
renunciation of violence, respect for the Afghan
Constitution and the renunciation of ties to Al-Qaida
and other terrorist organizations. Under these criteria,
it is unacceptable to de-list Taliban leaders from the
United Nations sanctions regime list. A dialogue with
Taliban leaders can be carried out only under Afghan
leadership. Any contact with them, in particular outside
official channels, could send the wrong signal from the
international community in the context of an Afghan
settlement.

We are also particularly concerned about the
consequences of implementing a plan for the long-term
enhancement of the military presence in Afghanistan
after 2014. We believe that the establishment of a
neutral status for Afghanistan is necessary. The
Presidents of the Russian Federation and the United
States spoke in favour of this idea in their joint
statement of 24 June 2010, and members of the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization also supported it in
the Astana Declaration of 15 June. Of course, the
initiative on this issue lies with the Afghan people
themselves - not in the near future, but when the
stabilization of Afghanistan is complete. The
establishment of Afghanistan's neutral status, if
accepted, could, we believe, facilitate dialogue on
reconciliation.

We are concerned about the drug trafficking
situation in Afghanistan. There is no doubt whatsoever
that drug trafficking in Afghanistan is a threat to
international peace and security, as reflected in
resolutions 1943 (2010) and 1974 (2011). Neutralizing
this threat requires joint efforts and the pooling of all
possible capacities. Unfortunately, the coalition forces
have not focused sufficient enough attention on this
issue. My country believes that the foreign military
presence in Afghanistan can and should play a more
proactive role in dealing with drug manufacture and
trafficking, particularly since they have assumed
responsibility for security in Afghanistan. Our
recommendations remain valid with respect to real-
time interaction on that track among our partners in
NATO, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and the
Collective Security Treaty Organization.

We are deeply concerned over the death of
civilians through the indiscriminate or disproportionate
use of force by military forces. Under the norms of
international humanitarian law, the responsibility for
guaranteeing the security of the civilian population lies
with all parties, including the international forces. The
Russian Federation will continue to favour the central
coordinating role of the United Nations in international
efforts to ensure a solution to the situation in
Afghanistan. Effective and impartial United Nations
support for the implementation of the provisions of the
outcome document of the Kabul Conference on Afghan
ownership of the country's administration will
guarantee long-term stability in Afghanistan.

Another important aspect of achieving long-term
stability is United Nations control of the manner in
which the international forces implement Security
Council mandates. Those forces are on Afghan territory
under the auspices of the Security Council and can
withdraw only pursuant to a decision of the Security
Council upon fulfilment of their mandate. They do not
have the right to leave Afghanistan without fulfilling
their anti-terrorism tasks or establishing an effective
Afghan army and police.

My country believes that the drawdown of United
States forces announced by United States President
Barack Obama will be offset by an increase in the
capacities of the Afghan National Security Forces,
which should be ready to control security and
effectively counter extremism and drug trafficking.

