Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I wish to thank you, Mr. President,
for giving us the opportunity to hold a cross-cutting
reflection on the subject of transitions. I also thank the
speakers for their informative contributions.

When speaking about transitions, it is indeed
essential to mention the importance of partnerships at
different levels among peace operations and myriad
actors. The drawdown or closure of a United Nations
mission and the transfer of its tasks and responsibilities
are complex processes. Our experience with Haiti
shows us that these processes must be preceded by an
evaluation mission. Moreover, an exit strategy with
specific benchmarks allows us to think about transition
from day one.

We must also ensure that United Nations dynamics
coherently integrate with regional and subregional
discussions. The example of the transition of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
illustrates that discrepancies may occur. National
ownership is a prerequisite for success, but it requires
the initial presence and functioning of State structures.

The transition of a peacekeeping mission to the
next phase depends on many factors, but the most
critical is capacity-building. Such a transition mainly
involves transferring duties to the authorities of the
host country. For the transfer to be effective, all United
Nations pillars - peace and security, socioeconomic
development and human rights - must be engaged.

Budgetary needs are important, and development
banks are required to support countries in transition.
I welcome the approaches of the World Bank and the
African Development Bank, which dedicate specific
strategies and enhanced resources to situations of
fragility and conflict. In addition, bilateral partnerships
with the private sector also make it possible to benefit
from other types of expertise. Work on governance,
including security sector reform, is also essential for
sustaining peace, rebuilding a strong social contract
and, where appropriate, laying the groundwork for the
exit strategy of a peacekeeping mission.

A successful and sustainable transition requires
addressing the root causes of conflict. In this regard,
Belgium and the European Union are taking a
comprehensive and integrated approach to United
Nations action on the ground, by taking into account
the full cycle of conflict and the various United
Nations actors. In addition to security sector reform,
the organization of free and fair elections, the criminal
justice system and transitional justice, education
and the inclusion of the most vulnerable groups also
play a key role in the transition process. Finally, the
authorities of a country in transition should not overlook
other conflict factors, such as competition for natural
resources. Such issues often transcend national borders
and are compounded by climate change.

The United Nations remains an essential partner
of countries in transition. The full implementation
of the various reforms of the United Nations system,
including management reform, will help to optimize
this partnership, and funding must also be secured.

I wish to conclude by commending the work
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and the
Peacebuilding Fund. For Belgium, the PBC represents
an example of integrating the United Nations pillars
and seeking effective synergies. The projects that it
funds demonstrate how the economic reintegration of
vulnerable people contributes to social cohesion and
peacebuilding. It is important that the Fund broaden
its support base. Belgium calls on Member States to
increase their contributions to it, and we advocate
stronger relations between the Fund and international
financial institutions.

Successful transitions to lasting peace require a
coherent and comprehensive approach to strengthening
the ownership processes of national authorities.

We wish to thank you again, Mr. President, for
convening this briefing.

