Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank the Deputy
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and the
Head of the African Union Military Observer Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM) for their briefings and for all of
the progress that they and their teams are making.

This is a well-timed meeting, coming as it does so
soon after the successful London Somalia Conference
last week on 11 May. We met at what is both a time
of struggle but also a time of hope for the people of
Somalia. The severe drought continues to cause daily
suffering. The risk of famine remains high. Yes, the
international community is making progress with
significant humanitarian pledges; but we cannot afford
to be complacent. There is still much more that needs to
be done if we are to avoid a famine.

In London last week the Secretary-General
presented a revised humanitarian response plan seeking
$1.5 billion dollars for 2017 in order to scale up the
United Nations response. We must work collectively to
help increase Somalia's long-term resilience at the same
time as tackling the immediate humanitarian needs.

Whereas the drought provides significant reasons
for concern, we also recognize that this is a period of
hope and optimism for Somalia. There has been good
progress on both political and security issues.

I was proud to attend the London Conference last
week, and I witnessed first-hand the renewed energy
and resolve of the Federal Government of Somalia and
of the federal member states to seize the opportunities
of this new Administration. I was also glad to see the
very strong commitment of Somalia's international
partners to supporting that progress in Somalia on
political and security issues, in a new partnership.

A crucial milestone was the conclusion of the
electoral process and the peaceful, swift transfer
of power, culminating in the appointment of a new
Government. That truly was a historic moment in
Somalia's emergence from conflict.

The new Government has set out its priorities,
and it is a daunting list ahead: responding to the
draught; tackling corruption; building Somalia's
security capacity to tackle Al-Shabaab; reforming the
Constitution; implementing the federalism project;
and rejuvenating the economy. Those are enormous
challenges ahead. However, last week I witnessed the
necessary political will to address them, as well as a
sense of momentum and energy that now needs to
translate into tangible progress.

The coming period will be about building a stable
federal settlement, most urgently in the area of security.
But we also need to ensure that commitments to address
fundamental constitutional issues on power and
resource-sharing are implemented and get the high-level
political attention thatthey need. Finding amodel to make
one-person one-vote elections a reality and agreeing an
electoral law by 2018 will not be straightforward; but
getting those things right will be essential for Somalia's
long-term stability. International-community support,
coordinated by AMISOM, will be needed to support
Somali decision-making.

We thank the Secretary-General for the strategic
review of the United Nations presence in Somalia to
ensure that the United Nations is best configured to
support this next chapter for Somalia. We agree with
its recommendations, in particular the emphasis on
supporting the federal member states to achieve more
inclusive, stable politics across the country.

Effective security will be essential to underpin
the political and economic progress and to prevent
recurring humanitarian crises. The security pact
agreed in London sets out the agreed version of Somali-
led security institutions and forces. They need to be
affordable, acceptable and accountable. They need to
have the ability to provide the security and protection
that the people of Somalia deserve and need, as part ofa
comprehensive approach to security. Implementing all
of this will be a key priority over the coming months.

On the international side, we need to coordinate
better, provide more coherent support and work
together to implement that Somali vision of security.
In the months ahead we will need strong political will
from Somalia to implement reforms together with the
continued support from the international community.
This is a moment of opportunity, and we look forward
to working alongside the United Nations, the African
Union, the European Union and all of Somalia's
partners and supporters to convert strong commitments
into action.

