Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): I thank Mr. Mamabolo and
Ms. Mueller, and also acknowledge the presence of His
Excellency Mr. Niels Annen.

First, with regard to the progress made in the
situation in the Sudan, we welcome the overall
improvement in security in Darfur, with the exception
of the hotspots in Jebel Marra, where the conflict
between the Government and the rebel forces of the
Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid persists. At
the same time, we are concerned about instances of
intercommunal violence and the destruction of farms,
reported in Central and North Darfur states.

I also express our deep concern about the increase
in criminal incidents victimizing internally displaced
persons, as well as the suspension of some humanitarian
activities and the restriction and denial of access to the
personnel of African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). Above all, however,
we are concerned about continuing reports of sexual
abuse against women and girls by uniformed military
personnel. It is regrettable that that remains an ongoing
feature of the conflict and that many such cases are not
reported by the victims for fear of reprisals. We reiterate
our call for the implementation of the framework for
cooperation between the Government of the Sudan and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict in order to respond to cases
of sexual and gender-based violence.

Secondly, we draw attention to the stalemate in
the peace process and the repercussions that current
events may have on it. Although the current political
dynamics raise challenges and uncertainty, it is crucial
that the process be put in motion to ensure the return
and relocation of displaced persons, the settlement
of land issues and the establishment of judicial
and reconciliation entities, as well as the Darfur
Reconstruction and Development Fund. There is an
urgent need for an open dialogue process to determine
the future interlocutors in the Government, both at the
national and the local levels, and to attribute national
ownership as a guarantee of the sustainability of
the process.

Thirdly, I express our concern about the recent
events in Khartoum and the consequent uncertainty
experienced by the Sudanese people. The Sudan is
facing a struggle in the midst of social protests and
disproportionate governmental reactions, with a toll
of dozens of dead and wounded, and, as often happens
in such processes, a high human cost. Every day we
hear stories like those of Babarki, a doctor who helped
wounded demonstrators at his home and was allegedly
executed, and Fatih, a university student was fatally
shot in the head. Those are tragic events involving a
people who ask only that their concerns be heard and
addressed. The Dominican Republic reiterates its call
for calm and that bloodshed be avoided at all costs.

The time has come to leverage this opportunity
for a democratic and peaceful transition and minimize
the possibility of a violent outcome. The Sudanese
people deserve not only an opportunity for political
and economic recovery but also to be recompensed for
their prolonged suffering within a reasonable amount
of time. The time has come to establish an inclusive
political system that upholds human rights and the
norms of international law, and above all that will
restore trust among Sudanese people.

We reiterate that the challenges facing the
Sudan should be resolved through consensus with
the participation of all actors, including the equal
participation of women, with a view to restoring
democratic order, good governance and the well-being
of the people. As the representative of the United
Kingdom rightly pointed out, we find ourselves at a
decisive moment in time. Any decision that is taken,
will leave its mark on the future of democracy for the
Sudanese people.

