Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank all of our briefers. The Russian Ambassador
spoke at length and in colourful and imaginative
language about many other actors as he introduced
the topic, but he said nothing about Russia's role. The
German Ambassador - an eyewitness to the Minsk
agreements - showed us why, with his account of the
events of the time and Russia's actions.

The United Kingdom welcomes this opportunity to
discuss the repeated violations of Ukraine's sovereignty
and territorial integrity at the hands of Russia. Russia's
aggression towards Ukraine is not limited to the Donbas
and Crimea. Russia seeks to undercut Ukraine at every
opportunity, undermining the ceasefire, supplying the
Russian-backed separatists with weapons and calling
illegitimate elections - all in breach of the Minsk
agreements. Those actions have a tragic impact on the
lives okarainian civilians. As the French Ambassador
said, in the five years since this conflict began, more
than 12,800 people have lost their lives. Almost 25,000
have been injured, and 3.4 million people are in need
of humanitarian assistance. Russia bears a heavy
responsibility for the ongoing loss of life.

Despite the parties recommitment to the ceasefire
on 29 December 2018, violations are increasing and there
continues to be military activity in the disengagement
zones. However, our understanding of the situation
within non-Government-controlled territory is limited
because the Special Monitoring Mission (SMM) of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
is unable to carry out its mandate. It is unable to do
so because of Russia's repeated refusal to support
the Special Monitoring Mission. That threatens the
ceasefire and ultimately the security of Ukraine and
the wider region. The raft of incidents that Russia has
yet to provide an explanation for only reinforces that
conclusion - for example, the downing of an SMM
long-range unmanned aircraft near the Ukraine-Russia
border, outside Ukraine Government control last
year. Just last week, the SMM. twice observed the use
of the Russian electronic jamming system Zhitel in
the Donbas. I would ask the Russian Ambassador to
ensure his country's support for the Special Monitoring
Mission and to allow its personnel to observe. I would
ask what people have to hide.

A further example of Russian attempts to
destabilize Ukraine is the illegitimate elections in
the non-Government-controlled territories of the
so-called Luhansk People's Republic and Donetsk
People's Republic in the Donbas in November 2018.
That represents a clear breach of the Minsk agreements
and unnecessarily increases tensions. Russia could
use its considerable influence on the Russian-backed
separatists to encourage them to comply with their
Minsk commitments. Instead, Russia fuels the
conflict by supplying weapons and personnel to the
armed formations.

Next month marks the fifth anniversary of the
illegal annexation of Crimea by Russia, and it is
worth reminding ourselves of the facts. In response to
Russia's plans for an illegal and illegitimate referendum
in Crimea, on 15 March 2014 the Security Council
voted on draft resolution S/2014/l89, which reaffirmed
the sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of
Ukraine, and noted that Ukraine had not authorized the
referendum and that it had no validity. Russia vetoed that
draft resolution. Following the illegal and illegitimate
referendum in Crimea on 16 March 2014, on 27 March
2014 the General Assembly adopted resolution 68/262,
which was supported by 100 member States and
affirmed the General Assembly's commitment to the
territorial integrity of Ukraine within its internationally
recognized borders and underscored the invalidity of
the referendum.

We object to the illegal annexation of Crimea not
only because it is illegal. We also object to it owing
to the Russian Government's appalling treatment of
many of those who live there. Human rights violations
are prevalent. Ethnic and religious groups such as the
Crimean Tatars are persecuted. Despite calls in the
relevant General Assembly resolutions for the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to
visit Crimea, Russia continues to refuse. We, the
international community, must stand united and call
on Russia to release all political prisoners and allow
urgently needed, unrestricted access for human rights
monitoring organizations immediately. Again, what
does the Russian Federation not want the world to see?

Less than three months ago, the Russian authorities
admitted to using force in the Black Sea to seize three
Ukrainian naval vessels, injuring three Ukrainian
servicemen. Those actions are not in conformity with
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea,
and they are a blatant attempt to destabilize Ukraine by
harming the economic activities of the other ports of
Berdyansk and Mariupol, hampering Ukraine's ability
to manage its economy.

Let me be clear. Russia's actions in Ukraine have
no basis in international law. We cannot and will not
ignore such actions. They represent a serious challenge
to the international rules-based order. This is an order
that benefits us all and keeps us safe. In order to protect
it, the international community must continue to stand
united and remain focused on Russia's behaviour and
its attempts to integrate Crimea into Russia, including
through the construction of a bridge across the
Kerch Strait.

In conclusion, I reiterate the United Kingdom's full
support for Ukraine's independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity, including within its internationally
recognized borders and territorial waters. We look
forward to discussing the situation in Ukraine further
at the forthcoming General Assembly debate on
20 February. I take note of the Russian Ambassador's
enthusiasm for Security Council meetings on Ukraine
and will look forward next time to hearing about what
Russia will be doing to meet its obligations and end to
the suffering of the people of Ukraine.

