Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Assistant Secretary-General Zerihoun and
Ambassador Vieira for their briefings.

China has closely followed recent developments
in the situation in Guinea-Bissau. We take note of the
special report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/1086)
on the strategic assessment of the work of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-
Bissau (UNIOGBIS) and its analysis and assessment
of the situation in the country. China commends
the mediation efforts undertaken by the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the
States of the region in promoting the political process
in Guinea-Bissau.

We take note of President Vaz's 20 December
announcement of 10 March 2019 as the new date for
legislative elections. We hope that the Bissau-Guinean
parties will work together to ensure that elections are
held on schedule and in a smooth manner. At the same
time, the international community should provide
technical, financial and logistical support for the
holding of the elections commensurate with the needs
of the Guinea-Bissau Government. The international
community should fully respect Guinea-Bissau's
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity.
The Bissau-Guinean parties should keep the long-term
interests oftheir State and people in mind, take concrete
actions with political decisiveness, build consensus,
resolve differences through dialogue and consultations
and work towards achieving a better quality of life for
their people and national stability and development.

As always, China supports African countries in
seeking African solutions to African issues. China
supports ECOWAS and the countries of the region in
continuing to mediate the situation on the ground and
play a constructive role in advancing the implementation
of the Conakry Agreement and the ECOWAS six-point
road map. We call on UNIOGBIS, the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel, the United Nations
country teams and other stakeholders to strengthen
coordination and collaboration with the relevant United
Nations agencies and build synergy with the African
Union, ECOWAS and the States of the region through
mediation efforts so that each party can leverage its
own strength and provide robust support for economic
development and the improvement of life in Guinea-
Bissau.

China stands ready to work with the rest of the
international community to promote dialogue and
engagement among the Bissau-Guinean parties and
play a constructive role in securing sustained stability
and development in Guinea-Bissau and West Africa,
in general.

