The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Ukraine.

Last year the Council organized meetings on the
implementation of presidential note S/2010/507 just
five times, and today is the first time this year that we
have held a meeting on the subject. I believe that we
should not judge the interest in the subject by those
numbers, since all of us are aware of the acute interest
in the Council's work on the part of the United Nations
general membership, which is very much apparent in
the corridors adjacent to this Chamber. We therefore
see real added value in endeavouring to improve the
format of the preparations for such meetings if we are
to make our deliberations more efficient and relevant.
In that spirit, the presidency has sought the input of
Member States to shape today's discussion. We leave
it up to future presidencies to continue and build on
the practice.

Despite the fact that February is the shortest
month of the year, it has been densely packed with
meetings and discussions, both in the Council and in
its subsidiary bodies. One of the highlights of our work
this month was the initiative that the Secretary-General
took to brief us on his participation in the African
Union Summit. Without going into the details of the
briefing, which was very informative and useful, we
believe that holding such meetings on a regular basis
would immensely strengthen the relationship between
the Council and the Secretary-General and thereby
benefit the whole United Nations family. We are also
looking forward to seeing the Secretary-General
continue to play a more proactive role in bringing
important issues of peace and security to the Security
Council's attention.

On 13 February, the Security Council held an open
debate (see S/PV.7882) on how we, as the international
community, should provide a fitting response to the
threat of terrorist attacks on critical infrastructure.
We hope that resolution 2341 (2017), adopted at that
meeting, will helpt to increase the effectiveness of
States' efforts in that area, and in particular in the
framework of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy. The subsequent discussion
clearly reflected demands from Member States for
significant improvements in the protection of critical
infrastructure - especially aviation and maritime
transportation, the nuclear industry, the finance sector
and cross-border projects - from terrorist threats both
physical and cyber. The question now is how thoroughly
we can all implement the resolution and what further
steps should be taken at the national, regional and
international levels. I take this opportunity to inform
the United Nations community that my country has
already started the process of implementing the
resolution through respective decisions of the President
and the National Security and Defence Council of
Ukraine from 16 February.

On 21 February, the Council engaged in another
open debate (see S/PV.7886) on the subject of conflicts
in Europe. While it is quite obvious that, at the moment,
it is rather hard to expect unity on the subject, a very
real deterioration of the security situation on the
European continent, with far-reaching repercussions
for global stability and security demands the most
urgent attention. We cannot afford to carry on in
blissful ignorance, hoping that somehow the problems
in question will simply disappear; they will not. Unless
diligently and properly addressed, they will continue
to fester and poison relations among States, further
endangering international peace and security.

Responding to inquiries from our colleagues
outside the Council on the work of the subsidiary
bodies, I will say a few words in the capacity of the
Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan and the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2127
(2013) concerning the Central African Republic. In
leading said Committees, I always strive to increase
efficiency and transparency of their work, maintain
constructive engagement with the Governments of
countries concerned through their Permanent Missions
here in New York, facilitate the work of their respective
Panels of Experts and keep communication channels
open with all interested parties. One of my most
immediate plans at this point is to conduct a visit to
Darfur to have discussions with Sudanese authorities
and United Nations entities on how to further improve
the Committee's work.

Following respective requests by a number of
Member States, allow me to make several comments
regarding the working methods of the Security Council
in February. Like many others, Ukraine is quite
concerned that despite the commitment to making
greater use of open meetings, there is a marked increase
in the number of informal consultations that the Council
holds. From the very beginning of preparing the
programme of work for February, my delegation strived
to plan most of the briefings in open Chamber. While
in the end, it was not possible to change established
practice, we are grateful to Council members for their
general support for such an approach and we hope that
in the future, the format of consultations will gradually
become less ofa rule and give way to open meetings.

As one of my colleagues pointed out during one
of the consultations, abstaining from communicating
States' positions in public statements in the Chamber on
any given subject can send the wrong signal to parties
concerned. Sometimes, that kind of silence from the
Council can be misinterpreted, resulting in unintended
consequences. The Council has to find a balance
between the confidentiality of informal consultations
and the need to maintain a maximum degree ofopenness.
Therefore, in line with President's note S/2015/507, we
encourage future presidencies to continue briefing the
media and the public after informal consultations with
short summaries. We have tried to do so throughout the
month and we would like to encourage those following
us to further perfect that practice.

In preparation for Council's country-specific
deliberations in February, I held meetings of the
presidency with parties concerned before the
Council's meetings or consultations. We consider it
very important for the presidency to hear their Views,

concerns, ideas, requests or expectations, as such
advanced knowledge would contribute to shaping the
Council's discussions accordingly.

In conclusion, I thank Council members for their
kind words addressed to my team and me. If we were
successful in presiding over the Council, it is because
we enjoyed its cooperation and had its support. To
my friend Ambassador Matthew Rycroft, as well as

the delegation of the United Kingdom, who will be
moving into this scat ofresponsibility in a few hours, I
would like to convey a message of our unequivocal and
full support.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

The meeting rose at 11.25 am.
