The President: I shall now make a statement in
my national capacity.

I wish to express my sincere thanks for the kind
words addressed to me and to my fellow members of
the Greek delegation by other Council members.

Many thanks to the Secretary-General for the
statement he made earlier, which accurately depicts the
critical situation in Darfur. Today's discussion has once
again highlighted the need for the Security Council to
act immediately to avert an unprecedented
humanitarian crisis with potential spillover effects on
the whole region. I welcome the participation of the
African Union (AU), the League of Arab States and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC).

During the past few weeks, we have been
witnessing the serious deterioration of both the
humanitarian situation and the security situation. On
the one hand, the Government of the Sudan is building
up its military forces for a possible wider offensive. As
we have stated on other occasions in the Council, any
attempt to implement the Darfur Peace Agreement
(DPA) by force will inevitably aggravate the situation.
On the other hand, the non-signatories of the DPA
appear determined to seek a military showdown with
the Government. It is therefore no surprise that the
political process has stalled and that no serious
political dialogue is taking place between the two
sides.

The situation just described, compounded by the
already dire humanitarian situation, has brought Darfur
to the brink of total collapse, touching what some have
called the Rwanda threshold. Tellingly, during the past
few weeks, the number of gross violations of human
rights, including rapes, has risen to emergency levels.
The number of internally displaced persons has risen
by 50,000, while humanitarian access has been
severely restricted owing to the fact that humanitarian
workers are targeted; in July alone, nine humanitarian
workers were killed.

The members of the Security Council stand
united in believing that that situation is unacceptable
and that it must be urgently addressed. The response by
the Council, but also by the international community as
a whole, should involve persuading Khartoum to
accept a United Nations deployment, reviving the
African Union Mission in the Sudan (AMIS) and
applying pressure on the non-signatories to participate
in the DPA.

Eleven days ago, the Council adopted resolution
1706 (2006), which provides for the expansion of the
mandate of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan
(UNMIS) to Darfur. Regrettably, the Government of
the Sudan has not accepted the resolution and
continues to publicly oppose it. The ongoing
diplomatic efforts should continue and intensify so that
the Government of the Sudan is persuaded to reverse
its decision. In that respect, consultations with other
stakeholders, such as the AU, the Arab League and the
OIC, are also particularly important.
22

The main objective of resolution 1706 (2006) is
to protect civilians in Darfur and to assist the people of
Sudan in implementing the DPA, thus contributing to
the restoration of peace and national reconciliation in
the country. Therefore, any fears as to the real
objectives of the resolution are unfounded and should
be dispelled. In addition, the presence and the
reinforcement of AMIS are of the utmost importance,
not only to address the present crisis, but also to
prepare for a United Nations deployment in January
2007. In that context, we look forward to the decisions
to be taken by the AU Peace and Security Council on
18 September here in New York.

Finally, in the coming weeks, efforts should be
made to persuade the non-signatories to get on board
and sign the DPA. The DPA, despite its shortcomings,
is the only agreement on the table that includes the
vital components for a long-term solution of the Darfur
crisis. It must therefore be implemented in its entirety,
not selectively.

We believe that the Council must intensify its
efforts to resolve the present crisis and use all the tools
at its disposal, including the mechanism provided for in
resolution 1591 (2005). At the same time, all members
with influence should spare no effort to bring about a
solution, which should be directed primarily at saving
lives and ensuring the necessary humanitarian access to
those in need.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.10p.m.
06-51559
