Ms. Goldsmith-Jones (Canada): Twenty years
ago, when the protection of civilians agenda was
first introduced in the Security Council, Mr. Lloyd
Axworthy, then Canadian Minister for Foreign Affairs,
said that the ultimate aim of the Council's work was
to safeguard the security of the world's people, not
just the States in which they live. That continues to be
true today. Canada is proud to have played a pivotal
role in establishing the protection of civilians agenda
as a core tenet of the Council's work. It was a paradigm
shift in how the Council saw international peace and
security, and important progress has been made over
those 20 years.

We commend the Council's efforts on children and
armed conflict; women and peace and security; conflict
prevention and accountability; and the mainstreaming
of the protection of civilians agenda throughout
peacekeeping mandates and training, as well as in the
context of sanctions regimes. Those developments have
saved lives and brought hope to people in their darkest
hours. However, I think we all know that significant
gaps persist.

Civilians continue to account for the vast majority
of casualties in armed conflict, including in Yemen,
Syria, Myanmar, South Sudan, the Central African
Republic and the Lake Chad Basin countries. Unlawful
attacks against civilians are a clear Violation of
international humanitarian law and an assault on the
rules-based international order.

Canada is alarmed that, despite resolution 2286
(2016), violence directed against humanitarian
personnel has increased, including the targeting of
medical personnel and facilities, as well as schools.
Recent weeks have seen a shocking number of attacks
on hospitals and health facilities in Idlib, Syria. Canada
condemns these attacks and calls on those responsible
to ensure fundamental protection to civilians caught in
that conflict.

Canada is outraged by the use of sexual and gender-
based violence as a tactic of war. As we noted in the
Council last month, we have to ensure that robust legal
and institutional arrangements are in place to address
sexual and gender-based violence in armed conflict
and that steps are taken to investigate and prosecute
perpetrators. Canada is participating in that kind
of activity.

In this Chamber and in the field, Canada has a
proven track record of advancing the protection of
civilians. During our presidency ofthe Group of Seven,
we championed the implementation of international
humanitarian law through partner organizations. We
believe that the protection of all civilians requires
gender-responsive approaches. This includes
humanitarian action, which now responds to the
increased insecurity and threats that women and girls
and other groups - including lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender and intersex persons - often face during
armed conflict. Improved access to comprehensive
sexual and reproductive health services remains a
non-negotiable component of an effective response.
This also includes the meaningful participation
of women and girls in decision-making processes,
including access for local women's organizations,
which know best.

Canada is also advancing the protection of
civilians agenda through our renewed approach to
peacekeeping. Following the launch of the Vancouver
Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the
Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers, we are leading a
multi-stakeholder process to help translate that political
commitment into meaningful action. Continuing our
long-standing support for mine action, Canada remains
firmly committed to advancing the goals of the Ottawa
Convention and to achieving a world free of landmines
by 2025.

Canada urges the Council to advocate, unequivocally,
for compliance with international humanitarian law
and to condemn violations when they occur. We need
to continue to pursue accountability measures. The
Council must also advance the gendered dimensions
of the protection of civilians agenda, not only sexual
violence in conflict, but also the differential impacts
of armed conflict on women and girls and other groups
that face gender-based discrimination and violence. We
must hear their voices; we must meet their needs.

(spoke in French)

As the lead of the Call to Action on Protection
from Gender-Based Violence in Emergencies, Canada
urges the Council to ensure greater accountability
for the perpetrators of gender-based violence and
support efforts at the international level and in
the field. As local communities are the first to be
affected by conflict, the Council should encourage the
establishment of local-level alert networks, conflict-
resolution, mediation and reconciliation. Canada urges
the Council to preserve humanitarian space in counter-
terrorism contexts, in accordance with international
humanitarian law, international human rights law and
international refugee law.

The protection of civilians agenda must also be
consistently applied to peacekeeping. This means
adequate resourcing for peacekeeping missions,
including for advisers for the protection of civilians,
child protection, women's protection and gender. It also
means promoting best practices in performance and
accountability in the implementation of protection of
civilians in peacekeeping operations.

The next 20 years will test the international
community's commitment to the protection of civilians
agenda. We thank Indonesia for convening today's
debate and providing the protection of civilians agenda
the attention it merits. The Council can count on Canada
to continue to be a steadfast advocate for respect for
international humanitarian law, with civilians at the
centre of our protection efforts.

