Mr. McNee (Canada): I thank you, Mr. President,
for the opportunity to speak on this important subject.
Canada continues to support the Government and the
people of Afghanistan in forging a stable country and a
peaceful future. I would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for his honest
and insightful briefing today and for his deep
commitment to Afghanistan and the United Nations
Mission.

Canada also welcomes the Secretary-General's
recent report (S/2009/ 135), which offers a frank
assessment of the situation. The report outlines some of
the progress made, with Afghans and the international
community working together to strengthen institutions,
fight terrorism, stem narcotics production and improve
lives by providing education, health services and
agricultural assistance.

For its part, Canada has restructured its own
efforts - military and civilian - to focus on six
priority areas with clear objectives, making our
engagement more focused and effective. We view those
priorities as key to the progressive transfer of authority
to Afghans.

In particular, Canada is helping to improve the
capabilities of the Afghan national security forces. We
are also continuing to rehabilitate the Dahla dam and
irrigation system in Kandahar, which will improve the
lives of thousands of Kandahari farmers and their
families, and we are building and rehabilitating
schools. Canada has also facilitated an Afghan-
Pakistani dialogue on border security, and we are
working with the United Nations to help Afghans to
prepare for the presidential and provincial council
elections this year.

The Secretary-General reminds us of the many
challenges ahead, including rising violence and
widespread corruption. Those challenges must continue
to be met by the Afghan people, the Afghan Government
and the international community with determination,
unity of purpose and a will to act swiftly.

Canada welcomes Special Representative Eide's
pledge to strengthen the United Nations presence
throughout the country. In our view, that means
strengthening existing regional and provincial offices
and opening new ones where necessary.

Canada looks forward to positive results
stemming from the new integrated approach, which
brings the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF), the Government of
Afghanistan and others together in the planning and
coordination of security, development and governance
initiatives in key districts. Canada stands ready to work
closely with UNAMA on that new approach. We are
also committed to working with Special Representative
Eide to ensure that UNAMA continues to deliver on its
mandate, fulfilling its role as adviser, coordinator and
leader of the civilian international mission.

In that context, we note with appreciation
UNAMA's progress over the past year in streamlining
coordination structures in Kabul, as well as in creating
an aid-effectiveness unit. We also look forward to
enhanced coordination on the ground to ensure that
immediate humanitarian needs are met effectively.
UNAMA's mandate is sufficiently robust to address the
challenges that Afghanistan faces, and its increased
resources will now allow for more action. We look
forward to receiving regular reports on the progress
that UNAMA is accomplishing in implementing its
mandate.

The Government of Afghanistan, UNAMA and
the international community must now demonstrate
results to the people of Afghanistan in order to restore
their faith in their own institutions and in their own
capacity to build a better future.

In order to demonstrate those results, the United
Nations must ensure a strong presence throughout
Afghanistan. That is particularly important in the area
of humanitarian assistance. Canada welcomes the
deployment of additional United Nations humanitarian
officers to Kabul and hopes that that will soon be
followed by a reinforcement of the United Nations
humanitarian presence in the provinces, where it is
most needed. To maintain credibility with the Afghan
people, the United Nations must broaden its reach and
ensure the timely and appropriate delivery of
humanitarian aid.

Expanded civilian-led humanitarian action -
notably in aid delivery - is increasingly challenging,
given the rise in violent incidents involving civilians
and the targeting of civilian aid workers. Advocating
for international humanitarian law and the importance
of respecting humanitarian space will remain a priority.

In that respect, we urge increased coordination
among the United Nations, ISAF, the Government of
Afghanistan and the international community. Full,
safe and unhindered humanitarian access throughout
Afghanistan for neutral and impartial humanitarian
actors is critical to ensuring that emergency needs can
be met.

The Secretary-General has noted that 2009 is a
critical year for Afghanistan, with the upcoming
elections of particular significance. The international
community has a crucial role to play in helping
Afghans to conduct those elections. Successful
elections will be a result of national and international
coordination and cooperation, including international
monitoring, as well as voter access and security. First
and foremost, in cooperation with the Independent
Electoral Commission, we must help to ensure that the
elections are credible in the eyes of the Afghan people.

The Secretary-General has noted some
encouraging news in Afghanistan: institutions are
being strengthened, and the Afghan National Army is
being expanded and is becoming more autonomous.
The fight against illegal narcotics is progressing, with
the crop of poppies expected to be reduced
substantially this year. That is indeed heartening, but
the fight against narcotics production must not end
with poppy eradication. It is also important to
emphasize alternative livelihood programmes to
provide increasingly diverse economic opportunities.

(spoke in French)

Canada is working with the Afghan Government,
the United Nations, ISAF and the international
community to resolve the many problems still
threatening Afghanistan. Most of those problems,
including narcotics and the lack of legitimate economic
opportunities, can be sustainably addressed only
through regional cooperation.

We welcome the fact that the international
community recognizes the regional dimension of the
challenges facing Afghanistan. We urge all regional
partners to cooperate on economic and security issues
as a top priority. Given the challenges facing Pakistan,
mutual efforts by Afghanistan's neighbours are more
essential than ever to the stability of the region.
Canada would appreciate greater United Nations
leadership on regional coordination issues, as such
coordination is essential to the coherence of regional
and international efforts.
The efforts of the international community are
aimed at helping the Afghan Government to assume
responsibility for rebuilding the country. Afghans must
be able to have confidence in their institutions and
their Government. In order to inspire and nourish such
hope, the international community's efforts must be
swift, effective, ambitious and responsible.

Finally, Canada takes this opportunity to
commend the hard work and dedication of United
Nations personnel and other civilian workers in
Afghanistan. Their courage and commitment in the
face of dangerous working conditions is a source of
inspiration. Permit me to conclude by reaffirming
Canada's commitment to the people of Afghanistan and
to the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan.

