Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt): At the outset, I would like
to congratulate France on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council this month, and I thank the French
Mission for its timely choice of this topic.

The latest world events have shown that children
are the most affected by the consequences of armed
conflict, a situation worsened by the involvement
of non-State terrorist armed groups. There is a trend
among such groups to abduct children in order to terrify
both Governments and populations. Those children are
sexually abused, injured, maimed or even killed. They
are also used as combatants for those groups. It is not
only abduction; unfortunately, children are persuaded
to join those terrorist groups because of economic,
social and security pressures.

While we celebrate this year the tenth anniversary
of resolution 1612 (2005) and the first anniversary of
the campaign "Children, Not Soldiers", and despite
the great efforts exerted by Governments and different
United Nations agencies to reverse the negative impacts
of terrorist acts of those groups on children, that
negative trend is increasing steadily. In that context,
Egypt would like to stress the following points.

First, we condemn all forms of violence against
children by terrorist armed groups in Syria, Iraq,
Somalia, Central Africa, Nigeria, South Sudan, Libya
and other countries.

Secondly, there is a wide gap between the adoption
of relevant Security Council resolutions and their
implementation. In that regard, Egypt proposes the
establishment of a more coordinated and consolidated
system to collect proper data and monitor the
implementation of the relevant resolutions. That new
system should include the updating of resolution 1612
(2005) to encompass non-State terrorist armed groups.

Thirdly, more efforts should be exerted regarding
transitional justice measures in order to bring the
perpetrators of such acts against children to justice,
with special focus on providing the necessary treatment
for children affected by such experiences, especially
girls.

Fourthly, affected children must be rehabilitated
and reintegrated economically, socially and culturally
in society in order to avoid their re-recruitment by the
same or other groups.

Fifthly, more financial resources must be secured
for the expeditious implementation of the children and
armed conflicts agenda.

Sixthly, discussions within the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations should continue so as
to find the best solutions to the challenges facing
peacekeeping missions in providing full protection for
children in armed conflicts.

The primary responsibility for protecting civilians,
including children, falls on countries, in accordance
with the various universally agreed legal instruments
and relevant Security Council resolutions. Based on
that conviction, Egypt believes that dealing with the
root causes of such conflicts, including poverty and
social exclusion, is the sole solution to any conflict.
There is no single formula for that solution. It should be
designed by each State in accordance with its priorities,
resources and national strategy in order to guarantee
national ownership of that solution and maintain
societal stability at the end.

We reiterate Egypt's position in unequivocally
condemning all acts of terrorism, in all its forms
and manifestations, irrespective of its motivation
and objectives, and regardless of the nature of its
perpetrators, whether they are individuals, groups
or States. No sustainable development agenda can be
properly applied, given the increasing rates ofinsecurity
for our children, who are our coming generations.

