Mr. Ould Ely (Mauritania)(interpretation from French): I wish first, on behalf of my delegation, to
congratulate you most warmly, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
May 1995. I am sure that your experience and skill will
ensure the success of the Council's deliberations. My
confidence in you is made even stronger by the important
role that France, this friendly country, is playing in the
maintenance of international peace and security.

I take this opportunity also to thank your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of the Czech
Republic, His Excellency Mr. Karel Kovanda, on the
efficient and skilful way in which he guided the Council's
work in April.

As is known, the political decision of the Arab
States to begin negotiations with Israel was a decision
based on Security Council resolutions 242 (1969) and 338
(1973) and on the principle of land for peace.

The decision of the Government of Israel to begin
negotiations with the Palestine Liberation Organization
(PLO) and the signature of the Declaration of Principles
by the two parties strengthened confidence in the peace
process.

But now the Council is meeting today in the wake
of the recent decision by the Government of Israel to

 

confiscate 53 hectares of Palestinian land in occupied East
Jerusalem. This action, which has aroused almost universal
disapproval and has had a negative impact on the fragile
peace process in the Middle East, is a blatant and flagrant
violation of the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949, United
Nations resolutions and the Declaration of Principles on
Interim Self-Government Arrangements, signed on
13 September 1993. What is more, the decision runs
counter to the norms of international conduct, the United
Nations Charter and the rules and principles of international
law. Far from promoting the emergence of a climate of
confidence in the difficult negotiations now under way, it
is yet another obstacle on the path towards an overall
settlement of the question of the Middle East.

That is why the Islamic Republic of Mauritania - as
many other countries have already done - strongly
condemns the Israeli decision, which aspires to present the
international community with a fait accompli and, by so
doing, continues to turn a blind eye to the feelings and
aspirations of the immense majority of the world's peoples.

True, there has been a great deal of progress since
the Madrid Peace Conference over three years ago.
Negotiation and respect for the norms and principles of
international law were in the process of ousting the
tension and violence the peoples of the Middle East had
suffered under for so long. But today the peace process is
at a critical stage: the Security Council must take urgent
steps to address these serious violations of international
law. Progress in, indeed the success of the peace process
depend to a large extent on the political will and the
commitment of the two parties to fulfil the undertakings
they have put their names to. Unilateral actions such as
the one that brings us here today cannot but arouse
suspicion and doubt, and undermine the aspirations of the
peoples of the region for peace and concord.

