Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation wishes in turn to welcome Mr. Kanat
Saudabayev, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Kazakhstan, and to thank him for the information he
has shared with us on cooperation between the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and the United Nations and on the priorities he
is seeking to promote in his capacity as Chairman-in-
Office of that organization.
Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter
provides the appropriate framework for promoting the
greater participation of regional organizations in
matters related to international peace and security.
Indeed, over the past two decades, the Security Council
has increasingly turned to regional organizations in
respect ofissues of peace, security and development.

In Africa and Europe, in recent years regional
organizations have shown renewed determination to
address internal conflicts that can affect security on
their continents, as well as to promote development.
That is the important role played by the OSCE, a
geographically and politically diverse entity with 19
operations of various kinds in the field.

During the month of January, the Security
Council held a thematic debate on cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations in maintaining international peace and
security. At that meeting, we noted that the activities of
regional organizations, with their early warning and
prevention mechanisms, can prove to be decisive in the
early stages of a conflict in averting larger-scale action
by the international community as a whole. We also
stressed that the capacity of such organizations to
promote peaceful conflict resolution and their
knowledge of the underlying causes of various
conflicts give them a comparative advantage. We
therefore welcome the OSCE efforts to prevent
conflicts and to manage crisis situations and post-
conflict and national reconstruction phases.

We think it is important that the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe is promoting
among its members the ratification of the relevant
United Nations instruments and the implementation of
Security Council resolutions in the areas of combating
terrorism and non-proliferation. That is a good practice
that can be followed by other regional organizations.
We also believe that the full implementation of Council
resolutions on the protection of women and children
should also be promoted, and we welcome the OSCE's
interest in strengthening its relationship with the
United Nations in the areas of protecting human rights
and strengthening the rule of law.

We welcome as well the efforts made to
strengthen the broad-based architecture for security
cooperation among OSCE countries by pursuing the
so-called Corfu process. Also in the area of security,
OSCE cooperation with the relevant Security Council
committees seems to us to be especially important, in
particular with the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), on non-proliferation.

In conclusion, I would like to point out that this
format of periodic dialogue between the Security
Council and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe is a model that should be
explored vis-a-vis other regional and subregional
organizations, all the while paying particular attention
to preventive, early warning and crisis management
approaches and to the areas of negotiation, mediation
and conciliation, with a view to resolving regional
conflicts.

