Mr. Djinnit: The second report of the Secretary-
General on the activities of the United Nations Office
for West Africa (UNOWA) (S/2009/39), which is being
presented to the Council today, focuses on cross-
cutting and cross-border developments in West Africa
and the activities UNOWA has undertaken since my
last presentation to the Council in July. As a relatively
small special political mission with a unique regional
mandate, UNOWA does not always get the exposure it
deserves, and I am grateful for this opportunity to
present its work to the Council.

Despite significant progress made in
consolidating peace and stability in West Africa, many
challenges remain that threaten to derail these positive
developments. In addition to well-known problems
2
facing the region, such as youth unemployment, rapid
urbanization, corruption and irregular migration, many
of the root causes of conflict in a number of West
African countries have yet to be addressed in an
effective and durable manner.

In the past six months, West Africa has continued
to be heavily affected by rising global food prices and
food insecurity, compounded by threats of a global
recession, raising new concerns about many countries'
prospects for achieving the Millennium Development
Goals. It is expected that food insecurity will remain a
special challenge to the region over the next few years.
In response to that potential threat to stability, UNOWA
actively advocates with the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) and West African
leaders regarding the need to take proactive and
collective measures to achieve food security. The food
crisis also remains a permanent item on the agenda of
the regular meetings among the heads of United
Nations agencies in West Africa convened by UNOWA.

Another particular concern is the spread of cross-
border organized crime, especially drug trafficking.
Taking advantage of porous borders and weak State
and security institutions, criminal networks are
increasingly using West Africa as a transit route for
narcotics bound for Europe from Latin America. While
criminal networks operated mostly with the complicity
of low-level authorities in the past, today they are
infiltrating State institutions, fuelling corruption and
destabilizing the political and social fabric of nations.
UNOWA has therefore stepped up its activities, raising
awareness at all levels of leadership about the harmful
impact of organized crime on governance and security.
In conjunction with the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime and ECOWAS, UNOWA is also
expected to play a lead role in coordinating United
Nations inputs into the implementation of the recently
adopted ECOWAS Action Plan on drug trafficking.

While West Africa has made considerable
progress in consolidating democratic governance, the
process suffered major setbacks over the past six
months in Mauritania and Guinea, both of which
experienced military coups. There were also renewed
attempts on the life of the President of Guinea-Bissau
from within the country's armed forces. The fact that
the coups in Mauritania and Guinea were bloodless is
positive. If, however, the resurgence of coups is not
addressed in a decisive manner, their potential domino
effect across the region should not be underestimated.
09-21525
UNOWA has endeavoured to foster constructive
dialogue among national, regional and international
partners and continues to work to facilitate a return to
constitutional order in Mauritania and Guinea within
the shortest possible time frame. In parallel, an
important role that UNOWA can play, together with
ECOWAS, is to engage countries of the region in
preventive diplomacy, confidence-building and, if
necessary, mediation efforts.

Electoral processes and the opportunities and
risks that they present are another priority area for the
region and for UNOWA. While countries such as
Liberia, Sierra Leone, Guinea-Bissau and Ghana have
provided encouraging examples of peaceful and
transparent elections, democratization processes could,
if not properly managed, trigger political violence,
economic disruption and social strife in fragile
societies in the region. Critical elections are envisaged
in 2009 in Mauritania, Guinea, Cote d'Ivoire and the
Niger. Continued partnership among the United
Nations, the African Union and ECOWAS will be
required to increase the likelihood that electoral
processes in the region will be peaceful, transparent,
free and fair.

The situation in the fragile Sahel band continues
to be a source of concern. UNOWA continues to
closely monitor the mediation process related to the
rebellion in northern Mali and the situation in the
Niger, including the ongoing efforts to convene a
regional summit on peace, security and development in
Mali.

The role and the capacities of security sector
institutions remain major sources of concern in many
West African countries. Security sector reform must be
seen as a key component of any peacebuilding strategy,
with ECOWAS playing a lead role and with the full
support of the international community, including the
United Nations. In November in Conakry, Guinea,
UNOWA initiated a useful regional discussion on the
role of the security sector in electoral processes. Joint
efforts will need to be undertaken by ECOWAS, the
United Nations and other partners to build on that
positive experience so that countries in the region can
develop a broader security sector reform agenda.

As members are aware, a pivotal role of UNOWA
is to promote concerted subregional approaches to
peace and security both within the United Nations
system and with ECOWAS. In that regard, I am
encouraged by the arrangements and effective
partnerships developed over the past year with all
United Nations entities operating in the subregion and
the enthusiasm shown in situating their individual
activities within the larger United Nations strategic
objective in support of peace and stability in West
Africa.

Finally, in my capacity as Chairman of the
Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission, my team and I
continue to provide support to the delimitation and
demarcation process along the Cameroon-Nigeria
boundary. Following the successful completion, on
14 August 2008, of the transfer of authority in the
Bakassi peninsula from Nigeria to Cameroon, in
accordance with the June 2006 Greentree Agreement,
their efforts are now focused on expediting the
boundary demarcation process, promoting confidence-
building measures between the two countries and
addressing the needs of affected populations.

