Mr. Choi Young-jin (Republic of Korea): Post-
conflict peacebuilding is a major challenge to the
responsibility of the United Nations for ensuring global
peace and security. In war-torn countries around the
world, peace, development, human rights and
democracy are threatened by the possibility of
recurring or rekindled conflicts. Those conflicts can
spill over all too easily into neighbouring countries,
damaging regional peace and stability. In our
interdependent world, Member States have an ever
higher stake in curbing instability and mitigating the
human tragedy brought on by recurrent conflicts.

That is why the States Members of the United
Nations, in a manifestation of their collective will and
wisdom, created the Peacebuilding Commission - to
improve the coordination of all relevant actors within
and outside the United Nations in helping post-conflict
societies to successfully navigate the often treacherous
path from conflict to sustainable peace. The
Commission is thus designed to fill a critical gap by
linking the United Nations peacekeeping and
peacebuilding activities as seamlessly as possible.

My delegation notes with satisfaction that, since
the creation of the Commission, two country-specific
meetings have already been held, on Burundi and
Sierra Leone, at which guidelines were developed for
the allocation of Peacebuilding Fund resources to those
two States. My delegation believes that those outcomes
demonstrate the value and viability of the Commission.

Going forward, we expect the Commission to continue
to grow its role in the development of holistic,
synergistic strategies to coordinate the work of the
Security Council, the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council and other actors.

It goes without saying that effective
peacebuilding requires adequate financial resources.
Currently available resources should be used as
efficiently as possible, but greater resources are clearly
needed. My delegation hopes that, as the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Peacebuilding Fund fulfil their
mandates and prove their worth, Member States will
recognize their achievements by increasing their
contributions to the Fund. The Peacebuilding Fund
should also play a catalytic role in responding to the
initial needs of post-conflict societies, sustaining
international attention and initiating inflows of
financial resources from the international community
to help with rebuilding and development.

National ownership is another crucial element of
post-conflict peacebuilding efforts, which should serve
the needs of the people on the ground. Nevertheless, as
has often been pointed out, there are sometimes post-
conflict situations in which national authorities are not
able to participate meaningfully in peacebuilding
efforts. While national ownership should be ensured as
much as possible, peacebuilding efforts should also
address situations where there is a lack of competent
national authority.

The Republic of Korea has demonstrated its
support for peacebuilding through its participation in
United Nations activities in East Timor and other post-
conflict situations. As a further demonstration of that
support, we have contributed $3 million to the
Peacebuilding Fund. We are hopeful that the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding
Fund will have a significant impact on international
peacebuilding efforts, and we pledge to continue to
contribute to the peacebuilding work of the United
Nations in the years ahead.

