Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank today's briefers, and to pay special tribute to
Ms. Fatima Askira for the bravery she represents and
the inspiration she gives to many.

The United Kingdom is taking the floor in this
afternoon's open meeting because we believe we
cannot afford to stay silent on this issue, as Ms. Power
has so clearly articulated. We have just heard that
the humanitarian situation in the Lake Chad basin is
simply horrifying. More than 11 million people are in
need of humanitarian assistance. More than 2 million
are displaced in north-eastern Nigeria alone, with
hundreds of thousands more in the Niger, Cameroon
and Chad. And it will only get worse. In a matter of
months, supplies from the poor harvest will begin to
run out, further compounding a disastrous situation.

Behind the suffering of the millions of men,
women and children in the Lake Chad basin lie the
brutality and unrelenting cruelty of Boko Haram.
The group is a clear threat to international peace
and security, and we have a clear responsibility to
take action in response. That action will require a
sustained, multi-year international effort to address
the overwhelming humanitarian need and the drivers
of conflict that have helped Boko Haram flourish in
the first place. We must therefore up our game. I call
on donors, Governments in the region and international
non-governmental organizations to act with urgency
to step up their efforts. Collectively, our response so
far has frankly been inadequate and underfunded. The
United Nations has called for $1 billion for Nigeria and
$310 for Cameroon. The United Kingdom will do its bit.
In September, we announced an additional $97 million
in humanitarian aid for the region on top of our existing
multi-year commitment of $110 million. I hope that
others will join us.

But money alone is not enough. We must also see
strong, effective leadership, both from Governments in
the region and from the United Nations. We look to the
Organization to increase its capacity in the Lake Chad
basin and develop multi-year plans, coordinated across
borders, to aid recovery. We in this Chamber must also
show leadership ourselves. A Security Council visit
to the region in the coming weeks would be a signal
of that leadership and a chance for all of us to see at
first hand the challenges the region is facing. One
such is the worrying report of forcibly incentivized
returns of displaced people to areas that remain unsafe.
When one has fled murder or enslavement, it is simply
unthinkable to be forced back to the scene of that horror,
and unthinkable to be lied to or coerced into returning.
All the parties to the conflict have a responsibility to
respect international conventions on returns and on
the protection of civilians more broadly. I urge them
to do so.

Ultimately, a humanitarian response is just one part
of the solution. It is a vital part, of course, but it must
be delivered hand in hand with a coherent security,
political and economic response as well. There is
little sense in healing the wounds of conflict without
addressing its root causes. Let us therefore call on all
Governments in the region to win the peace - to tackle
underdevelopment and other conflict drivers, and to do
so in a way that respects international humanitarian
and human-rights laws. That means doing so for all
people in the region and making sure that women have
an equal say and an equal role in reaching that peace.
It is vital that strategies for tackling Boko Haram
include women's voices. That includes all efforts to free
the remaining Chibok girls, and also when providing
protection for women affected by sexual and gender-
based violence.

I would like to conclude by turning to Maiduguri
in north-eastern Nigeria. We raised the subject of the
plight of displaced people in that city six months ago,
when we last discussed this issue (see S/PV.7748).
Six months on, the situation remains desperate. More
than 1 million displaced people now call Maiduguri
home. The cost of food has doubled in the past year.
Disease and hunger are all too common. But there are
signs of hope. In the past three months, Medecins Sans
Frontieres (MSF) has delivered 810 tons of food to
Maiduguri. As the head of the MSF mission there made
clear, it is not normally the role of a medical charity to
provide people with food. But faced with a desperate
need, MSF stepped up to help. That is the spirit that we
should all channel in the weeks and months ahead if we
are to end the catastrophe in the Lake Chad basin.

