Mr. Al-Dosari (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like at the outset to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Ibrahima Fall for his excellent briefing on the situation in
Burundi.

It is regrettable that the situation in Burundi in all its
aspects - political, economic and humanitarian - is
deteriorating in a most dangerous and adverse manner.
The death of Mwalimu Nyerere has left a vacuum in the
political arena of Burundi, and we believe this to be a
major factor in the deteriorating situation in Burundi.
However, it is not the principal factor.

With his experience and wisdom, the Facilitator
Mwalimu Nyerere was able to some extent to calm the
situation in Burundi by bringing the parties to the conflict
to the negotiating table and involvement in the Arusha
peace process. However, it seems that the political
partners, as Mr. Fall called them, did not have the
necessary political will to reach an agreement on national
reconciliation that would respect the fundamental rights of
all citizens, regardless of their ethnic origin. The slow
progress made so far in the peace process, which had
been taking place under the leadership of Mwalimu
Nyerere, makes clear that lack of political will.

My delegation calls on all the parties to choose
peace as a means of settling their differences. The
international community will not permit the use of force
to settle the crisis in Burundi. In this context, we call on
the parties to end all acts of violence likely to exacerbate
the crisis in Burundi, cause delay in the peace process
and, indeed, undermine it. Moreover, we look forward to
the rapid appointment of a new facilitator in the peace
process to replace Mwalimu Nyerere. This is necessary if
we are to maintain the momentum achieved by Mwalimu
Nyerere in the peace process. We look forward to Under-
Secretary-General Prendergast's visit to the region soon in
order to help find a successor to Mwalimu Nyerere.

We are concerned about the acts of violence taking
place in the capital, Bujumbura, and in some of the
provinces of Burundi, but we are especially worried about
the humanitarian tragedies suffered by the people of
Burundi as a result of these acts of violence. We call on
the parties concerned, including the Government, to allow
humanitarian aid to reach all refugee areas, particularly
the 13 assembly areas that lack food and medicine, which

 

are necessary if epidemics or humanitarian tragedies are to
be avoided there. At the same time, we appeal to the
international community to provide the necessary
humanitarian aid to Burundi immediately. My delegation
strongly condemns the killing of humanitarian aid workers.
We call on the Government of Burundi to make the utmost
effort to bring to justice the perpetrators of those heinous
acts. We also call on the Government of Burundi, as well
as the other parties, to make every possible effort to ensure
the safety and security of United Nations personnel, as well
as international aid workers.

In conclusion, allow me to thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this debate and to thank Mr. Fall once again
for his briefing. We look forward to a further meeting in
the future, following the visit of Mr. Prendergast to the
region.

