Ms. Bogyay (Hungary): Hungary wishes to thank
China for convening this highly appropriate open
debate of the Security Council, for we cannot pledge
enough our commitment to the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations.

It is my privilege to speak here today in the
Chamber for the very first time as the new Permanent
Representative of Hungary. Much has been said today,
and so I would rather focus on three major points: first,
the need for, but lack of, real dialogue; secondly, the
importance of not forgetting, but learning from, our
previous sins; and, thirdly, the need think out of the
box and look for new methods in order to succeed in
peacemaking.

Talking in tune has always been my aim throughout

my professional life. Talking to each other with dignity
even when our differences hold sway should be a
main preoccupation in turbulent moments for all of
us. Indeed, differences in our opinions and visions
are at times pronounced, and the spirit of consensus is
difficult to bring to bear on some issues. But Hungary
would still argue that we should handle our political
differences through ongoing dialogue and the art of
listening and responding in order at least to try not to
misunderstand each other.

"Dialogos" does not mean a conversation between
two people or two groups, but an acceptance by two or
more participants that they will compare and contrast
their respective arguments to the end. Dialogue is
accordingly a perilous enterprise. In my country's
view, the United Nations was created for dialogue, and
it must act on the highest possible level for dialogue.

The Council will agree with me that we have to
renew our commitment to understanding and tolerating
each other's cultural background and identity, keeping
in our hearts and minds the verses of Jalal al-Din Rumi,
the great thirteenth century Islamic scholar, poet and
philosopher, who wrote: "Half of me comes from here;
half from everywhere/ Half of me comes from the pearls
of the sea; half from distant shores." We, the people
of the world, are connected to each other globally, and
today our interdependence is greater than ever. We
must therefore consciously protect our sensitive peace
together and act together against evil for the betterment
of the future of our children.

Hungary fully supports the statements delivered on
behalf of the European Union and of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group.

The founding mothers and fathers of the United
Nations and its organs, including the Security Council,
wanted to "save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war", as we have heard many times today,
but they also wanted to achieve more: human rights,
the rule of law and development. And, as Nelson
Mandela said, there is no peace without development
and no development without peace. None of this can
be achieved without teaching our children at a very
young age to respect and celebrate the diversity of
the human race. Only then will grown-ups respect
State sovereignty, territorial integrity and the peaceful
settlement of international disputes.

We have seen an amazing evolution of humankind

since the end of the Second World War. We should never
forget the immense developments in the political arena,
and we should be proud of them. The United Nations
has undeniably had its success stories. It stabilized
the security situation in a bipolar world and, in many
cases, served as the most important - sometimes the
last - hope on the international platform for Member
States to overcome their differences.

However, the world has been changing. The
world has changed. Only, many people seem no
longer to recall why the United Nations had to be set
up 70 years ago. Conflicts, bloodshed and human
suffering continue. Religious and ethnic minorities are
again threatened. People are beheaded because of their
religion, nationality and beliefs? Are we going back
in time? Only, people do not go to the main square in
their towns to watch executions or to the arena to see
brutality; we just switch on the television.

The world needs new enlightenment. The United
Nations could play the leading role in creating it.
Today, the world is in turmoil despite the Security
Council never having been busier. Somehow, we do not
seem to learn enough from our sins and mistakes, our
greediness and selfishness. And the Security Council
and the international community seem to be paralysed
in many of these situations. But history has already
shown us that failure to act will only prolong human
suffering and invite further atrocities, and that we will
pay a very high price for our inaction in the form of lost
lives, lost generations, lost hopes and lost futures.

Our inability to live up to the challenges we face
also undermines the trust and belief that people around
the world have in the United Nations. They see the world
Organization ever more distant and detached from
reality. Einstein said that we cannot solve problems
by using the same kind of thinking we used when we
created them. Based on the lessons learned and reunited
by our common values, we must be open to new ideas
in order to effectively implement the noble principles of
the Charter of the United Nations.

