The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of July, I should like to take
this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the Council, to
His Excellency Mr. Sergey V. Lavrov, Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation to the United
Nations, for his service as President of the Security Council
for the month of June 1997. I am sure I speak for all
members of the Security Council in expressing deep
appreciation to Ambassador Lavrov for the great diplomatic
skill with which he conducted the Council's business last
month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan

The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Afghanistan, in which he requests to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite that representative
to participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Farhadi
(Afghanistan) took a seat at the Council table.


The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General contained in document S/1997/482.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following other documents: S/1997/408,
letter dated 27 May 1997 from the Permanent
Representative of Pakistan to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General; and S/1997/424 and S/1997/463,
identical letters dated 2 and 16 June 1997, respectively,
from the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and to
the President of the Security Council.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the report
of the Secretary-General concerning the situation in
Afghanistan of 16 June 1997 (S/1997/482).

"The Security Council expresses its grave
concern at the continued escalation of military
confrontation in Afghanistan. It calls for an
immediate end to the fighting.

"The Security Council calls upon all Afghan
parties to return to the negotiating table immediately
and to work together towards the formation of a
broad-based, fully representative government that
will protect the rights of all Afghans and abide by
Afghanistan's international obligations.

"The Security Council, taking into account risks
of regional destabilization, believes that peace and
stability in Afghanistan can best be attained through
intra-Afghan political negotiations under United
Nations auspices with the active and coordinated
assistance of all countries concerned. It urges the
Afghan parties and countries concerned to abide by
the provisions of relevant resolutions on Afghanistan
adopted by the Security Council and the General
Assembly.

"The Security Council stresses that all external
interference in Afghan affairs must cease, and, in
this context, it calls upon all States to end
immediately the supply of arms and ammunition to
all parties to the conflict in Afghanistan.

"The Security Council is deeply concerned at
the continuing discrimination against girls and
women and other violations of human rights, as well
as at violations of international humanitarian law.

"The Security Council reiterates that the
continuation of the conflict in Afghanistan provides
a fertile ground for terrorism and illegal drug
production and trafficking which destabilize the
region and beyond, and calls upon the leaders of the
Afghan parties to halt such activities.
 

"The Security Council is deeply concerned at the
worsening of the humanitarian situation, including the
displacement of the civilian population. In this regard,
it calls upon Member States to respond generously to
the 1997 United Nations Consolidated Appeal for
Emergency Humanitarian Assistance for Afghanistan.

"The Security Council reaffirms its full support
for the efforts of the United Nations in Afghanistan,
in particular the activities of the United Nations
Special Mission to Afghanistan (UNSMA). It requests
the Secretary-General to continue to keep it regularly
informed of the situation and his efforts, as well as
those of UNSMA.

"The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1997/35.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.35 pm.

