Mr. Satoh (Japan): I will cut my compliments to
you, Mr. President, but I have to say that this meeting is
very timely and well focused.

HIV/AIDS is a serious threat to human security in
many parts of the world. However, the situation is most
serious in Africa. There, this deadly disease is threatening
the security of the life and dignity of communities and
their members. In many African countries, it is already
having a devastating impact on the population,
particularly on young people. More than that, the disease
has become a serious impediment to economic and social
development, as well as to the peace and security of the
countries concerned.

This situation demands a clearer recognition of the
seriousness of the issue of AIDS and a stronger
commitment to fight the disease both by African countries

 

themselves and by their partners outside the region.
Africans themselves are already engaged in the fight against
AIDS. However, given the magnitude of the problem, it is
evident that the African countries need stronger support and
cooperation from the international community.

Japan, for its part, is engaged in a combination of
efforts aimed at combating AIDS in Africa, primarily
through the following three approaches, and we are
determined to strengthen our efforts in the years to come.

First of all, Japan places a high priority on the issue
of AIDS in its official medium-term policy on official
development assistance, and under its Global Issues
Initiative on Population and AIDS, launched in 1994, Japan
has been providing technical assistance and grants to many
countries in Africa to assist them in fighting this deadly
disease.

I want to add that some of the programmes in this
Global Issues Initiative are integrated into the so-called
common agenda that Japan and the United States are
pursuing together on a broad range of global issues. For
example, our two countries sent a joint mission to Zambia
in 1998 for the purpose of formulating projects on
population, AIDS and children's health.
J apan's financial contribution under the Global Issues
Initiative had already reached approximately $3.7 billion by
the end of fiscal year 1998. Although the seven-year
Initiative is due to be completed at the end of fiscal year
2000, the Japanese Government is determined to expand its
support for the fight against AIDS by building upon what
has been accomplished thus far.

Secondly, Japan is firmly committed to supporting the
Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS)
and has contributed a total of $23 million to its
programmes since its establishment in 1996. We highly
commend UNAIDS for the coordinating role it has played
and for its achievements to date. We are considering
strengthening our financial support for its programmes
relating to AIDS in Africa.

Thirdly, it was decided at the second Tokyo
International Conference on African Development (TICAD II), which Japan sponsored with the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) in October 1998, that
African countries and their development partners should
strengthen cooperation in their fight against AIDS and other
sexually transmitted diseases. In response, Japan announced
its readiness to provide approximately 90 billion yen in
grants over a five-year period starting in 1998 in such
areas as education, health care, medical services and the
supply of safe and clean water in Africa. It is our
intention to use these grants with a particular emphasis on
the fight against AIDS.

I would also like to point out that African and Asian
countries have much to learn from each other in their
fight against AIDS and that the exchange of information
and experience between the countries of the two regions
should be promoted. I am pleased to inform the Council
that this proposition received broad support from the
participants at the TICAD regional review meeting held
in Zambia last November.

I am convinced that this open meeting will greatly
enhance the level of attention paid by all concerned to the
serious issue of HIV/AIDS in Africa. It is our strong hope
that today's discussion will result in more intensive efforts
by Africans themselves and their partners, which we need
now in order to improve the situation quickly. I would
therefore like to conclude by reaffirming yet again the
strong commitment of the Japanese Government to the
urgent task of fighting AIDS in Africa.

