Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I wish at the outset to
congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the lofty position of
President of the Security Council for this month. We
are totally confident that, under your leadership, the
Security Council will be able to accomplish all the
objectives on its agenda for this month.

I also want to express our gratitude for the
outstanding leadership of the Ambassador of Lebanon
and his team last month.

The situation of children in armed conflicts,
including foreign occupation, from which the children
of Palestine continue to suffer, remains a matter of
grave concern. We grieve for the millions of innocent
children around the world whose lives have been taken
violently and prematurely by armed conflict and for the
millions of other children who continue to suffer the
traumas of armed conflict.

The fact that the Secretary-General has had to
appoint a Special Representative for Children and
Armed Conflict and that the Security Council must
continue, along with the General Assembly, Human
Rights Council and other United Nations organs and
agencies, to address this very serious matter year after
year is a sad testament to the failure of the
international community to live up to its commitments
and legal obligations to protect children from the
scourge of armed conflicts.
Children in situations of armed conflict continue
to be the victims of appalling human rights violations,

exploitation and grave crimes. Millions of children are
forced to live in fear, hunger, poverty, isolation and
despair among their devastated families and
communities. Their rights to life, to health, to
education, to food, to family, to development and to be
nurtured and protected are grossly violated. Failure to
provide them with the protection they are entitled to
under international humanitarian and human rights law
has deepened their suffering, with immense
socio-economic, humanitarian, political and security
consequences for their societies and nations.

Urgent action is required to uphold our
commitment to protecting children from the horrors of
armed conflict, among them children living under
foreign occupation. We must ensure respect for their
rights in accordance with the Convention on the Rights
of the Child, the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and all other relevant legal instruments,
including the Fourth Geneva Convention.

What is missing is not intention, as evidenced in
the international declarations and positions reaffirmed
time and again. What is missing is the political will to
directly address the crises being faced by children in
situations of armed conflict and to thus render the
debating of this global dilemma unnecessary. This
would require, among other steps, real measures to
ensure the accountability of those found to be
persistently committing grave violations against
children in armed conflict. There must be zero
tolerance for the perpetration of crimes against
children in all cases, without exception. Excuses
should not be made or accepted for violations of the
rights, safety and innocence of children.

The lack of accountability for systematic human
rights violations and war crimes against civilians in
armed conflict has fostered a vicious culture of
impunity that has only prolonged conflicts and
compounded the vulnerability and suffering of
innocent civilians. I can say without doubt that this has
been the case in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, where
Israel, the occupying Power, has been permitted to act
with impunity, in total disrespect of all norms of
international law and relevant United Nations
resolutions, resulting in a heavy price being paid by
Palestinian children.

Generations of Palestinian children have been
traumatized by decades of human rights violations by
Israel, the occupying Power. In this regard, we recall a
telling reflection by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Coomaraswamy, to whom we express our
appreciation for her tireless efforts to call attention to
the plight of children in armed conflicts and to
advocate for their protection and well-being. In a 2007
report after her visit to the occupied Palestinian
territory, she noted that this ongoing conflict has
created "a palpable sense of loss and a feeling of
hopelessness that places the children of the West Bank
and Gaza apart from all other situations".

Tragically, the plight of Palestinian children has
not improved since her last report on the situation
there. Their situation has deteriorated in all respects, in
particular in the Gaza Strip, where children - who
constitute over half of the population, the majority of
them refugees - continue to be tormented by the
occupation policies, particularly Israel's illegal and
shameful blockade imposed in collective punishment
of the entire population.

The critical situation of children in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, is
reflected in the Secretary-General's recent report on
children and armed conflict (S/2010/181). While that
important report provides a brief, sterile glimpse into
the pervasive and intense suffering of Palestinian
children during the reporting period, particularly in the
aftermath of the Israeli military aggression against the
Gaza Strip in December 2008, it nevertheless conveys
a grim picture of what Palestinian children continue to
endure under Israeli occupation. This includes death
and injury, as at least 374 children were killed and over
2,000 injured, the majority during the Israeli military
aggression against Gaza. Children were also repeatedly
used as human shields by the occupying forces.
Children face homelessness and displacement as a
result of the military aggression, the wanton
destruction of homes in Gaza, the demolition of homes
and eviction of Palestinian residents in East Jerusalem,
as well as the continued confiscation of Palestinian
land and property by Israel for its illegal colonization
campaign.

Children also endure forcible and violent
interrogation, detention, arrest and physical and mental
ill-treatment and torture by the occupying forces,
including threats of rape and sexual assault against
children between the ages of 12 and 15. At least 305
children remain in Israeli jails, 42 of them under the
age of 15.

There are grave violations of children's rights to
health and to education as a result of Israel's
destruction of schools and health centres, the
blockade's obstruction of necessary medical and school
supplies, and blatant discrimination against Palestinian
schools in East Jerusalem. At least nine children died
in Gaza wile waiting for Israeli permits to travel
outside the territory to receive life-saving medical
treatment.

Children also continued to be victims of settler
attacks, being shot, beaten and threatened while
walking to school, tending livestock or playing outside
their homes. Their right to food has been grossly
violated in blockaded Gaza, where thousands have
been afflicted by hunger, malnutrition, anaemia,
stunted growth and other diseases as a result. The
socio-economic conditions and overall well-being of
children also continued to decline as a result of Israel's
intentional obstruction of livelihoods and
impoverishment of the majority of the population.

As for the alleged Palestinian deficiencies
referred to in the Secretary-General's report, we
continue to strive through our ministries and national,
judicial and social institutions to redress all problems
and abnormalities arising from the oppressive,
dysfunctional foreign occupation we are forced to
endure. We shall continue to exert the necessary efforts
in this regard, with the assistance of relevant United
Nations agencies and humanitarian organizations on
the ground, as we strive to end the Israeli occupation
and to prepare for the independence of our State, where
our children will be able to enjoy their human rights in
freedom, peace, dignity and security, free from fear and
want.

Until that goal is attained, we reiterate that the
rights and needs of children living in armed conflict
cannot be withheld until more amenable circumstances
somehow materialize and must be safeguarded and
addressed without delay. Based on our legal, moral and
global obligations, collective efforts must be exerted to
protect these children, provide them with assistance
and rehabilitation, give them hope and ensure their
well-being and ultimate survival.

We reaffirm the central role of the United Nations
in protecting children, particularly through UNICEF
and, in the case of Palestinian children, through the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, as well as through
peacekeeping missions and the programmes of other
United Nations agencies working with humanitarian
and human rights organizations to protect and help
children around the world.

