Mr. Skau (Sweden): Let me begin byjoining others
in thanking the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, David Shearer, for his comprehensive briefing
this morning. We also welcome the Council's decision
today to extend the restrictive measures imposed by
resolution 2206 (2015) related to South Sudan. It is
important that the members of the Panel of Experts be
reappointed without delay so that they can continue
their important work.

The dire political, security and humanitarian
situation in South Sudan remains of great concern.
Despite repeated calls from the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD), the African Union
(AU) and the Security Council, little progress has
been made in finding a solution to the conflict. While
we welcome the declaration on a unilateral ceasefire
by President Kiir on Monday of this week, we must
now make every effort to ensure that this time his
commitments are honoured and implemented. The
region and the Security Council should agree to monitor
the situation closely and hold the South Sudanese
Government and other relevant actors to account. We
should all make it very clear that there is no time for
playing games, and that there will consequences if
agreements are breached.

It should by now be obvious to all that there is no
military option and that only a political solution can
resolve the conflict and bring peace to South Sudan.
We therefore, once again, call on all parties to come
to the table. A national dialogue could be an important
way forward, but only if it is genuinely inclusive and led
by impartial conveners at all levels. And there cannot
be a meaningful political process unless the fighting is
brought to an end.

While it is unfortunate that the deployment of the
regional protection force has been significantly delayed,
we welcome that it is now being deployed, and we hope
that it will soon be fully operational. That force should
contribute to giving the necessary political space to
allow the parties to engage in a meaningful political
process. However, we also agree with the Secretary-
General that neither the regional protection force, nor
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan represent a
panacea to the crisis. Only a political process is.

The need to address the humanitarian situation,
including ending all obstacles to relief efforts, grows
more pressing by the day. The Secretary-General's
report (S/2017/224) illustrates how the upswing in
violence against aid workers has had a severe impact
on humanitarian operations. That includes detentions,
threats, physical assaults and killing. Such behaviour
is simply unacceptable and is a grave violation
of international humanitarian law. Humanitarian
principles must be respected. The rapid, safe and
unhindered delivery of relief across South Sudan
must be assured. We pay tribute to the United Nations
and its humanitarian partners for their efforts in that
very difficult environment. We also commend the
intensified efforts under way to prevent a large-scale
cholera outbreak.

The international community owes it to the people
of South Sudan to engage with renewed commitment
and urgency. We welcome the intensified efforts now
under way by actors in the region, including the recent
visit by President Museveni of Uganda to Juba earlier
this week. The world looks to the AU and IGAD to
take the lead in efforts to set out a road map for peace.
The Security Council must remain united in support of
those regional efforts and contribute to ensuring that
commitments are implemented. Important decisions,
such as the joint declaration at the AU Summit in
January, the IGAD communique' of 24 March and the
clear steps outlined by the Security Council in its
presidential statement of 23 March (S/PRST/2017/4),
must be followed up on and implemented.

We therefore call for continued close cooperation
and coordination between the United Nations, the AU
and IGAD. We commend the leadership shown by the
Secretary-General and encourage him to continue play
an active role. In that regard, we would welcome the
inclusion in his next report of more concrete proposals
on a way forward, including on how the United Nations
can best support the region in facilitating an inclusive
political process.

There can be no more business as usual on South
Sudan. There should be no illusions - our commitment
and engagement must be there for the long term. But let
us, in the short term, seize on the recent commitments
made by the Government and build on the sense of
renewed urgency in the region, including that coming
from Uganda and Kenya, to push for a solution. We
must do all we can to bring the conflict to an end. That
is our collective responsibility.

