Ms. Sinegiorgis (Ethiopia): Thank you,
Mr. President, for giving me the opportunity to say a
few words on the question of Somalia. Actually, I do
not have much to add after the comprehensive
statements made by my senior colleagues, the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Djibouti and of Kenya,
but let me briefly add my voice by emphasizing that
Somalia today is at a critical stage, after having gone
through a devastating national crisis.

We are all aware that the situation of statelessness
for the last 14 years has had a devastating effect on the
people of Somalia, on the region and on the
international community as a whole. Therefore, what
has been achieved after a protracted peace process
should never be allowed to falter or be reversed.
Hence, it is highly important to realize that the tasks of
the reconciliation process are not over, and that we
cannot expect the going to be easy.

In that regard, the task ahead, to say the least, is
very daunting indeed. In our View, the major concern
of the new Government should be to establish itself
inside Somalia as speedily as possible. As was said by
the Ministers, and as I am sure is obvious to the
Security Council, that task can be accomplished only
with the continued and active support of the
international community. The new Government of
Somalia is faced with the Herculean task of rebuilding
the State from scratch; in that effort, the major hurdle
will be the security situation of the country. In that
regard, my delegation supports the statement of
Mr. Kiplagat.

Let me also add that in order to ensure the
security of the country, the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of the various militias
is an absolute necessity. Therefore, the deployment of a
peace support and protection force is also absolutely
necessary.

There is also an immediate need to rehabilitate
the seat of the Government and its institutions, as a
whole. In that connection, although the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
and the African Union have their role to play, it is
imperative that, given the limited resources and
capacity at their disposal, the United Nations be more
engaged in Somalia than it has been in the past two
years.

The response of the international community to
the needs of Somalia has to be commensurate with the
gigantic nature of the challenge involved. At the
present stage, Somalia deserves a great deal of
attention from the region, the African Union and the
United Nations. In particular, the United Nations
should and must take a lead role in assisting the
Somalis to keep up the momentum of the process they
have now embarked upon in reconstructing and
re-establishing the Somali State from the ground up.
This is a crucial moment for the Somalis, the region
and the international community. It must be reiterated,
again and again, that the success of the Somali peace
process is in the direct interest of the international
community.

While we are all grateful for the support rendered
to the peace process during the past two years by the
international community in general, and by the
European Union in particular, we feel it is time that the
United Nations assumed greater responsibility. The
role we are expecting from the United Nations is not
that of an incremental engagement, but an active
involvement in helping the new Government establish
itself in the country. No doubt, that is a process that
should be led by the transitional federal Government of
Somalia, but the full and unswerving support of the
international community cannot be overemphasized.

In that regard, we are happy to note that the
international community, at the recent Stockholm
meeting on Somalia, recommitted itself to provide
structured diplomatic, political, technical and financial
support. Such structured engagement by the
international community is expected to be coordinated
by the United Nations. In the View of my delegation,
this should be supported and endorsed by the Security
Council.

I would like to conclude my brief remarks by
saying that it is a unique opportunity that the Security
Council is today discussing the situation in Somalia at
the place where the new Government was born. In the
past, the crisis in Somalia has been a source of
frustration for all of us, but now there is a ray of hope.
Let us all stand together to help Somalis help
themselves.

