Mr. Christian (Ghana): I would like to express
the appreciation of my delegation to you, Madam
President, for convening this meeting. I would also like
to thank Assistant Secretary-General Angela Kane for
her briefing on the latest developments in the Middle
East.

The situation in the occupied Palestinian territory,
where Israeli troops have carried out military
operations in Gaza, including air strikes, aimed at
securing the release of a soldier abducted by
Palestinian militants could, if not contained, lead to
more violence, with dire consequences for the
Palestinian people and further damage to the prospects
for the resumption of negotiations towards a
comprehensive settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict.

We must address the present grave situation in the
Middle East with serious concern. We therefore call on
the Palestinian Authority to do all in its power to
secure the release of the abducted Israeli soldier.
Meanwhile, Israel should cease forthwith all military
operations, including air strikes, withdraw its forces
from Gaza and release detained Palestinian officials.
We hope that the efforts being made to achieve a
negotiated solution to this crisis will bear fruit and lead
to the end of yet another dark episode in the Middle
East crisis.

Furthermore, my delegation wishes to reiterate its
condemnation of all acts of violence. We call on the
Palestinian Authority to act decisively against rocket
attacks on Israel. At the same time, Israel must desist
from launching future military attacks into the
occupied Palestinian territory.

My delegation is very concerned about the
consequences of Israeli military operations on the
Palestinian people, who already find life unbearable
because of the economic pressure being brought to bear
on the Palestinian Authority by Israel. Ongoing Israeli
air strikes have affected power supplies, and there is an
acute lack of fuel in Gaza. The water supply system
could also be affected. A widespread humanitarian
crisis, with probable devastating consequences, could
therefore be in the offing. However, the economic and
institutional collapse of the occupied Palestinian
territory must, of necessity, be avoided at all costs.

Israel and the Hamas Government should now
move back from the brink of full-scale hostilities and
seek peace, bearing in mind that that is the only way to
achieve their goals. Clearly, the international
community must remain actively engaged in the search
for a solution to this crisis and must once more renew
its commitment to the objectives of the right of Israelis
to their own State within well defined and secure
boundaries and equally to the right of Palestinians to
their own independent State that guarantees freedom of
movement for its citizens.

