Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes Mr. Meza-Cuadra, Peru's new Minister
for Foreign Affairs, to today's meeting. We also
listened carefully to the briefing by Under-Secretary-
General Lacroix.

The mandate of the United Nations Mission for
Justice Support in Haiti expires today, marking the end
of the United Nations peacekeeping mission in Haiti.
For the past 15 years United Nations peacekeepers
have diligently delivered on their mandates and made
important contributions to Haiti's peace and stability
at great sacrifice. Eight Chinese peacekeepers have
died in the line of duty in Haiti, making the ultimate
sacrifice for peace in that country. It pains us to see that
despite the outstanding support that the United Nations
has given Haiti in maintaining peace and promoting
development, the country's political crisis recently
escalated yet again. In his report (S/2019/805), the
Secretary-General notes the near-paralysis of Haitian
State institutions, the demonstrations and protests that
are ongoing in multiple locations and the troubling
security situation. The country's deteriorating economy
has posed enormous challenges to people's livelihoods
and has exacerbated the humanitarian situation.

China calls on the Haitian authorities to commit
to resolving differences properly through consultation,
strengthening the rule of law and its own development
capacities and settling the current political crisis
as soon as possible. The international community,
especially countries with significant influence on Haiti,
should step up attention to the political, economic and
humanitarian situations in Haiti and help it maintain
stability, boost economic growth, improve people's
livelihoods and implement the 2030 Sustainable
Development Goals.

The United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti
(BINUH) will officially become operational tomorrow.
It will continue to provide support and assistance to
Haiti together with the United Nations country team.
China supports the Office's work pursuant to resolution
2476 (2019) and supports its role in assisting the
Haitian Government in promoting political stability,
enhancing the rule of law and building a stronger police
sector. The Haitian Government should strengthen its
coordination with BINUH and work with it to ensure
that the Office starts off on the right foot. The road to
stability and development in Haiti will be long and hard.
We hope that the Haitian Government will place the
interests of the Haitian people first, step up capacity-
building, chart a course towards greater self-reliance
and effectively assume responsibility for maintaining
national security and stability and promoting economic
and social development.

