Mr. Thoresson: I thank you, Mr. President, for
the invitation to brief the Security Council on behalf
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). Let me also
congratulate you on assuming the presidency of the
Council for the month of December.

We meet at a pivotal point in time, ahead of the
Security Council's decision on the future of the
United Nations peacekeeping presence in Liberia.
It therefore gives me great pleasure to present the
conclusions and recommendations emanating from a
recent trip to Liberia and a multi-stakeholder forum on
sustaining peace through transition in Liberia, hosted
by the Peacebuilding Commission and the Government
of Liberia.

The objective of the visit was to identify
peacebuilding priorities during the transition and
beyond the peacekeeping presence in the country, and
to complement the atrategic assessment mission led
by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations. The
Chair met with the President of Liberia, several senior
representatives of the Government, civil society, the
United Nations leadership, members of the international
community and political parties. The written report
from the trip has been shared with the Security Council.

Two main questions guided the deliberations in
Monrovia: first, what must be done to address remaining
root causes of conflict in Liberia and, secondly, what
should international support look like after the United
Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL)? Let me highlight
the key conclusions.

First of all, while no one seems to believe that
Liberia is facing an imminent risk of relapsing into
conflict, there was general agreement that the root
causes and potential triggers of conflict in Liberia
remain unresolved and demand concerted attention.
Reconciliation has not yet fully taken place - which
was also acknowledged by the President himself. The
nation has yet to address the grievances of a large
marginalized majority, and must also go back to
implementing the road map for national reconciliation.

Strong political leadership is required to fully and
comprehensively address reconciliation in Liberia. In
that connection, the need to forge a common national
identity was identified and stressed repeatedly at the
multi-stakeholder forum. That tells us that reconciliation
in Liberia goes beyond coming to terms with what took
place during the civil war. Building social cohesion
requires addressing historical inequalities and unequal
access to resources and power. That, in turn, relates to
the need of extending State authority beyond Monrovia,
providing basic social services in rural communities,
forging a stronger relationship between the State and
its citizens and building trust in security institutions.

It is encouraging to note some degree of progress
on legislative reforms essential to peacebuilding and
State-building, including those concerning land rights,
decentralization and governance. However, while some
progress has been made in the legislative process,
certain regulations still need to be passed, and we must
continue to monitor the situation. The passing of the
Land Rights Act would not only address crucial property
rights, but would also help reform the agricultural sector
in Liberia, which is falling short of delivering on its
potential. Government leadership is needed to promote
structural reform as a critical preventive measure
before the elections. Another message emanating from
the forum is that critical gaps remain in institutional
capacity. The rule of law remains weak and access to
justice constitutes an ongoing challenge.

The large disenfranchised youth constitutes a
real risk factor. Making jobs available for youth,
engaging them and ensuring meaningful channels
for participation is important - not least now in the
run-up to the elections. The right support should be
provided to ensure that the youth can play an active role
in peacebuilding.

That leads me to another key point of discussion
during the PBC visit - the presidential and legislative
election in October 2017. The election was described as
a defining moment for Liberia, as the first democratic
transfer of power from one living president to another
since it became a republic. A successful election
and peaceful transition would further consolidate
democracy and good governance.

As is often the case, the running of an election is
fraught with the risk of tensions. More than 20 candidates
are running for President. Efforts to establish solid
mechanisms for dispute resolution early on, as well as
drafting joint codes of conduct and managing run-offs,
should be supported and prioritized. We understand
that UNMIL is heavily involved in such efforts, along
with the National Election Commission, both providing
crucial support. Other priorities in preparing for a
successful election are civic education, awareness-
raising and outreach to a largely disenfranchised
population. A special focus on the active participation
of women is needed. Several interlocutors in Monrovia
noted that it would be premature to withdraw the
peacekeeping Mission before the elections. Even a
smaller presence, with police contingents could play an
important role.

It is important to be aware of the current
socioeconomic situation in which the election and
transition will take place. The Liberian economy is under
considerable stress, in the aftermath of both Ebola and
the downturn in prices of iron ore and rubber. Economic
growth has not increased at all over the past three
years, and the International Monetary Fund projection
for 2016 is -0.5 per cent. That limits the fiscal space
available for taking forward critical peacebuilding
reforms under the current Administration. Economic
growth is dependent upon economic diversification,
but the foundation is weak. The economy faces huge
challenges, such as the decline in Government revenue,
overreliance on concessions, social exclusion in the
governance structure and the need for structural
reforms to improve the business environment. During
the visit, daunting statistics regarding education were
presented: 63 per cent of Liberian children are not
attending school. This is a key challenge today with
real implications for the future.

Where does that leave us? Liberia is facing an
incredibly important year in 2017, with a defining
election. Many root causes remain unaddressed. After
the peacekeepers withdraw, there will be residual
peacebuilding tasks - some of which address root
causes of conflict that remain unresolved in Liberia
and require sustained international support. Those
factors should be borne in mind when the future of
the United Nations presence beyond December 2016
is decided. Given 13 years of massive investment in
UNMIL, it will be important to ensure a responsible
and careful drawdown that safeguards the gains and
achievements made and sends Liberia on a stable and
robust path towards the further consolidation of peace.
The United Nations leadership in Monrovia still plays
a key role. Preserving the function of its good offices
will be useful during the period when there will be a
heightened risk of tension in the lead-up and during the
elections next year.

In conclusion, it is crucial to maintain international
attention on Liberia at this critical time. An immediate
task is to ensure that the remaining United Nations
presence is set up and resourced to respond to the
continuous need for peacebuilding support. The PBC
therefore encourages the entire United Nations system
to intensify collaborative and strategic planning, and
looks forward to engaging in a regular dialogue with
the stakeholders on how that is proceeding and to offer
further support.

For its part, the Commission stands ready to
continue its political accompaniment by ensuring
continued international attention on Liberia, in the
event that Liberia leaves the agenda of the Security
Council, and assisting by drawing attention to gaps. The
PBC is committed to making substantive contributions
to the Council's deliberations, and those of us who have
dual membership in the Council and the PBC will make
sure to play our part in strengthening our advisory and
bridging role. The PBC will also undertake continued
advocacy on the importance of pursuing reforms that
are central to State-building and sustainable peace
in Liberia.

