Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Ukraine co-sponsored
and voted in favour of the draft resolution contained
in document S/2017/962 on the basis of the
following position.

Continuous allegations of the use of chemical
weapons in Syria, which cause enormous suffering and
are a blatant violation of international law, require an
uncompromising and firm response from the Council,
not only by condemning such horrible crimes, but by
taking effective action, including through mobilizing
all tools available to that end and without undermining
their efficiency to ensure accountability. Ukraine
commends the efforts of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM) in executing
its mandate, based on the principles of impartiality,
objectivity and independence. It is the only tool at the
Council's disposal with the mandate to identify the
organizers and perpetrators of chemical weapons use.
No outstanding differences or opinions on the Syrian
chemical file should be used to justify actions aimed at
destroying the JIM, as doing that effectively amounts
to shielding those responsible for atrocious crimes
from justice.

Today the Council again failed to exercise its
responsibilities under the Charter of the United
Nations. The Council's continuous inability to address
chemical attacks in Syria is leading to further impunity
and sending a signal to perpetrators that they can get
away with murder. Despite overwhelming support, it
has already become routine that one Council member
continues to block each and every decision that could
move us closer to bringing the perpetrators of atrocities
in Syria to justice.

Playing the JIM. card in one's political game is
utterly cynical and cannot be understood or accepted by
responsible members of the international community.
I wish to sincerely commend the dedication and
flexibility shown by the delegation of the United States,
which made every effort to preserve the JIM, including
by inserting the maximum number of concerns from
various Council members into the final text, while
preserving the primary part of the JIM. mandate, which
is investigating and identifying those responsible
for chemical weapons use in Syria. But, regrettably,
different approaches to the subject are not the issue.
The issue is that of a single-minded pursuit to destroy
an international system built around respect for norms
and principles of international law, which we, and our
predecessors, have all so carefully constructed for
many decades.

Despite the results of the vote, I believe we must
continue our joint efforts in defending and restoring
respect for international law. I wish to reiterate that the
time for justice will come.

