Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): France
associates itself fully with the statement made earlier
today by the Permanent Representative of Sweden on
behalf of the European Union. I would like to review
briefly some of the items that in our judgement are
essential to understanding the stakes involved in this
issue, from the Security Council's point of view.

First of all I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for having organized this debate two
months after the adoption of resolution 1327 (2000).
The views expressed by the troop-contributing
countries earlier today provide us with a good idea of
the best way to put into practice the commitments we
made under that resolution.

I will not reprise in detail the reasons why it is
indispensable to enhance consultations between the
Council and the troop-contributing countries at every
stage of the preparations for and conduct of
peacekeeping operations. Such cooperation in fact
makes it possible to increase the unity of purpose of
operations and cohesiveness in their conduct. This
cooperation must promote a shared understanding of
the objectives and of the risks involved, as well as of
the strategies to be implemented to successfully carry
out peacekeeping operations. The willingness of troop-
contributing countries to commit their troops in the
field depends on such cooperation. As the Brahimi
report forcefully recalls,

"The Security Council and the Secretariat also
must be able to win the confidence of troop
contributors that the strategy and concept of
operations for a new mission are sound."
(S/2000/809, para. 52)

We know well that such confidence can be
cultivated only through a genuine partnership between
the Council which decides on mandates, in keeping
with its responsibilities under the Charter, and the
troop-contributing countries, which implement these
mandates. There are several possible approaches to
seeking such a partnership.

I would like to recall first the very useful role that
groups of friends play when such groups are open and
when they bring together the members of the Council,
the main troop contributors, the countries of the region
and possibly foreign donors as well. For instance,
throughout the existence of the United Nations Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINURCA) the
Group of Friends of the Central African Republic,
which brings together all these different categories of
countries, has made it possible to share information
and to have a shared understanding of the stakes and
objectives of the mission, of the situation on the
ground and of the relationship with the Central African
authorities. I am convinced that the existence and work
of this Group have been one of the factors in the
success of MINURCA.

Secondly, the meetings between all the Council
members and all the troop contributors are the standard
approach to such a partnership. I listened closely to the
criticisms that several Member States made earlier
concerning the often pro forma and not very useful
character of these meetings. I understand their
frustrations, and I must say that I share their opinions.
For my part, over the past few months I have argued in
favour of organizing, more and more systematically,
private meetings with the troop-contributing countries,

along the lines of the meeting that the Council held on
4 October for the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL).

That was an exemplary meeting in our opinion,
because three conditions were met. First, the members
of the Council and the main troop contributors were
represented at a level of high responsibility. Secondly,
the information provided by the Secretariat concerning
the situation and the possibilities was the same
information that had been given to the Council
members the day before during consultations. Thirdly,
an interactive, candid and substantial dialogue -
without pointless formalities - ensued between the
Council members and the troop contributors. If all the
meetings with troop contributors were to proceed in
this manner, I think that many of the frustrations
expressed today would fade away.

Several Member States have suggested that
subsidiary bodies of the Council be established to
better organize consultation between the Security
Council and the troop contributors. This idea should be
examined with an open mind, while remaining
aware - as I have just said regarding the meeting of 4
October - that what matters is not so much the formal
machinery as the use to which it is put.

In conclusion, I would like to respond to troop-
contributing Member States - I am thinking in
particular of India, which made a brilliant statement,
and Jordan and some others - that lamented that there
are members of the Council that have not committed
themselves to contributing troops under the same
conditions as other States. The French delegation did
not take this criticism personally. France has
participated in many United Nations peacekeeping
operations. In 1993, it was even the leading contributor
worldwide, with more than 9,000 personnel engaged.
With 98 deaths and hundreds of wounded, France is,
after India, the country that has given the greatest
number of lives to the service of peacekeeping. Today
France is participating in 10 United Nations operations
and in two additional operations authorized by the
Security Council - in Bosnia and Kosovo. In all, more
than 8,700 military staff and 200 police are
participating directly in the implementation of Security
Council mandates. These few statistics are enough to
demonstrate that France has good reasons to
understand the concerns of troop contributors, and,
along with all the members of the Council, France
wishes to respond to these concerns as effectively as
possible.

