Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): I want to commend your
delegation, Mr. President, for bringing the focus of our
peacebuilding discussion on institution-building for the
first time. I extend our thanks to the Secretary-General
for his insightful briefing, and we especially wish to
welcome Deputy Prime Minister Jose Luis Guterres for
sharing the experience of his country with us in this
debate.

We owe a great debt to Peter Wittig speaking in
his capacity as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC). We believe that his dual role is a valid sign of
the Security Council's deepening relationship with the
PBC, from which we can only benefit.

Institution-building, an integral part of
peacebuilding, encompasses more than establishing
and nourishing organizational structures. It includes the
value systems that underpin such organizations.
Indeed, many civil conflicts erupt or recur not because
of a lack of organizational structures such as courts,
police and other security services, but because of deep
disagreements over the sharing of political power and
economic resources among different groups. The task
of post-conflict institution-building revolves as much
around rehabilitating organizational structures as it
does around restoring the norms and values that guide
the effective functioning of the economy, society and
politics.

Although the work of the various actors in the
United Nations system is to be commended, the
restoration of core institutions cannot be outsourced,
and accordingly it is imperative that, from the
inception of each peacebuilding exercise, the United
Nations be mindful of its role as a facilitator. National
actors should always take the lead in articulating the
needs of their countries, with the United Nations
providing necessary assistance in addressing those
needs.

As speakers before me have already stated, the
fundamental need for people to own their own peace
cannot be ignored. Every post-conflict society must be
the author of its destiny. Any peacebuilding project that
is not rooted in local knowledge, local expertise, local
engagement and local will is doomed to fail right after
the departure of the Blue Helmets. It is equally true
that building a sustainable peace is the primary
responsibility of the nation State. The Government and
people of each country must assume the task of long-
term institution-building.

We are gratified that the early findings of the
civilian capacity review of the Peacebuilding Support
Office point to the need to assess local needs and
existing local capacities, including the capacity to
absorb assistance, before we set about deploying

international capacities. It is encouraging to note that
the United Nations Development Programme and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations are reviewing
both their needs and capacity assessment
methodologies to better calibrate their work on the
ground.

Despite a degree of progress, more predictable
long-term financing for institution-building must
remain high on our agenda. As Nigeria has previously
stated, the lack of pre-mandate funding can slow
progress in implementing important transitional
mandates, and we therefore call for further
consideration of how the Organization might resolve
this very important issue. The two new funding
facilities and the revised funding ceiling for urgent
peacebuilding support from the Peacebuilding Fund are
very welcome innovations. We encourage donors to
participate in this and other multilateral funds that
support institution-building and post-conflict recovery
activities.

Regional actors also have an important role to
play in this context, and we note in particular the
African Union's Post-Conflict Reconstruction and
Development Policy Framework. For its own part,
Nigeria provides support for regional and international
peacebuilding efforts. Across Africa, particularly West
Africa, we support activities such as security sector
reform. In addition, since 2004 all three arms of
Nigeria's armed forces have been working assiduously
with civil society to mainstream peacebuilding into
international peacekeeping operations. The integration
of peacebuilding into the training curriculums of a
number of Nigeria's military institutions is aimed at
equipping the armed forces with skills that will allow
intervention supportive of a more lasting peace within
communities following the cessation of hostilities.

If properly managed, with a clear division of
labour, predictable funding and an exit strategy, the
expertise of the international community can be
invaluable in rebuilding institutions, particularly in the
security and rule of law sectors. We eagerly anticipate
the completion of the civilian capacity review so that
the United Nations can draw from it lessons on better
coordination, better cohesion and more effective
partnerships with national, subregional and regional
actors. In this way we can help post-conflict countries
restore security, accountability and legitimacy, all of
which lie at the very core of responsible statehood.

1l-21268

Every nation aspires to stand on its own two feet.
Let us use every means at our disposal to make that
aspiration a realizable one. I want to reiterate Nigeria's
commitment to peacekeeping and peacebuilding. As an
active and responsible member of the PBC, we will
continue to lend our support to the efforts of the United
Nations in assisting post-conflict societies.

