Mr. Koonjul (Mauritius): My delegation is very
grateful to General Cisse, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his comprehensive briefing and
for presenting the report of the Secretary-General on
the Central African Republic. We are also thankful to
Mr. Calderisi, Country Director of the World Bank, for
his briefing on what the World Bank is doing to
alleviate the problems of the Central African Republic.
It is now almost eight months since we discussed
the Central African Republic in this Chamber. It is
regrettable that there has been little positive
development in the situation there over that period. On
the contrary, the country experienced turbulent
events- an attempted coup - during the month of
May, which has further aggravated its already
precarious situation. We are very concerned that a large
number of Central Africans who were directly or
indirectly involved in the coup attempt have fled the
country. We strongly condemn all coup attempts and
believe that their perpetrators should be brought to
justice.

But we are equally concerned about reports of
unfair treatment being given to one particular ethnic
group. We call on the Government of the Central
African Republic to create the necessary environment
for the return of these people and for eventual
reconciliation.

My delegation believes that the grim economic
situation prevailing in the Central African Republic is
one of the root causes of the problems in that country.
The difficulty in paying the salaries of the military and
of civil servants, combined with the social tension and
insecurity, is leading not only to an exodus but to an
important "brain drain".

There is a need for enhanced effort by the
international community to assist in the economic
recovery of the country. In this respect, we appeal to all
of those States that made pledges at the special donor
meeting in New York in May 2000 to fulfil them. The
current situation in the country also merits particular
attention on the part of the Bretton Woods institutions.
We are hopeful that the forthcoming meeting set for 24
September in Paris will bring concrete solutions to the
macro-economic difficulties of the Central African
Republic.

Economic recovery of the Central African
Republic cannot hold on its own; it can be sustained
only through real progress in capacity-building. Efforts
should be aimed at the strengthening of democratic
institutions, good governance and accountability by the
Government. We also urge the Government to invest
heavily in education and training.

We note that the system in place in the country
has not led to the optimum utilization of human
resources in the administrative and financial sectors of
the Government. We therefore fully support the
recommendations of the Secretary-General calling for
high-level experts in the field of administration and
finance from the Central African Republic's
international partners to assist the Government.

In this respect, the Council could recommend the
appropriate United Nations agency, such as the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP), to provide
the necessary framework to facilitate the supply of
competent experts. This would help not only in the
short term but also in training the financial and
administrative cadres of the Central African Republic
to efficiently shoulder their responsibilities in future.

We fully concur with the observation made by the
Secretary-General in his report that there is a potential
risk of illicit proliferation of small arms and light
weapons from the region. We agree equally with his
remarks on the need to address the security aspect of
the Central African Republic and in particular the
structuring of its defence and security forces.

While we agree that all necessary assistance must
be provided to the country in improving its security, it
is equally vital that the Government engage in a
permanent and regular dialogue with the countries of
the region in order to sustain peace not only in the
country but also in the region through confidence-
building measures.

My delegation pays tribute to the United Nations
Peace-building Support Office in the Central African
Republic (BONUCA) for its role in strengthening
peace in the Central African Republic. We support the
recommendations to strengthen BONUCA in terms of
both human and financial resources, so as to enable it
to contribute to encouraging political dialogue and
national reconciliation and to the monitoring and
respect of human rights - especially under present
circumstances, after the failed coup attempt - and to
provide the appropriate support to the mobilization of
resources for economic reconstruction.

We are aware that financial implications for
strengthening BONUCA's mandate will come into play,
but we should not forget that hesitation on our part
might lead to the aggravation of the problem in the
Central African Republic. We therefore fully support
the recommendation to strengthen BONUCA as well as
the extension of its mandate for another year.

