Mr. Guehenno: My thanks go to Pakistan for
organizing this debate at such a critical time for
peacekeeping. The fact that no less than 43 countries
have participated in this debate shows the importance
that the membership of the Organization attaches to
peacekeeping. It has been very encouraging,
throughout this day of discussions, to hear so many
words of encouragement and support for the work of
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and -
more important, I would say - for our colleagues in
the field who support the ideals of the Charter.

Many important and very substantive ideas and
proposals have been expressed throughout the day. At
this late hour I do not think I should comment on each
and every idea that was expressed during the
discussion. Let me just say that we will certainly
follow up carefully with all the ideas that have been
discussed today. At this hour, I want to make just five
short points.

First, a point that came through in many of the

statements: the Organization - whose rules and
regulations, after all, were designed to manage
Headquarters activities - has to adjust the rules and

regulations that govern it to accommodate the
requirements of field operations, which are often quite
different from the needs of Headquarters. The need for
flexible means of early financing, replenishment of
strategic deployment stocks and the possibilities of
economies of scale through the provision of common
services are some of the ideas that need to be further
developed. I would like, in that respect, to stress that
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations is now
managing more than 11,000 civilian personnel. I am
not talking about the uniformed personnel or the
police, only the civilian personnel. They are more than
11,000, and that could go up to 15,000. That is much
more than the whole of the Secretariat. We see, every
day, that the rules and regulations that govern this
personnel - who work side by side with personnel
from the funds and programmes in the field - are not
always well adapted to their work in the field. This is
one of those practical things that will need to be
adjusted if we want to have the best and the brightest
serving in our difficult peacekeeping operations.

Secondly, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, at a time when peacekeeping is becoming
increasingly multidimensional, does not want to - and
should not - become a jack of all trades, so to speak.
The Department has some core capacities that it needs
to strengthen and continue strengthening, but, indeed,
it has to serve as an integrator, drawing on the
resources, capacities, capabilities and expertise of the
whole United Nations system. Our strategy is certainly
not to try to duplicate competencies and expertise that
exist outside the Department, but to make sure that we
have the right entry points so that we can mobilize in
an effective manner all of these resources that already
exist within the system or, sometimes, within Member
States, and so that these resources can be part of a
comprehensive and coherent plan. In the field, I think
this integrating function already works and has seen
some very serious improvements. The fact that the
Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-

General - or one of the Deputy Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General in a
multidimensional mission - is often the Resident

Coordinator as well as the Humanitarian Coordinator
provides the kind of integration of the United Nations
presence in the field that makes our operation more
effective. With regard to Headquarters, many speakers
stressed the need to improve the functioning of the
Integrated Mission Task Force to make it more
effective. At Headquarters, we have to work harder to
bring together the whole system.

Thirdly, there is a need for stronger partnerships.
This, in a way, is an expansion of my previous point.
Confronted with such huge challenges, we will not
succeed unless we mobilize all the resources, not just
within the United Nations system, but from all Member
States. This means more and more interaction with the
troop contributors, more interaction with the major
financial contributors, more interaction with the
Bretton Woods institutions and more interaction with
regional organizations. We strongly believe in
transparency and in finding more ways to intensify
relationships so that Member States have a better
understanding of what our needs are - and of what
our weaknesses are, so that these can be corrected. I
think it is in the interest of all of us that we share with
Member States in the most transparent manner what
our concerns and needs are.

Fourthly, whatever improvement we can bring to
the management of peacekeeping operations, the end
point of all of our efforts is the commitment of the
membership of the United Nations at large. The efforts
of the United Nations Secretariat can only go so far.
There is no standing army. This means that there must
be an improvement in the standby arrangement system
so that it becomes something really effective and so
that the arrangements have really been made
beforehand and so that we can mobilize military
resources quickly. We know how important that is. We
need more specific capabilities. The Secretary-General
mentioned this issue this morning in his statement.
This means that, in challenging military environments,
we need to get the kind of capabilities from Member
States that we now very often find are stretched. We
need enabling capacities and force multipliers, which
multiply, as the name indicates, the capacity of a force
far beyond the numbers provided; we need them in the
present situation.

My last point is a broader one: long-term success
requires that peacekeeping deployments be
accompanied by and embedded in a broader strategy.
Many have stressed the need not to transform
peacekeeping forces into a long-standing presence.
Peacekeeping must be a phase in the return to peace.
Peacekeeping must be as short as possible.
Peacekeeping must not cost too much money, because
the resources, both financial and human, are not
unlimited. I would like to make a comment here. Yes, it
is possible that if new missions are mandated, the
peacekeeping budget could get close to $4 billion. That
is a lot of money. But it can be looked at in several
ways. Four billion dollars is less than half of one per
cent of world military spending. After all, the bulk of
peacekeeping costs are military costs, and so the
reference to military spending makes some sense. It
means that still only a tiny percentage of overall
military spending is focused on United Nations
peacekeeping. At the same time, I recognize that, when
compared with the figure for official development
assistance, $4 billion is a very significant figure: it is a
lot of money compared to official development
assistance.

There cannot be sustained peace if there is
conflict. There cannot be the beginning of peace if
there is conflict. But peace that has been imposed, that
has been consolidated by peacekeeping operations, will
not grow roots if there is no development. So the
tension that is sometimes observed between
peacekeeping and development is not actually a
tension. You will not see investment and development
aid in a country that is afflicted by conflict. But you
will not see peace being sustained if a real, broader
strategy does not accompany the peacekeeping
mission.

Peacekeeping is a fragile bridge towards peace.
That bridge is essential. But if it is not anchored in a
broader strategy, with the Member States making sure
that the country that has been afflicted by conflict gets
much broader support than the support that
peacekeepers can provide, then no indeed, our costly
investment in peacekeeping will not bear fruit. I would
like to conclude on that point. Sometimes we have the
feeling that the left hand ignores what the right hand is
doing. The left hand invests in peacekeeping, and it is
an important and necessary investment. But that
investment has to be complemented by broader
investments. It is not one or the other; I am afraid it has
to be both.

