Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I would like to
start by thanking the Secretary-General's Special
Representative for Kosovo, Mr. Farid Zarif, for his
briefing today. I also welcome to the Council His
Excellency Mr. Enver Hoxhaj, the Foreign Minister of
Kosovo, and His Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremic, the
Foreign Minister of Serbia.

The United Kingdom is grateful for the
Secretary-General's comprehensive report
(S/2012/275). On the political level, there has been
steady progress over the reporting period. The number
of recognitions continues to rise. We have seen both
the launch of the feasibility study by the European
Union (EU) on Kosovo and the announcement of EU
candidate status for Serbia. The engagement of
Belgrade and Pristina in the EU-facilitated dialogue
has been a crucial vehicle for progress for both
countries. I welcome the further expressions of
commitment to that dialogue that we have just heard
from the Foreign Ministers of Kosovo and Serbia.

That dialogue has produced a number of practical
agreements, which the United Kingdom commends.
However, we are concerned that Belgrade has yet to
sign the protocol on integrated border management. We
would also urge both Governments to implement the
agreement facilitating regional cooperation and to
accept the decision of the host in international
meetings concerning the placement of the footnote. It
is absolutely essential that the agreement is
implemented to enable the countries of the Western
Balkans to work together to address the challenges
facing the region.

We encourage Kosovo to engage proactively with
the EU feasibility study. It is a valuable opportunity to
focus on the important reforms required, particularly in
the economic sector, which will be crucial to Kosovo's
development and the promotion of trade. We welcome
the inauguration of the National Anti-Corruption
Council and hope that it receives full support for its
mandate. The Government of Kosovo also needs to
take ownership of reforms in the areas of the judiciary,
the rule of law and administrative capacity. Driving

forward those initiatives using the tools available
through the European Union Rule of Law Mission
(EULEX) would provide huge benefits to Kosovo.

We share the Secretary-General's concerns about
the rising tensions in the run-up to Serbia's elections.
We witnessed an unfortunate series of arrests and
incidents on the ground, accompanied by unhelpful
rhetoric on both sides. We welcome the efforts of
Special Representative Zarif in liaising with the
Government in Belgrade to reach agreement not to
hold or recognize any local elections in Kosovo. The
United Kingdom welcomed the peaceful holding of
Serbian presidential and parliamentary elections for
dual nationals in Kosovo on 6 May. We are grateful to
Secretary-General Zannier and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) for their
patience and for the crucial role they played. We
support their continued involvement in the second
round of elections on 20 May. The OSCE agreement
demonstrated how the Governments in Belgrade and
Pristina can work constructively with each other and
the international community to ensure that the rights of
their dual nationals are protected.

The approaching end of supervised independence
will be an important milestone for Kosovo. It is
essential that Kosovo use this historic moment to
demonstrate its continued commitment to the full
implementation of the comprehensive settlement plan,
including respect for the culture and for the
implementation of the rights of minority communities.
That is particularly true for the Kosovan Serb
community in the north. It is now for the Government
of Kosovo to truly engage on this issue, bringing the
rule of law, education and employment to all its
citizens.

The freedom of movement continues to be a
challenge in the north. We welcome the progress made
in opening Gates 1 and 31, but the majority of traffic
continues to use the illegal bypasses. Efforts need to be
made to close them. I encourage all those who exercise
influence in northern Kosovo, including the
Government of Serbia, to work actively to deter
violence and to give consistent backing to both the
Kosovo Force and EULEX in the exercise of their
legitimate mandates to guarantee security and freedom
of movement.

We welcome the thorough work being done the
EULEX Special Investigative Task Force looking into
allegations made in the Marty report. Serious
allegations have been made, and it is inevitable that
any investigation will be complex and lengthy. In that
context, we do not believe it appropriate or warranted
to talk about the slow pace of investigations. We urge
the Government of Kosovo's continued cooperation
with the investigation. We also note the recent and
welcome enactment of legislation by Albania's
Parliament that will allow the Task Force to
autonomously conduct investigative activities on
Albanian territory.

In conclusion, the United Kingdom continues to
support Kosovo and Serbia's irreversible progress
towards joining the European Union. We urge them
both to make the most of the opportunities provided by
the European Union this year to enable them to move
along their respective paths. We also look forward to
the continued constructive engagement of Belgrade and
Pristina in the EU-facilitated dialogue, which provides
a space for both Governments to propose creative
solutions in the development of their relationship.

