Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I would
like to thank Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson,
Mr. Simonovic', Mr. Ging and Ambassador Apakan for
their briefings today. I also welcome the participation
of the Foreign Ministers of Ukraine and Lithuania in
this meeting.

In resolution 2202 (2015), the Council unanimously
called on all parties to implement the package of
measures for the implementation of the Minsk
agreements, which was to have been completed by
the end of this year, less than 20 days from now. We
are very concerned at the slow progress, and we urge
renewed efforts to ensure full compliance with the
commitments under the agreements, which, as others
have noted, offer the best chance for a durable peace.

As the briefers have outlined today, the continuing
presence of foreign fighters and the flow of weapons
and ammunition into the separatist-controlled areas
make the renewal of hostilities a constant possibility.
New Zealand calls on all the parties to the conflict to
deliver on their commitments to a genuine and sustained
ceasefire and to the verified withdrawal of proscribed
weapons.

On the political track, a number of key outstanding
elements of the Minsk process still need to be resolved.
We urge the parties to reach agreement on the
modalities for free and fair elections in the conflict
areas, in accordance with Ukrainian law and with
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) standards, and for elections to be monitored by
the OSCE. The restoration oflasting peace to the region
requires the restoration of Ukraine's control over its
border with Russia. In order for that to occur, the parties
will need to reach agreement on, and implement, all of
the political elements of the Minsk agreements.

All parties to the conflict agreed that the OSCE
would play a special role in monitoring and verifying
compliance with the Minsk agreements. Yet the OSCE
continues daily to report significant restrictions on its
access throughout eastern Ukraine. The separatists
must comply with all the obligations undertaken in
Minsk, including by ensuring that OSCE monitors are
able to carry out their work effectively and safely. We
call on Russia to use its considerable influence over the
separatists to ensure such compliance.

The twelfth report on the human rights situation
in Ukraine by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights records a troubling list
of human rights abuses in eastern Ukraine and Crimea,
including a lack of protection and justice for victims,
impunity for perpetrators on both sides and a prevailing
climate of fear in the separatist-controlled territories.
We call for urgent independent oversight of places
of detention and for investigation and accountability
for all violations of human rights. It is clear that the
humanitarian problems are large, with millions of
affected people in the conflict area. As we have heard
today, the situation is already dire in some areas. With
the further onset of winter, the already difficult lives of
civilians affected by conflict in Ukraine will become
even more perilous.

As we have also heard, critical infrastructure has
been damaged in the conflict and is in need of repair.
Many are without adequate shelter owing to the shelling
of residential areas. Secure access to food has become
increasingly challenging. Landmines and unexploded
ordnance are posing a critical risk to civilians, thereby
underscoring the need for mine clearance and mine
awareness on both sides of the conflict line.

The difficult situation facing civilians has been
greatly exacerbated by the restrictions imposed on
humanitarian actors in recent months, such as purported
registration requirements enforced by the separatists.
We call on all parties to do everything within their
power to ensure that humanitarian assistance can freely
reach those who need it in Ukraine.

The Council has previously determined to remain
seized of the situation in Ukraine. Until fundamental
issues have been resolved, it is right that the Council
continues to monitor the situation very closely.

