Mr. Titov: I would like to thank you, Madam
President, for the opportunity to present the sixth
report (S/2008/281) of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Integrated Office in Sierra Leone
(UNIOSIL). The report provides an update on major
developments in that country and highlights the key
challenges facing it. It also contains the Secretary-
General's recommendations on the mandate, structure
and strength of the integrated office that is being
proposed to succeed UNIOSIL. My remarks in
introducing the report will be relatively brief. I will
focus on the preparations for the local elections, the
challenges being faced by the security sector, the
socio-economic conditions in the country, human rights
and rule of law issues, peacebuilding support activities
and the proposed mandate, structure and strength of the
post-UNIOSIL office.

Since its inauguration into office in September
last year, the new Government of Sierra Leone has
taken several major steps to implement its reform
agenda, as well as policies that promote transparency
and accountability. As mentioned in the report,
President Koroma has outlined his vision for change
for the country, Cabinet ministers have signed
contracts agreeing to implement the priorities outlined
by the President, Parliament has continued to function
and the judiciary organs are fully operational.

The political and security situation in the country
remains generally calm, although incidents -
sometimes violent, as took place recently - are
emanating from political intolerance between
supporters of the main opposition political party, the
Sierra Leone People's Party (SLPP), and the ruling
political party, the All People's Congress (APC).

On 5 July, Sierra Leone will take another major
step towards enhancing its democratic process, with
the holding of local council elections. The United
08-32986
Nations Development Programme (UNDP), in close
cooperation with UNIOSIL, has deployed a United
Nations electoral assistance team, which is providing
technical support to the National Electoral
Commission. Through a UNDP-managed basket fund,
international partners have pledged and already
contributed a considerable amount, totalling
$24.6 million, required for the elections. The candidate
nomination process for the elections ended on 20 April.
Some 1,300 candidates have submitted nomination
papers for 456 councillor positions in 394 electoral
wards, while 65 candidates have submitted nomination
papers for 19 Council chairperson or mayor positions
in the country.

As members of the Council have seen from the
report, the United Nations is providing technical
assistance to the National Electoral Commission and is
also assisting with the procurement of voter
registration and election materials. As a result of the
very tight timelines for the elections, the Electoral
Commission, in consultation with the political parties,
has agreed to shorten the voter registration period. In
addition, the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) is making efforts to expedite the procurement
of election materials.

However, there is concern that political tensions
between supporters of the SLPP and the APC will
continue in the period leading up to the local council
elections. Therefore, UNIOSIL is working closely and
actively with all key stakeholders, including the
Government, opposition parties, the National Electoral
Commission, the Political Parties Registration
Commission and civil society to ensure peaceful and
violence-free elections. In addition, with the assistance
of UNIOSIL, a security plan, funded through the
UNDP Basket Fund, is being prepared by the Sierra
Leone Police. The United Nations Mission is also
helping to strengthen the Political Parties District Code
of Conduct Monitoring Committees, which usually
plays a vital mediation role in the electoral process.

We are glad to report that considerable progress
has been made in enhancing the professionalism and
effectiveness of the Republic of Sierra Leone Armed
Forces and the Sierra Leone Police. UNIOSIL has been
helpful in training and mentoring the police and in
building the capacity of the Office of National
Security, which coordinates all Sierra Leonean security
sector agencies, while the United Kingdom-led
International Military Advisory Training Team has
08-32986

been assisting with the training of the Republic of
Sierra Leone Armed Forces. In an effort to streamline
the armed forces, the Government recently approved a
reduction in its strength from a personnel of 10,500 to
8,500 persons, which is expected to take place over the
period of the next two years. Despite these
achievements, both the army and the police continue to
be plagued by serious logistical deficiencies, in
particular shortages of accommodation, equipment and
fuel supplies, especially for the conduct of patrols.
Moreover, the national security agencies still require
assistance in building capacity to combat drug
trafficking and to improve airport security.

On the subject of socio-economic developments
in the country, regrettably, there has been little
improvement on this front. The soaring prices of staple
commodities and fuel have exacerbated the overall
security conditions in the country. Although the
Government is sensitizing the population about the
external factors leading to the rise in the cost of the
country's main staple - rice - there is a real risk that
discontent over price increases could trigger unrest.
The Government has created a task force to deal with
the food crisis and has promised to work towards
achieving self-sufficiency in rice production, which
will obviously require time and considerable
investment to achieve. Currently, the country is
producing only 30 per cent of the rice it consumes.

The peace consolidation process in Sierra Leone
has the potential to be compromised if the country does
not generate adequate employment opportunities for
the multitude of young people. It is hoped that the
Bumbuna Hydroelectric Project, which is expected to
increase power supplies across the country, will create
considerable employment opportunities and increase
private investment in the country. In the short- to
medium-term, the country will continue to need
generous and sustainable support from the international
community to create jobs.

As regards human rights and the rule of law, I
would like to inform the Council that there has been an
overall improvement in the human rights situation in
the country, as evidenced by the increased respect for
civil and political rights, the adoption of legislation on
the rights of women and children and the work of the
Human Rights Commission. However, efforts to
implement the recommendations of the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission are still very slow. The
Justice Sector Development Programme funded by the
3
United Kingdom's Department for International
Development is playing a critical role in building the
capacity of the justice sector. However, the
Government will continue to require long-term external
support in order to establish credible and sustainable
rule of law institutions.

On the Peacebuilding Commission, the adoption
by the Commission of a Peacebuilding Cooperation
Framework for Sierra Leone has injected fresh impetus
into the peace consolidation process. UNIOSIL is
working closely with Ambassador Majoor, the
Peacebuilding Commission's country-specific chair for
Sierra Leone, to support the overall work of the
Commission. The United Nations mission is advising
the Government on the implementation of its
commitments contained in the Framework, supporting
the Government's preparations for meetings of the
Peacebuilding Commission and bringing key
stakeholders together to promote peacebuilding
activities.

Finally, I would like to say a few words about the
mandate and structure of the new proposed mission. As
members have seen from the report before the Council,
the document sets out the Secretary-General's
recommendations on the mandate, structure and
strength of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office, as had been requested by the
Council. These recommendations were developed
through a consultative process that involved various
players, including the Department of Political Affairs,
the United Nations Development Programme, the
Peacebuilding Support Office, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, obviously, the Department of
Field Support and the country team. These
recommendations were also the result of extensive
consultations with senior Government officials in
Sierra Leone, political parties, civil society and
development partners. Every effort has been made to
ensure that the new entity, the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office (UNIPSIL), optimizes
United Nations system-wide cooperation and synergies
in the fulfilment of its mandate.

As outlined in the report, UNIPSIL will assist the
Government in several tasks: identifying and resolving
political tensions, completing good governance
reforms, politically and economically empowering
youth and women, implementing the Peacebuilding
Cooperation Framework, supporting the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding
Fund, strengthening the justice sector and supporting
security sector reform.

The report proposes that the new office be headed
by an Executive Representative of the Secretary-
General, who will report directly to the Department of
Political Affairs, as well as to the UNDP Administrator,
in his or her capacity as United Nations Resident
Coordinator and as UNDP Resident Representative. As
the Council is aware, since the departure in December
of the former Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Victor Angelo, this position has
been vacant. The Secretary-General is in the process of
identifying a suitable replacement. We expect that the
post will be filled shortly.

In conclusion, there are hopeful prospects for
Sierra Leone to move forward and improve its socio-
economic situation. However, such progress will
require the Government to make tough economic and
political decisions and implement policies that promote
transparency and accountability. It will also require
sacrifice and patience on the part of the Sierra Leonean
population as the country continues its journey towards
full economic and social recovery. I would like to
underline that there is a real opportunity to consolidate
the gains already made in the country if the
international community sustains its support for the
peacebuilding process.

Finally, allow me to convey our profound
gratitude to the Security Council, the troop- and police-
contributing countries, the Economic Community of
West African States, the African Union, our bilateral
and multilateral partners and non-governmental
organizations for their consistent support to UNIOSIL,
which has enabled the Mission to accomplish so much
within its mandated tasks. Obviously, we are also
grateful to the strong country-specific support of the
Peacebuilding Commission, under the impressive
leadership of Ambassador Majoor.

