Mr. Marsico (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, I wish to thank Mr. Annabi for the
comprehensive and useful information he has given us.
We note with satisfaction the positive evolution of the
situation in East Timor, in particular as regards
security. It should be stressed that, since early March,
no incidents have been recorded along the frontier of
the territory and that the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) has
succeeded in developing good cooperation with the
military authorities of Indonesia. It is also good to see
the growing involvement of the East Timorese leaders
in the decision-making process on the future of the
territory. We believe that this initiative on the part of
UNTAET will make it possible to create conditions for
the development of the essential institutions and
political framework for the independent life of East
Timor.
In this context, I would like once again to express
the appreciation and gratitude of the Argentine
Republic for the excellent performance by Mr. Sergio
Vieira de Mello and all the personnel of UNTAET. In
addition, we would like to congratulate the Indonesian
authorities on their cooperative attitude towards the
United Nations, a clear indication of which was the
judicial process initiated against those responsible for
the lamentable violent events that occurred in 1999. We
trust that this positive trend will also help solve the
refugee problem in West Timor.

With regard to the current situation on the island
of Timor, I would like to express the solidarity and
sorrow of the people and the Government of Argentina
in respect of the serious flooding that has recently
occurred. In this connection, we hope that UNTAET's
assistance, and that of international humanitarian
agencies, will help alleviate the suffering of those
affected. It is also our hope that United Nations
assistance will contribute to clearing up misinformation
and preconceptions that apparently continue to exist in
some refugee camps. This would make it easier for the
people there to return to East Timor.

Lastly, I would like to ask Mr. Annabi about
developments in the talks concerning the future of the
Armed Forces for the National Liberation of East
Timor (Falintil), especially in the light of the position
of the leaders of East Timor regarding the creation of
armed forces for a future independent State.

