Mr. Logar (Slovenia): I would like to join the
others in expressing its appreciation to your delegation,
Madam, for organizing this debate on the promotion
and strengthening of the rule oflaw.

My delegation fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union. In
addition, we would like to make a few comments in our
national capacity about topics of special interest.

The rule of law is key not only to international
peace and security, but also to sustainable development,
respect for human rights and the fight against impunity.
It is also a precondition for success in those areas. The
international community, including the organs of the
United Nations, must therefore step up its efforts to
strengthen its support to countries requiring assistance
in establishing, upholding and respecting the rule of
law.

My delegation recognizes the linkages between the
rule of law and the maintenance of peace and security.
We therefore welcome the inclusion of rule-of-law
parameters in several of the mandates adopted by the
Security Council. The inclusion of clear, tailor-made
rule-of-law activities is of significant importance in
securing stability in conflict and post-conflict areas in
the future. In that regard, we believe that feasible time
lines, a follow-up mechanism and strict accountability
for actions taken should be included in the mandates.
Cooperation between the international community and
experts in diverse security situations might be also
useful.
Regional organizations, and especially local
stakeholders, should also be included in the process
of establishing the rule of law, as national ownership
of the process is crucial in upholding the rule of law
after the expiration of a mandate. Therefore, technical
assistance to local judicial institutions is vital, and
evaluation and monitoring of our work in enhancing
the rule of law are of great importance. It is essential
that international organizations and other stakeholders
work together towards a balanced, fair and just world
that can only be achieved in the presence of functioning
rule-of-law institutions.

Cooperation at the national and international levels
must be enhanced, and the various international and
regional organizations should become involved in
specific situations. The role of individual international
organizations should be based on their mandates,
expertise, facilities and other comparative advantages.
Their role should be clearly defined, duplication of
efforts avoided and information on good practices and
lessons learned exchanged.

In that regard, we recognize that the activities
of NATO have contributed towards a stable security
environment, enabling other international organizations
and stakeholders to implement various aspects of
stabilization and reconstruction.

The rule of law also includes the fight against
impunity. We believe that the role of international
criminal courts and tribunals, in particular the
International Criminal Court (ICC), is essential
in establishing the rule of law. The prosecution of
international crimes should remain the primary
responsibility of States, according to the principle of
complementarity. The role ofthe ICC takes on particular
importance in cases where States are unable or unwilling
to prosecute perpetrators of the most heinous crimes. In
that context, we emphasize the need to strengthen the
international legal framework for judicial assistance
and extradition between States in order to support the
effective prosecution of international crimes at the
national level.

Having recognized that legal gap, Slovenia, the
Netherlands, Belgium and Argentina have been working
together on an initiative to consider the possibility of
adopting a new international instrument on mutual
legal assistance and extradition so as to ensure effective
investigation and prosecution ofthe most serious crimes
of international concern by domestic jurisdictions.

To conclude, as a staunch supporter of the ICC,
Slovenia would like to encourage the Council to
seriously consider referrals to the International
Criminal Court as one of the tools for establishing the
rule of law. In that connection, an effective follow-up of
the referred cases is equally essential.

