Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): Allow me to begin by thanking Viet Nam for convening this important debate on upholding the Charter of the United Nations. Let me join others in congratulating the newly elected members of the Security Council and wishing them success during their tenure. We thank the outgoing members, including two of the three African members of the Council - Cote d'Ivoire and Equatorial Guinea - as well as Kuwait, Peru and Poland for their important contributions to the work of the Council. The topic that you have chosen, Mr. President, could not be more relevant in the context of the current state of affairs in the international arena and the role that the United Nations and the Security Council play in that regard. In 1945, Ethiopia was one of the only four African States to sign the Charter of the United Nations to establish a new world order based on international law and cooperation. It has indeed been an indispensable multilateral forum for advancing collective security and promoting sustainable development. Nearly 75 years later, the grand principles laid down by its founders - sovereign equality, territorial integrity, political independence, non-intervention and the peaceful settlement of disputes - remain pertinent and immutable. Its primary purposes, as defined in Article | of the Charter, also remain as relevant today as they were in 1945. In the intervening decades, the United Nations has recorded remarkable advances and progress in fostering peace, security and international cooperation. It has had its share of challenges and shortcomings. However, in spite of those challenges - or maybe even because of them - it remains the only truly global multilateral body dedicated to safeguarding international peace and security, promoting respect for human rights and ensuring sustainable development for all. In peacekeeping, the United Nations continues to make enormous contributions. As a leading troop- contributing country, my country has, over the years, deployed more than 90,000 troops in more than 11 United Nations and African Union (AU) missions to safeguard international peace and security. Currently, there are more than 8,000 Ethiopian troops and police officers serving in a number of missions. There has, of course, been a groundswell of change in the global geopolitical landscape since the founding of the United Nations. Today, we are facing unprecedented challenges and threats, ranging from terrorism and violent extremism to transnational organized crime, unilateralism, protectionism and the weaponization of digital technology, including the use of social media for nefarious purposes. The rise of poverty and inequality, the spread of pandemic diseases, the impact of climate change and other socioeconomic challenges continue to have serious ramifications for our collective security. The need for revitalized multilateralism has never been greater. However, to remain effective, functional and relevant in the face of highly dynamic global events, the post-war international system must continually reform and evolve. That is why we need a renewed commitment to the multilateral system and the efficacy of the United Nations system. The question then is how we make this premier multilateral Organization fit for purpose in the twenty-first century. We believe that bolstering partnerships at all levels is critical to revitalize the United Nations system. Member States must show serious commitment to the reform of the United Nations. We should use the occasion of the seventy-fifth anniversary to develop and strengthen partnership and cooperation, particularly with regional and subregional organizations. In that regard, the United Nations-AU strategic partnership has shown promising potential, including in the context of the implementation of the African Union's goal of silencing the guns by 2020. Partnership forms the foundational basis for a more resilient global and regional security architecture that will enable the United Nations to respond to the aspirations of "We, the peoples". While we need to deepen and institutionalize cooperation between the United Nations and AU, we must also be willing to go beyond the current focus on peace and security and pursue robust collaboration in other areas. As the primary organ entrusted by the Charter with the responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security, the Security Council must embrace the changing global dynamics and recommit to pursuing robust political solutions through meaningful partnerships with regional and subregional organizations. The Charter attaches great importance to prevention. In our contemporary context, that entails addressing the root causes of conflicts, which increase the vulnerability of States. Such causes include political, economic and social exclusion, particularly of young people, women and marginalized groups; high rates of unemployment; rapid urbanization; deficits in governance; the mismanagement of diversity; and the competition for increasingly scarce natural resources. Those challenges are further exacerbated by weak State institutions and the lack of capacity to deliver for a population that increasingly demands its rights and the efficient delivery of public services. The complex and protracted nature of today's conflicts means that domestic crises are often not contained within national borders and the resulting spillover may take the form of mass migration or a refugee crisis. In the Horn of Africa, sweeping political reforms and the region-wide rapprochement initiated by my country has rekindled hopes for lasting stability and a new era of regional cooperation. There is now positive momentum and a range of possibilities for progress towards regional economic integration. The Security Council has recognized those positive developments. That recognition must be followed by concrete support as the countries of the region strive to advance peace and prosperity. Countries in the region must be encouraged to deepen and institutionalize the political and economic reforms that they have initiated, including through the lifting of unilateral embargoes and by de-securitizing the Red Sea and the Gulf of Aden. To conclude, the global concerns and realities of our time require us to reaffirm, with one voice, our solemn commitment to the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter. The ban on inter-State war in the United Nations Charter has so far contributed to forestalling another world war. In these trying times, we must once again resolve to maintain that trajectory. It will not be easy, but we must show greater wisdom and not be deterred by temporary waves of populism and unilateral tendencies that could undermine the multilateral system and the international law that it is based on. Let me take this opportunity to underline Ethiopia's unwavering commitment to the enduring tenets of the United Nations Charter and to playing its part fully, as it has done for more than seven decades.
