Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): It is a
great pleasure for me, as I am speaking for the first time
in the Security Council, to wish you, Mr. President, and
all members a happy New Year and to congratulate you
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
the month of January. I wish you every success.

I would also like to congratulate the newly elected
members of the Council and wish them every success in
the two years ahead.

Forty years after our first term on the Council, I
take this opportunity to reiterate that we look forward
to working together and cooperating with members on
all issues on the agenda of the Council. The State of
Kuwait will work unremittingly during its term on the
Council, in compliance with the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, hoping that our
efforts will succeed in achieving the aspirations of our
peoples and the whole world.

We listened carefully to the statement made by
Assistant Secretary-General Taye-Brook Zerihoun
and welcome the information provided to us, as well
as his efforts and those of all staff of the Department
of Political Affairs. We take note of the letter dated
3 January 2018 from the Permanent Representative of
Iran addressed to the Secretary-General, as well as the
press statement issued yesterday by the spokesperson
for the Secretary-General, in which he expressed the
Secretary-General's concern regarding the recent
events in Iran and his deploration of the loss of life due
to the demonstrations in Iran.

Regrettably, we have been following what has
been reported and statements citing the Iranian the
authorities regarding the loss of life among civilians
and members of the security forces, as well as the
various acts of violence that have occurred over the past
few days. In that context, we stress that it is important
to respect the freedom of expression and rights of
peaceful demonstrators, in accordance with the Iranian
Constitution and international law, including the
International Covenant on Political and Civil Rights,
adopted by the General Assembly in 1966 (resolution 2200A (XXI)), which guarantees freedom of expression
and freedom of assembly, among other things.

The State of Kuwait deems it important to engage
in preventive diplomacy and strengthen the role of the
Security Council in the prevention of conflicts and
addressing events at an early stage, when there are signs
of future threats to regional and international peace and

security. We hope that the popular demonstrations in
Iran do not take that direction. In that regard, we would
like to stress that, when dealing with such events, it is
essential to abide by established principles regulating
relations among States, based on the Charter of the
United Nations, that is, respect for the sovereignty of
States, non-interference in their internal affairs and
compliance with the remit of the various bodies of the
United Nations. The Council, according to Article 24
of the Charter, is the organ charged with maintaining
international peace and security and with addressing
any genuine threat to global security and stability.

Over the past few years, several States in the Middle
East have witnessed demonstrations and protests that
were peaceful at first but, regrettably, turned violent,
leading to loss oflife, damage to infrastructure, foreign
interference and instability in the region. Some of these
events had disastrous results that the international
community is still dealing with and suffering from.
We hope that this will not happen in Iran or in any
other State.

The Islamic Republic of Iran is our neighbour,
with which we have long-standing historical relations.
We are keen to maintain friendly and stable relations
with it based on good-neighbourliness, mutual respect,
common interests and non-interference. We have
stated this in the framework of the Gulf Cooperation
Council and of various Arab and Islamic bodies, whose
concerns we convey to the Council. The stability and
security of Iran is closely linked to that of the region
and of the world as a whole. We hope that the situation
in Iran does not evolve into further violence. We call
for necessary measures to be taken and restraint to be
shown in dealing with the demonstrators, so that there
are no further victims. Their demands must be heard
and dealt with wisely so as to improve their living
conditions and prevent tensions from escalating and to
ward off instability.

