Mr. Dejammet (France) (spoke in French): The
Council is naturally honoured that this meeting is being
held under the presidency of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Malaysia, and that it concerns a subject of great
importance to my country.

In the decade that is now drawing to a close, no
region in the world has been spared the heightening of
internal conflict. These confrontations have often involved
not only regular forces, but also armed groups, insurgents,
militia - unbridled elements that vie with each other for
control of parcels of land. Proliferation and spread of
these armed groups, combined with the spread of light
weapons, makes it even more difficult and complicated to
conclude peace agreements and, where they do exist, to
verify compliance.

Nothing can replace agreement by the parties
concerned to apply peace arrangements in good faith.
Here,the role of the Security Council is decisive even
though peacekeeping and peace-building are the result of
the efforts of all actors: international institutions, regional
organizations, donor States and other funding bodies.

The disarmament of ex-combatants is, as Malaysia
has rightly affirmed, a problem that deserves attention,
and for which we must find a lasting solution. The recent
case of Guinea-Bissau shows that the recovery and
stocking of weapons, even under surveillance, does not
adequately prevent fresh outbreaks of tension or the
resumption of hostilities. Only the destruction of these
weapons can really prevent their being used again; such
provisions should be part of peace agreements sponsored
by regional organizations and the United Nations. It is
therefore necessary to include this objective of
demobilization and demilitarization in a comprehensive
approach. Collection of weapons must go hand in hand
with demobilization and the reintegration into civil life of
those who bear arms. Without the possibility of social
rehabilitation, and reintegration into national life, ex-
combatants will be inclined to take up their weapons
again at the first hitch in a peace agreement or because
they will simply see this as the best, or only way of
improving their living conditions.

It has therefore clearly become essential for
agreements putting an end to conflicts - in particular
internal conflicts - to include precise provisions for
implementation and verification in the context of
disarmament, demobilization and the reintegration of ex-
combatants.

But the international community must not evade its
own political and financial responsibilities to make
possible the implementation of these agreements and
thereby ensure the success of peaceful transition. This
effort on the part of the international community can take
many forms. First, in the case of the deployment of

 
authorized multinational forces or United Nations
peacekeeping operations, the task of collecting, storing and,
as I said earlier, destroying such weapons, could be
included in the mandate of those forces and operations.
Secondly, help could be provided for restructuring the
armed forces in order to avoid the maintenance or re-
establishment of militias, and, in some cases, for
reintegrating some of the ex-combatants into established,
controlled military structures. Lastly, and most important,
economic assistance could be provided for rehabilitation
and development so as to deter ex-combatants from ever
using armed force again.

In all of these areas, more generous support from the
international community would be necessary. The lack of
financial resources is, in fact, the main obstacle to the
implementation of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes. In this respect, we can only
express regret that too often such activities depend on
voluntary contributions which, by their very nature, are
uncertain. In a number of cases, programmes were carefully
developed by the United Nations, but in the end it was not
possible to implement them because of a lack of funding.

The record of the efforts made over the past few years
is thus extremely uneven. The saddest example is the
resumption of fighting in Angola, which is a cruel
illustration of the failure of a disarmament and
demobilization operation envisioned in a peace agreement
and conducted by and entrusted to the United Nations.

Fortunately, there are, on the other hand, some
positive exceptions. In Mali, Mozambique, Cambodia, the
Central African Republic and Guatemala, the tasks of
disarmament, demobilization and the reintegration of ex-
combatants into civilian life have been undertaken and
successfully completed, in the first place, because of the
involvement of the parties, but also because of the
persistence and constancy of international assistance. The
United Nations Operation in Mozambique, the United
Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia, the Inter-
African Mission to Monitor the Implementation of the
Bangui Agreements (MISAB) and the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINURCA) have
played an essential role in applying the principles that we
are discussing today. The two operations in the Central
African Republic - one of which, MISAB, was a
multinational operation entrusted exclusively to Africans,
the other, MINURCA, being a United Nations mission -
succeeded in recovering and keeping under control over 90
per cent of the heavy weapons and 60 per cent of the light
weapons that had been circulating during three uprisings
that broke out in 1996. A demobilization programme was
developed with the assistance of United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), and we should pay
particular tribute to the work of UNDP in this field.
UNDP has played a fundamental role in the
demilitarization of the Central African Republic, an
operation which is preserving respect for civilian life.

We must bear these examples in mind in dealing
with the problems arising today in several post-conflict
situations, situations that completely justify the statement
made by the Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Frechette, to
whom we express our gratitude.

In Guinea-Bissau, it is now truly essential for the
weapons-collection operation initiated by the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) to resume fully and to
succeed and for the combatants to be demobilized,
thereby contributing to the stabilization of the country as
it prepares for elections.

We are pleased that an agreement has just been
signed by the parties in Sierra Leone, and we understand
very well how essential this is to our British friends. That
agreement includes a section devoted to disarmament,
cantonment, demobilization and the reintegration of
combatants. The United Nations, which is involved
through the United Nations Observer Mission in Sierra
Leone (UN OMSIL), working together with the parties in
Sierra Leone and with ECOMOG - the competent
regional organization - must see to it that this task is
successfully completed if we truly want that country,
which has been at war for eight years, to rediscover
peace, with its attendant benefits, in particular the return
of refugees. And we know that almost 400,000 refugees
are in the neighbouring country of Guinea.

The same can be said about the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Again, the news is good, although the
situation is fragile. The success and the solidity of the
ceasefire agreement that has just been signed by the
warring parties will require the recovery of weapons and
the demobilization of combatants from the many armed
groups, militias and rebels that have been present in the
Great Lakes region for a number of years. The task is
considerable. That is another reason why this debate,
convened by Malaysia, is so timely and important.

We must also talk about Kosovo, where, in
accordance with Security Council resolution 1244 (1999),
it is the duty of the international security presence to

 

demilitarize the Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA) and the
other Albanian armed groups, as well as to establish a safe
environment for the civilian population. That is necessary
if we want peace to be restored and the provisions of the
important resolution adopted here to be fully implemented.

Those are the reasons why we are grateful for your
country's initiative, Mr. President, which deals with
concrete problems that relate to several conflicts being dealt
with by the Security Council. The presidential statement
that will be adopted at the end of this debate will confirm
the importance the Council attaches to this question, and,
above all, its determination, stimulated by the statements
made today, to find answers. It will then be up to the
Council to embody in each case the principles and
recommendations that it will endorse in that statement.

