Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): Today the Security
Council is meeting to discuss an issue of serious concern to
all of us, one that has broad ramifications for issues of such
profound interest as international terrorism and the safety
and security of Heads of State and Government. In this
connection, my delegation expresses its indignation at the
assassination attempt on the President of the Arab
Republic of Egypt, His Excellency Mr. Hosni Mubarak,
on 26 June 1995 in Addis Ababa, during the opening of
the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU). It is particularly
abhorrent that this infamous event occurred in Ethiopia,
constituting a glaring violation of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of that State.

The Indonesian delegation continues to strongly
condemn acts of violence and terrorism, which are the
most flagrant violation of human rights. It is our hope
that the perpetrators of this act of violence will be
brought swiftly to justice. In this connection, my
delegation reiterates its view that no individual, group or
country is immune from international terrorism and its
devastating consequences. We therefore call for
intensified cooperation, at the national, international and
regional levels, in the fight against terrorism, wherever it
may occur, and by whomever and against whomever it
may be perpetrated. We were dismayed by the situation
that arose in the aftermath of this event, particularly since
it involves countries with which Indonesia enjoys cordial
and fraternal relations and which are members of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

In our view, the most expeditious way to resolve this
question would be for the Security Council to extend its
full support to the continuing bilateral efforts that have
already been made. These endeavours should be
augmented by the OAU, as regional efforts would also
make a substantial contribution to resolving this issue,
which impacts the critical interests of all its members. We
therefore commend the efforts of the nations concerned,
and of the OAU, in seeking to find a lasting solution.

My delegation gives its full support to operative
paragraph 7 of the draft resolution, which requests the
Secretary-General to seek the cooperation of the
Government of the Sudan. We also see merit in this
proposal because the method established requires the
cooperation of the Government of the Sudan, without
which cooperation the task of the OAU would be
rendered infinitely more difficult.

In this connection, my delegation notes that the
Government of the Sudan has expressed its condemnation
of international terrorism and has voiced its willingness to
cooperate with the OAU and the countries concerned.
Towards this end, it is gratifying to note that the
Government of the Sudan has extended invitations, most
recently on 25 January 1996, to the Secretary-General of

 

the OAU. In this context, the detailed information relating
to the three suspects gathered from reliable and
authoritative sources can be utilized for further
investigations.

We note that the draft resolution before us today
should be viewed as supporting the thrust and the objectives
of the statements by the Central Organ of the OAU
Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management and
Resolution, adopted on ll September 1995 and
19 December 1995. We hope that the draft resolution will
facilitate the OAU's tasks.

After careful consideration, my delegation has decided
to vote in favour of the draft resolution, because it offers a
pragmatic approach to dealing with this urgent matter. It
also provides the OAU with a flexible and appropriate
mechanism for resolving this question. A pragmatic
approach of this kind takes into account the interests and
viewpoints of the parties directly involved in this
unfortunate episode.

We therefore call upon all parties to do their utmost to
refrain from any actions that might lead to, or be construed
as, attempts to escalate tensions further. In this regard, we
urgently appeal to all parties to cooperate fully with the
Secretary-General of the OAU in his efforts to achieve a
peaceful and speedy resolution to this matter.

Given the nature of the evolving situation, it would be
premature to contemplate any further action by the Council
at this stage.

In conclusion, we are confident that the good offices
of the Secretary-General of the United Nations combined
with the determined efforts of the OAU will yield positive
results.

