Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I would like to
start by thanking you, Sir, and your British presidency
for organizing this special meeting of the Council this
morning.

I also would like to say that, having listened to
the very pertinent proposals this morning, contained in
the Secretary-General's statement, and to his
contribution, which we welcome, they definitely enrich
our debate.

Three years ago, by adopting the Millennium
Declaration, which embodies a large number of
specific commitments, the entire United Nations
membership shared a common vision aimed at creating
an appropriate legal framework based on the rule of
law and justice. As referred to in the preamble of the
Charter, the peoples of the United Nations are
determined to establish conditions under which justice
and respect for the obligations arising from the treaties
and other sources of international law can be
maintained. The Charter is, therefore, the most
important instrument dealing with the rule of law and
justice in promoting peace and stability.

At the Millennium Summit, the Secretary-General
encouraged States to sign, ratify and accede to
international treaties. Specific attention was paid to the
core group of multilateral treaties that represent the
objectives of the Charter and reflect the Organization's
values. While the increasing willingness of States to
make that commitment should be commended, the gap
between commitments and concrete action must be
closed.

In that connection, the concrete proposals
presented to us this morning by the Secretary-General
show the importance and timeliness of this morning's
debate. People throughout the world remain victims of
summary executions, disappearance and torture. It is
therefore our firm conviction that the most important
contribution that our Organization can make lies in the
promotion of the development of treaties and relations
among States that make implementation of the set of
laws that exist, and those that are created, possible.

The system of collective security provided by the
Charter is of vital importance to the maintenance of
international peace and security and the peaceful
settlement of disputes. At the same time, the Charter
acknowledges the important role that regional
arrangements can play. In that connection, the
contribution of African countries to the rule of law
relating to peacekeeping represents interesting aspects
concerning the relationship between regional
arrangements and the Charter.

The engagement of the African Union mission in
Burundi and of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) in Liberia and Sierra Leone
is a very concrete demonstration of the willingness and
the active commitment of the African countries, the
region and subregional organizations to enforce peace
and security based on justice and the rule of law.

Furthermore, the concrete lessons drawn from the
peace process in my own country, Angola, with the role
played by the countries of the Southern African
Development Community in combating the illegal
exploitation of natural resources and in the activities
relating to the effective implementation of United
Nations resolutions regarding sanctions on arms and
petroleum embargoes, travel bans and the freeze of
assets, all clearly demonstrate what can be achieved
when there is political will on the part of the countries
and the international community.

The close cooperation between the Security
Council and the African Union reinforces the need for
even closer cooperation in the future between the
United Nations and regional organizations, and
provides important lessons for the Security Council in
its efforts to strengthen the role of the United Nations
in safeguarding the rule of law and justice.

International efforts to deal with many of the
problems associated with justice and the rule of law in
preventing armed conflict, as well as in post-conflict
situations in Africa, have succeeded significantly. For
instance, the Constitutive Act of the African Union, as
a landmark in this trend, provides for the right of
intervention in any member State in case of grave
circumstances, such as war crimes, genocide and
crimes against humanity.

It also provides for the right of member States to
request intervention by the Union to restore peace and
security and to reject unconstitutional changes of
Government. In a word, African countries have
recognized the primacy of international law and the
importance of the rule of law and justice for the
prevention and settlement of conflicts.

The African countries and the international
community have put in place a comprehensive set of
international legal instruments designed to prevent
impunity and atrocities such as those which have been
committed in various countries. Those instruments also
represent an important contribution by the continent.
By establishing the special criminal courts for Rwanda
and Sierra Leone, the Security Council showed its
determination to enforce the rules of international
humanitarian law. The lessons learned from the work
of those tribunals were of great relevance in inspiring
the international community to establish the
International Criminal Court.

The role of the United Nations in enhancing the
role of international law in international relations is
constructive and cuts across many fields. While some
African countries are doing well, poverty in Africa
continues to rise. In my delegation's view, in order to
make the work of the United Nations more effective
and to better promote peace, justice and the rule of law,
the international community should address important
challenges such as extreme poverty, the devastating
debt burdens of developing countries and the threat
posed by the illegal exploitation of natural resources
and its consequences. It should support initiatives and
local strategies for securing adequate resources from
the international community in order to enable the
recovery and development of countries emerging from
conflict situations, for ensuring support for country-led
economic and social initiatives focusing on poverty
reduction, for urging donor countries to fulfil their
commitments to increased assistance to the least
developed countries, for building supplementary
peacekeeping capacity in cooperation with the regional
organizations, and for making international technical
assistance available to help countries to harmonize
their domestic laws with international obligations.

To conclude, we deem very important the
initiative of scheduling this public meeting. With the
important contributions made in the Council this
morning, I think the international community has again
received very valid input to feed into what the
Secretary-General has started in this very important
deliberation.

