Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
At the outset, allow me to thank you, Sir, for calling
for this debate on the situation in Sierra Leone, and
Mr. Michael von der Schulenberg and Ambassador
Frank Majoor for their very comprehensive statements.
We also welcome the presence here of our new
colleague from Sierra Leone, Ambassador Shekou
Touray, whose statement we greatly appreciated.

In considering the prevailing situation in Sierra
Leone and the information provided in the various
briefings, we have no doubt that strenuous efforts have
been made and that tangible progress has been
achieved towards that country's recovery. We welcome
first the positive evolution in the political and security
situations in Sierra Leone, which have been marked not
only by the commitment of the actors to engaging in
constructive relations, but also by the evident resolve
of the Government of Sierra Leone to promote true
national reconciliation and ensure solid political and
economic governance. The holding of peaceful and
transparent local elections in July 2008 further
confirmed that Vision and, above all, the country's
determination to build genuine peace and security.

In that context, we cannot but welcome the
establishment in October 2008 of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone,
pursuant to Security Council resolution 1829 (2008),
and its dynamic efforts, along with all other
stakeholders, to support the peacebuilding efforts of
the Government of Sierra Leone.
Nevertheless, there are still many challenges to
overcome, in particular with regard to the vulnerability
of the socio-economic fabric, which has been
exacerbated by the current international financial
crisis. Those challenges also include the rise in the cost
of basic goods, the level of unemployment among
young people and the increase in drug trafficking and
transnational organized crime. The Agenda for Change
developed by the Government explicitly recognizes
that the ongoing scourge of corruption, the emergence
of drug trafficking and the high level of unemployment
among young people pose the principal risks to peace
and stability. In that regard, we welcome the holding
Mano River Union summit on 10 December 2008,
which provided an opportunity for the heads of State of
the Union to share their experiences with regard to
security.

With regard to peacebuilding, we have already
acknowledged how much has been done, in particular
in connection with the contributions of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra
Leone (UNIPSIL), the Peacebuilding Commission and
bilateral and multilateral partners. In that connection,
we welcome the holding of the second biannual review
of the Peacebuilding Cooperation Framework for
Sierra Leone, which took place in New York on
15 December 2008, and, in particular, the
recommendations provided to the Government of
Sierra Leone. We encourage the Government to
continue to work closely with the Peacebuilding
Commission, and we urge the Commission to support
the implementation of the Agenda for Change. We must
also continue to encourage all stakeholders to support
the strengthening of political and economic governance
and the rule of law, in particular the reform of the
public, justice and security sectors.

The Peacebuilding Fund's support is especially
welcome, for it has allowed, among other things, for
the implementation of electoral assistance projects, the
strengthening of the capacity of the police and armed
forces and the provision of support for the judicial
system. We call on the Fund to continue its support and
urge all other financial partners to continue to provide
support to the authorities of Sierra Leone, despite the
international financial crisis.

Against that backdrop, we welcome and support
the establishment of the Agenda for Change and the
Joint Vision of the United Nations Family for Sierra
Leone. We endorse those two programmes, which aim
at linking economic growth to sustainable human
development. We hope that, as underscored in
paragraph 62 of the report (S/2009/59) of the
Secretary-General, the Joint Vision can bring together
the political mandate of UNIPSIL with the activities of
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes.

We of course support the desire of Sierra Leone's
officials to hold a special session of the Peacebuilding
Commission and UNIPSIL with a View to mobilizing
the necessary resources to support the Government's
Agenda for Change and the Joint Vision of the United
Nations Family for Sierra Leone. It is essential to
emphasize the importance of greater efficiency in the
activities to support the people of Sierra Leone, as well
as to ensure close cooperation between UNIPSIL, the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the Mano River Union and international
partners and other United Nations missions in the
region.

Special attention must, in particular, be paid to
supporting economic recovery programmes;
strengthening the capacity of institutions responsible
for security and combating drug trafficking and
organized crime; implementing the recommendations
of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, in
particular by providing ongoing support for the victim
compensation programme; and supporting programmes
on good governance and the strengthening of
democratic institutions.

At this important stage in the peacebuilding
process in Sierra Leone, the international community
and the Security Council must continue to remain
committed to that country and to provide steadfast
support to its Government, which bears the primary
responsibility for the establishment of appropriate
conditions for peacebuilding and sustainable
development. For their part and in line with the means
at their disposal, ECOWAS and the African Union will
continue to support that country, which today, thanks to
the will and political courage of its people and leaders,
has been able to establish conditions for peace,
reconciliation and socio-economic recovery.

