The President (spoke in Chinese): The Security
Council will now continue its consideration of the item
on its agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council takes note with
satisfaction of the progress made so far in the
peace process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

"The Security Council calls on all the
parties to the conflict to fulfil all their
commitments, implement fully the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement (S/1999/815) and complete
the disengagement and redeployment of their
forces in accordance with the Kampala plan and
the Harare sub-plans, which the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (MONUC) will verify.

"The Security Council finds it unacceptable
that more than one year after the adoption of its
resolution 1304 (2000) of 16 June 2000
containing the demand completely to demilitarize
Kisangani, reiterated in resolution 1355 (2001) of
15 June 2001, the Rassemblement congolais pour
la democratie has thus far failed to comply with
it. The Council calls on the Rassemblement
congolais pour la democratie to implement fully
and immediately its obligations under resolution
1304 (2000), and notes that continued failure to
do so may have future implications.

"The Security Council reminds all the
parties of their obligation to cooperate fully with
MONUC and of their obligations with respect to
the security of civilian populations under the
fourth Geneva Convention relative to the

Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War of
12 August 1949. The Council urges the relevant
parties to expedite conclusion of their
investigation into the killing of six International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) staff in
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, to
report their findings to the ICRC and to bring the
perpetrators to justice.

"The Security Council calls on all parties to
facilitate and support humanitarian efforts of the
United Nations and non-governmental
organizations. It stresses the importance of the
work of the United Nations Humanitarian
Coordinator.

"The Security Council reiterates its call for
the cessation of the illegal exploitation of the
natural resources of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. In this regard, it calls on all parties to
cooperate fully with the expert panel and, looking
forward to the addendum to the report of the
panel, reiterates its readiness to consider the
necessary actions to put an end to this
exploitation.

"The Security Council reiterates its demand
on all parties to accelerate the finalization and the
implementation of comprehensive plans for the
orderly withdrawal of all foreign troops from the
territory of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and the disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration, repatriation and resettlement of all
armed groups referred to in annex A, chapter 9.1,
of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement.

"The Security Council expresses serious
concern over the activities of the armed groups in
the East of the country. It takes note with interest
of the invitation by the President of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to MONUC to
visit the camps where some members of the
armed groups have reportedly been quartered by
the Forces armees congolaises, and stresses the
importance of MONUC assisting, within its
capabilities, in the early implementation, on a
voluntary basis, of the disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration, repatriation and
resettlement of these armed groups, in accordance
with the authorization given in its resolution 1355
(2001). The Council requests in this regard the
donor community, in particular the World Bank

and the European Union, to provide financial and
in kind contributions as soon as possible to
MONUC in the implementation of this mission.
the

"The Security Council reiterates its firm
support for the inter-Congolese dialogue and the
efforts of the facilitator and his team in the field.
It emphasizes the importance of an open,
representative and inclusive dialogue, free from
outside interference and involving civil society,
leading to a consensus settlement. It calls on the
Congolese parties to the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement to cooperate fully with the facilitator
to enable him to conduct the process in a swift
and constructive manner. It expresses the hope
that the dialogue can be held on Congolese soil,
respecting the choice that the Congolese actors
themselves will make. It encourages donors to
continue to provide support to the facilitator's
mission.

"The Security Council welcomes the recent
high-level meetings between the Presidents of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and
Uganda and encourages them further to pursue
the dialogue to find solutions to their common
security concerns in accordance with the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement.

"The Security Council reiterates its
commitment to support full implementation of the
Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement. It reaffirms that the
primary responsibility for implementing the
Agreement lies with the parties. The Council
urges them to demonstrate necessary political will
by cooperating with each other and with MONUC
in achieving this goal. It expresses its readiness to
consider, subject to necessary progress made by
the parties and to recommendations of the
Secretary-General, possible expansion of
MONUC if and when the mission enters its third
phase.

"The Security Council commends the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ambassador Kamel Morjane, for his outstanding
work and invaluable contribution to the peace
process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo."

That statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2001/l9.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.20 pm.
