The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity as the representative
of Uruguay.

I thank Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
for his comprehensive briefing. Likewise, I should like
to thank the Minister of Justice of Serbia, Ms. Nela
Kuburovie, for her intervention. I take note of the
statement made by Ms. Vlora Citaku.

Allow me to begin by stressing, as I have
mentioned on other occasions, that Uruguay advocates
for compliance with resolution 1244 (1999) as the legal
basis for a resolution of the situation in Kosovo. Strict
respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of States is a fundamental principle of Uruguay's
foreign policy.

We believe it is essential that the dialogue between
Pristina and Belgrade being facilitated by the European
Union move forward and, in that regard, we express our
full support for that process. The interruption in the
dialogue and the delays in the implementation of the
international agreements are a source of tensions and
distrust in the region.

In view of the political situation that Kosovo
currently faces, we encourage leaders to work in a
constructive manner and to seek the speedy resumption
of the Belgrade talks and the implementation of the
agreements concluded. Progress on the commitments
already made will contribute to the achievement of
stability at the domestic and international levels, and to
the improvement of the conditions and development of
the people to their highest potential.

We firmly believe in the path of reconciliation. To
that end, it is necessary to move toward truth andjustice.
Despite years of work, 1,664 cases of missing persons
remain unsolved, and major questions still remain. It is
imperative to make progress in that area. The families
ofthe disappeared deserve to have access to information
about the fate of their loved ones. It is a fundamental
matter concerning the defence of human rights.
Furthermore, addressing the situation of internally
displaced persons is essential for reconciliation. Efforts
by local officials to hamper returns are worrying.

Moreover, efforts should be made at the local
level and in neighbouring countries to combat
ethno-nationalist discourse and incitement to hatred
and resentment. Discrimination and ultranationalism
have been the cause of great misfortune for humankind.
Respect for the religious and cultural specificities of
each community, as well as policies oriented towards
minority groups, are essential to consolidate peace.

UNMIK undertakes important work for the
population of Kosovo, via collaboration with the
leaders of Pristina and Belgrade. UNMIK also works
at the regional, municipal and community levels where,
among other activities, it spearheads activities directed
at minority groups and young people. I specifically wish
to highlight the Global Open Day on Women, Peace and
Security, the theme of which was "The role of women in
reconciliation: building peace and security in Kosovo",
held on 15 March under the auspices of UNMIK.
Uruguay believes that the participation of women at all
levels is indispensable for the achievement of sustainable
peace processes. Truth,justice, reconciliation, security,
equal rights, guarantees and inclusive processes are the
foundations of sustainable peace.

In addition to the work of UNMIK, I wish to
recognize the role of the European Union as facilitator
of the dialogues and as a cooperating partner, the work
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, the Kosovo Force and the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, as well as the support
of the entire United Nations system.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.

The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.
