Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I do
not wish to let this opportunity pass, Mr. President,
without extending my cordial congratulations to you and
your Mission. I wish you the very best as you assume
the presidency. You can count on our cooperation.

I should also like to thank Ambassador Rugunda
and the entire Ugandan delegation for their very
successful leadership of our work in July.

More than a decade has passed since the Security
Council first considered the issue of children and
armed conflict. Since then, six resolutions have been
adopted. In various ways, the decision to strengthen the
framework for the protection of children in conflict
situations has been enacted in deed. The adoption of
resolution 1882 (2009) significantly strengthens that
framework and broadens the mechanisms provided for
in resolutions 1539 (2004) and 1612 (2005).

The inclusion of two new criteria or triggers -
sexual violence and killing and maiming - is testimony
to the Security Council's resolve to respond effectively
to the two most serious and frequently committed crimes
against children in situations of armed conflict. We
must continue to expand that progressive focus, while
avoiding the establishment of artificial hierarchies.

The resolution addresses two issues to which
Costa Rica attaches importance. We stress the need to
improve communication and the exchange of
information between the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict and the sanctions committees, as
well as the importance of making the issue of children
an integral part of reports on situations in specific
countries. Of equal importance are the calls to follow
up on the recommendations of the Working Group; the
fight against impunity and referrals of cases to
international justice, when necessary; and the call for
timely and sustained response in the rehabilitation of
children affected by conflict.

Effective progress based on the resolution we
have just adopted will depend on the performance of
some important tasks. The first involves the
implementation of action plans, which may be the most
useful tool in attaining tangible results. Unfortunately,
in many cases no such plans have been elaborated; in
other cases, they have not been adopted. Costa Rica
therefore welcomes the call for the consistent
implementation of action plans and the information we
are to receive on progress made in that respect. We also
trust that such plans will henceforth include a
component for the provision of comprehensive and
sustained treatment to the victims of rape.

We also believe that the technology support of the
Secretariat is necessary. It will help to systematize the
information provided to the Working Group and to
consolidate the historic memory of recommendations
to the parties. This is an indispensable follow-up and
accountability mechanism for the assessment and
evaluation of the actions needed for compliance,
especially with respect to repeated offenders.

The time is also ripe for improving the
monitoring and reporting mechanism in order to make
it more useful in the identification of trends and
patterns of violations, and in the promotion of a
strategic vision of possible solutions. Finally, we
believe it necessary to establish objective criteria and
procedures for inclusion on and exclusion from the
annexed lists in the Secretary-General's reports, which
will guarantee transparency, objectivity and consistency.

Before concluding, my delegation wishes to
recognize the work undertaken by the delegation of
Mexico to reach the agreements that allowed us to adopt
this instrument of protection. We also thank all the
members of the Working Group for their constructive
attitude during negotiations, and Ms. Coomaraswamy
and UNICEF for the support they provided to us.
Similarly, on behalf of the Human Security Network,
which Costa Rica will chair until May 2010, we
welcome the conclusion of the process leading to
today's adoption of resolution 1882 (2009). The
protection of children in armed conflict has been a
priority issue for the Human Security Network since its
establishment.

