Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): Like other
speakers, I would like first to renew our condolences to
the people and Government of Haiti and to the United
Nations for the losses they suffered during the
devastating earthquake 12 months ago. Many thanks,
too, are due to Under-Secretaries-General Le Roy and
Amos and to the representative of Haiti for their
briefings today.

Our continued gratitude also goes to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Mulet,
and the personnel of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) for their dedicated work
there. Events of recent weeks have shown again their
crucial role in maintaining a secure environment. The
United Kingdom continues to give its full support to
MINUSTAH and looks forward to its continuing efforts
to help build the capacity of the Haitian authorities and
people. It is important for Haiti's long-term security
that the people themselves, not United Nations
peacekeepers, take the lead in reconstruction efforts,
with the support of the international community.

The people of Haiti, along with the international
community working in their support, have faced many
challenges over the past 12 months, as previous
speakers have said: the impact of Hurricane Tomas; the
ongoing cholera epidemic, which has affected almost
200,000 Haitians; concerns about secure shelter for
those displaced by the earthquake; and a safe
environment for those living in camps.

Some progress has been made. It is good that the
number of Haitians living in camps has halved.
Effective public education campaigns have contributed
to a decline in the cholera fatality rate. The Office of
the United Nations Special Envoy for Haiti has
reported that 64 per cent of funds pledged last March
have been disbursed. However, the challenges remain
immense, and the international community must
remain committed to supporting Haiti. The United
Kingdom has played its part in the humanitarian effort,
with more than a million people benefiting from
British help. We have targeted our aid to providing
people with food, shelter, clean water and medical
care, and we have now supplied medical staff to run
cholera treatment centres.

Turning to recent events, we welcome the Haitian
Government's invitation to the Organization of
American States (OAS) to conduct an inquiry into the
first round of the presidential elections. We now look
to the Haitian authorities to act on the
recommendations of the OAS report in order to allow

the process to move forward with credibility. We urge
all presidential candidates to share the collective
responsibility for maintaining a peaceful environment
in order to ensure conditions conducive to holding the
second round. It is vital that the new Haitian
Government be seen to have been elected
democratically and legitimately in order to allow it to
lead the reconstruction process in the name of its
people. Free, fair and transparent elections are the only
way to achieve this.

The way forward for Haiti will not be easy, but it
will be tackled with the support of the international
community, MINUSTAH, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the other
United Nations agencies. We hope that Haiti's progress
towards a stable environment will not be lost, and we
will continue to give our full support to its people.

