The Secretary-General: This meeting is
essentially an opportunity for Member States to discuss
the work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
established by resolution 1373 (2001). That means it is
Sir Jeremy Greenstock's show rather than mine.
Everyone is eager to hear him, I am sure, and I shall
therefore confine myself to a few brief remarks.

First, I greatly welcome the energy and the spirit
of cooperation with which Member States have reacted
to the terrorist attacks of ll September. The work of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the cooperation
it has received from Member States have been
unprecedented and exemplary. I will not delay the
Council by describing in detail the actions we in the
Secretariat are taking in response, or the parallel work
relating to international legal instruments, about which
the Legal Counsel has briefed the Committee on many
occasions. Let me simply mention here that we are
currently using more than 25 per cent of our resources
allocated to documentation to process the national
reports submitted to the Committee by Member States,
in order to facilitate the Committee's review of them.
This is an unprecedented effort, which, I fear, cannot
be sustained for long when those very same resources
are being reduced by the General Assembly.

Through the work of this Committee, Member
States are, for once, really using this Organization in
the way its founders intended - as an instrument
through which to forge a global defence against a
global threat. I firmly hope to see the same spirit of
unity and resolve manifested in the tackling of other
global threats, ranging from weapons of mass
destruction to HIV/AIDS or climate change.

Secondly, the Committee's work has already
highlighted the close connection between terrorism and
various other activities that the United Nations has
been seeking to repress, or at least to bring under
control. I am thinking particularly of organized crime
and the illicit traffic in weapons, drugs and other
commodities such as diamonds. We will surely deal
more effectively with all these things if we act more
coherently. That means we must ensure closer
coordination between different United Nations bodies.

Thirdly, we should all be clear that there is no
trade-off between effective action against terrorism and
the protection of human rights. On the contrary, I
believe that, in the long term, we shall find that human
rights, along with democracy and social justice, are one
of the best prophylactics against terrorism.

Terrorism is a weapon of alienated, desperate
people, and often a product of despair. If human beings
everywhere are given real hope of achieving self-
respect and a decent life by peaceful methods, terrorists
will become much, much harder to recruit and will
receive far less sympathy and support from society at
large.

Therefore, while we certainly need vigilance to
prevent acts of terrorism, and firmness in condemning
and punishing them, it will be self-defeating if we
sacrifice other key priorities - such as human
rights - in the process.

Of course, the protection of human rights is not
primarily the responsibility of the Council - it belongs
to other United Nations bodies, whose work the
Council does not need to duplicate. But there is a need
to take into account the expertise of those bodies and to
make sure that the measures the Council adopts do not
unduly curtail human rights or give others a pretext to
do so.

Finally, many States lack the capacity to adopt
effective counter-terrorist measures. They are in
genuine need of technical and financial assistance if
they are to fulfil their obligations.

This issue has been recognized from the
beginning, and, in resolution 1377 (2001), the Council
instructed the Counter-Terrorism Committee to explore
assistance programmes and best practice. I know it has
been doing so, and I hope that it will produce a precise
inventory of needs in this area, on the basis of which
the United Nations system and the Bretton Woods
institutions can design specific projects.

In conclusion, let me repeat that the United
Nations stands four-square against terrorism, no matter
what end it purports to serve. Our urgent business,
building on the excellent work of the Committee, must
now be to develop a long-term strategy to enable all
States to undertake the hard steps needed to defeat
terrorism. I believe they can do so only when the
global struggle against terrorism is seen as necessary
and legitimate by their peoples and that such universal
legitimacy is something that the United Nations can do
much to confer.

