Mr. Tidjani (Cameroon) (spoke in French): I
would like to convey to Mr. He'di Annabi how much we
appreciated his briefing, which was particularly rich in
information regarding developments in Kosovo. His
briefing makes it possible for the members of the
United Nations family present in the Chamber to have
an accurate idea of the progress made over four years
and of the situation prevailing in Kosovo in the
institutional, security and economic areas. I would like
to focus my statement on those three areas, which, it
should be recalled, are the three priority pillars for
Kosovo in 2003.

In that context, and despite the lack of progress in
dealing with certain substantive issues, it is a fact that
the Kosovo Provisional Institutions are functioning. We
believe that the persistence of problems just
underscored by Mr. Annabi results from internal
disputes fuelled by partisan rivalry that encourages
intolerance, hatred and rejection of one's fellow
citizens. Under those conditions, constructing a multi-
ethnic, multicultural Kosovo demands that the actions
of the Provisional Institutions and of the municipalities
involve the entire population of Kosovo in all its
sociological components.

Their efforts need to be backed by the
international community, and Belgrade has an
important role to play. But what is the use of such
support if the Provisional Institutions - which are
calling for acceleration of the transfer of competencies
described in chapter 5 of the Constitutional
Framework - do not show genuine political will and
an unfailing commitment to meet the many challenges
facing all Kosovans, of whom they are the
representatives: to ensure freedom of movement,
organize real participation in the Provisional
Institutions and the municipal bodies by the entire
active population of the province, and facilitate the
reintegration of minorities and ensure their safety,
security and protection, as well as their access to
education. Those are some of the challenges on the
road to a multi-ethnic and multicultural Kosovo.
The situation of minorities is indeed of concern,
particularly with regard to security. Information
reaching us confirms the precariousness of their
situation. On 4 June the whole world learned with
distress of the murder in Obilic of Mr. and Mrs.
Slobodan Stolic and their son, members of the Serb
minority. We strongly condemn that heinous crime;
everything must be done to find the perpetrators and to
bring them to justice. That is why my delegation
supports the recent measures taken by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Steiner.
This odious act, which undermines the international
community's efforts to achieve peace and
reconciliation, reminds us that the road towards peace
and the restoration of confidence in Kosovo continues
to be fraught with obstacles of all sorts. We must
remain vigilant and determined in our efforts and
demonstrate firm and steadfast resolve in our struggle
against insecurity. We must likewise be watchful and
resolute in supporting the Provisional Institutions and
in monitoring their activities, as well as in the fight
against poverty and unemployment, which lead to
hatred, violence and intolerance.

The current environment, which is characterized
by insecurity and the absence of a strong legal
framework, can hardly attract private investment. The
elements of a free-market economy that have already
been established in Kosovo therefore deserve to be
supported. Further incentive measures should be taken
to that end, with strict respect for existing legal
provisions, in order to accelerate the privatization
process and to relaunch economic activity and create
jobs.

The Secretary-General has told us - and his
colleagues have reiterated to us - that we must take a
comprehensive approach in order to attain the
objectives sought in Kosovo. That approach should
also respect the cultural specificities of the province
and align Kosovo towards progressive integration into
a Europe of shared values. That is how we believe it
may be possible to arrive at a multi-ethnic and
multicultural Kosovo in which there is peace,
tolerance, security, brotherhood, justice and economic
and social development for all. The main responsibility
for the advent of that Kosovo, to which we all aspire,
is, above all, the responsibility of all the people of
Kosovo themselves, including every ethnic group.

I cannot conclude my statement without
conveying our heartfelt encouragement to the
Secretary-General and his team and to the men and
women of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, who are working courageously and
doggedly every day to implement the recommendations
of the international community in order to bring about
the birth of a new and modern Kosovo in which peace,
stability and harmony prevail: a Kosovo that is a good
place to live.

