Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): I
want to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
session today and for your leadership on this issue. I
also want to thank Under-Secretary-General Guehenno
and Ambassador Dahinden for their statements. It is
important that the United Nations, the Security Council
and our Governments as Member States keep the issue
of mine action in our focus.

The United States recognizes the agonizing
consequences that these hidden killers have on
innocent people, whose lives and livelihoods are being
shattered by devices like the land torpedoes left behind
in more than 60 nations around the world from wars
past. Humanitarian mine action can and should be
about more than just clearing mines and other
explosive remnants of war, such as unexploded bombs,
artillery and mortar shells, rockets and grenades.

Also, mine-action efforts can and should play a
vital role in furthering peace and stability. Cleared
lands provide a physical environment that allows for
national reconciliation, stability and economic
development. Indeed, in addressing the horrific legacy
of landmines and unexploded ordnance, we are not
only helping to secure innocents from harm and restore
land productivity, we are also providing something
essential for communities ravaged by war, and that
gives hope. Mine action encourages the hope that the
future can be better than the past and hope that patterns
of war and violence can be replaced with patterns of
peace and prosperity.

Since 1993, the United States has dedicated over
$700 million to humanitarian mine action and will
provide approximately $100 million more in 2004 to
some 40 countries. We are pleased that concerted
efforts by mine-affected countries, as well as donor
Governments, international organizations, non-
governmental organizations and civil society, have
resulted in significant progress towards a mine-safe
world.

Since 1988, when the United States first engaged
in humanitarian demining in Afghanistan, we have
expanded our humanitarian mine-action assistance to
more than 40 countries, helping to demine the most
dangerous mine fields, train humanitarian deminers,
provide medical assistance and vocational training to
survivors of landmine incidents and their families,
teach children and their parents to identify and avoid
the threat, and conduct research and development into
new technologies to detect and clear landmines more
safely, quickly and efficiently.

Before the start of Operation Iraqi Freedom, there
were 10 million to 15 million landmines, over 2,500
minefields, 2,200 unexploded ordnance locations and
thousands of abandoned munition sites in Iraq.
Unexploded ordnance still present a tremendous
humanitarian threat. United States assistance to Iraq
began in 2002 with grants by the Department of State
Bureau of Near Eastern Affairs in the amount of $25.6
million for a three-year plan to cover mine-risk-
reduction education and expansion of the Mine
Advisory Group's operations and mine-action
coordination and surveys.

The United States believes that we can most
effectively help mine-affected countries by supporting
sustainable indigenous programmes. Thus, we have
established most of our programmes on a bilateral
basis. However, we recognize the important role the
United Nations system has in meeting this international
challenge, and we are proud of our work with the
United Nations system to help achieve these results.
We salute the leadership of the United Nations Mine
Assistance Service (UNMAS), the United Nations
Development Programme, the United Nations
Children's Fund, the United Nations Office for Project
Services and the World Health Organization for their
vital contributions to a mine-safe world.

We are also helping to strengthen mine-action
centres abroad. The United States will continue to
remain a leading proponent of efforts to mitigate the
harmful impacts from the illicit use of landmines
through our contributions to humanitarian mine action.
The future of mine action and the complementary
efforts to protect civilians from mines and other
explosive remnants of war should be dynamic and
fruitful. A great deal has been learned since the
inception of humanitarian demining just over a decade
ago. This accumulated body of knowledge will serve
the world well in the future. The United States
Government, Governments of donor and mine-affected
nations, international organizations and the private
sector together have created a formidable international
network of humanitarian mine action. Working
together, we can realistically set our sights on
achieving a world where all children can walk the
Earth in safety.

