Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan) (spoke in Spanish): I am
honoured to take the floor to speak on the last day of
Venezuela's presidency of the Council.

(spoke in English)

I would first like to welcome the Foreign Minister of
Germany, Mr. Frank-Walter Steinmeier, to the Security
Council. I thank him for his comprehensive briefing
on the priorities of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in 2016 in his capacity
as its Chairperson-in-Office.

Japan became the first OSCE partner for
cooperation almost 25 years ago, in 1992. Since then,
Japan has always participated in OSCE summits and
ministerial councils at a high level. We already hosted
four Japan-OSCE conferences and we are convinced
that Asia and Europe have a lot to learn from each
other. With the members of the OSCE, Japan shares
fundamental values, such as freedom, democracy and
basic human rights. Japan will continue to be an active
partner with the OSCE.

I wish to touch upon the situation in and around
Ukraine, which Minister Steinmeier referred to. First
of all, we will not accept any unilateral attempts to
change the status quo in Ukraine or any other country
or region in the world. The sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Ukraine must be respected. We commend
the dedicated efforts made thus far by the OSCE and
its Chairperson-in-Office on Ukrainian issues. The
role played by the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission
(SMM) continues to be critical. In order to support this
Mission, Japan has contributed €2 million and has been
sending a regional expert to the SMM. since last August.
We are concerned that the SMM. continues to report
systematic disruption of access to certain areas. Japan
would like to stress that SMM. observers must be given
full and unrestricted access to the entire conflict zone.

This month marks the one-year anniversary
of the signing of the package of measures for the
implementation of the Minsk agreements. However, the
situation in Ukraine is far from a final resolution. It is
unfortunate that the number of violations of ceasefire
agreements reported by the SMM. has increased
recently. The Minsk agreements are the only guidelines
for the improvement of the situation in Ukraine. Japan
urges all parties to fully and promptly implement the
Minsk agreements.

Counter-terrorism is one of the areas in which
the OSCE is playing an important role. We believe
that the strengthening of border control is among the
most effective counter-terrorism measures. That is
why Japan has been financially supporting the OSCE
Border Management Staff College since 2013. I wish to
add that Japan values cooperation between the OSCE
and the United Nations under the framework of Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.

Finally, I wish Minister Steinmeier every success
during his chairmanship and assure him of Japan's
support to him and to the OSCE.

