Mr. Gertze (Namibia): I wish to join colleagues
in expressing our appreciation to you, Mr. President,
for having convened this very important meeting
on silencing the guns in Africa. Namibia proudly
co-sponsored resolution 2457 (2019), which was
unanimously adopted here today. I would also like to
take this opportunity to congratulate you, Sir, on your
excellent presidency of the Security Council for this
month. I would furthermore like to thank the Under-
Secretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs, Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo; the African Union (AU)
High Representative for Silencing the Guns in Africa,
Mr. Ramtane Lamamra; and the Founder and Executive
Director of the African Centre for the Constructive
Resolution of Disputes, Mr. Vasu Gounden, for their
comprehensive and detailed briefings.

In thanking the Secretary-General, I also wish to
welcome his report Securing our Common Future -An
Agenda for Disarmament. It is alarming that in all
cases it is civilians who are the most affected as a
result of armed conflicts. The widespread availability
of small arms and light weapons is of major concern
to all of us. I cannot emphasize enough the harm
caused to lives all across Africa by illicit arms and
small weapons. We welcome the establishment of a
multi-partner trust facility through the Peacebuilding
Fund in order to provide a more sustainable solution,
with a sharp focus on development, for the control of
small arms and light weapons. We take note that the
new facility will be designed to support inclusive,
integrated and participatory approaches to small arms
control at the country level, and in some situations at
the subregional level.

My delegation firmly believes that peace and
security is a prerequisite for development. Prosperity
will therefore remain elusive if we do not seriously
take charge of our peace and security architecture.
Unfortunately, most of the peace and security issues
brought to the Security Council are on Africa. As
part of Agenda 2063 of the African Union and its first
lO-year implementation plan, the fiftieth anniversary
solemn declaration, of 26 May 2013, decided not to
bequeath the burden of conflicts to the next generation
of Africans, and they decided - we decided - to
silence the guns by 2020.

As Chair of Southern African Development
Community (SADC), I wish to share with the Council
that the subregion emphasizes, through its decisions,
the need to prioritize preventive diplomacy and
mediation in approaching crises and conflict situations.
Furthermore, SADC is in full support of the need to
enhance the AU's prevention capabilities and tools in
the context of the aspiration of the AU to silence the
guns by 2020. We are all aware that not all election
processes go smoothly. SADC recently averted
potential conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo following elections in that country. Equally,
Madagascar experienced a peaceful transition of power
from one leader to another. We cannot overemphasize
preventative diplomacy, mediation and negotiations in
peacebuilding and reconstruction.

I also wish to hail achievements reached in other
regions of the continent. On 6 February, the Central
African Republic Government and 14 armed groups
came together in Bangui to sign a historic peace
agreement, following negotiations held in Khartoum.
That agreement is an important first step taken by all
parties in the Central African Republic. The 2018 peace
agreement signed between Ethiopia and Eritrea was
also a landmark achievement. That peace deal brings
hope to the Horn of Africa.

I also wish to emphasize the importance of women
negotiators and mediators in peacebuilding processes,
as espoused in Agenda 2063 of the African Union. It is
apt for us that in 2000, during Namibia's presidency of
the Security Council, the Council unanimously adopted
the landmark resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security. That resolution formally drew
global attention to the unrecognized, underutilized
and undervalued contributions of women in preventing
war and in peacebuilding and engaging individuals and
societies to live in harmony.

We need to identify innovative ways and means
to enhance holistic preventative approaches in efforts
aimed at promoting peace and security. My delegation
furthermore recognizes the ongoing peace efforts on
the continent, and we commend the efforts of the United
Nations, the African Union and SADC. We reaffirm
our commitment to silencing the guns by 2020. And to
put that into perspective for all of us, 2020 is next year.

Many speakers today have spoken about the
ambitious plan of silencing the guns. But I am happy
that some have reminded us of the wisdom imparted to
us by the late Nelson Mandela: that it seems impossible
until it is done. Allow me to remind us of a great
African proverb that teaches us that: if we want to
move mountains tomorrow, we must start by lifting
stones today. Let us not be scared away by the fact that
silencing the guns may be ambitious. Let us start now
to implement it.

