Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): We thank you,
Mr. President, for giving us an opportunity to speak.
We appreciate the efforts by nine Council members
to organize this briefing by Mr. Marzuki Darusman,
Chairperson of the independent international fact-
finding mission on Myanmar.

As far as Bangladesh is concerned, our overriding
priority in the Rohingya humanitarian crisis is to
ensure the voluntary and sustainable return of the
forcibly displaced Rohingya to their ancestral homes
in safety and dignity. Bangladesh can have no interest
served by forestalling the repatriation and allowing the
crisis to become protracted with a growing Rohingya
population of 1.1 million. Accordingly, we have agreed
to commence repatriation of the rather small number of
individuals so far verified by the Myanmar authorities
at the earliest opportunity. After all, we painstakingly
negotiated every element in the bilateral arrangements
concluded between our two Governments, and we
would wish to see our Myanmar counterparts adhere to
those provisions.

We have consistently maintained that as long as
the forcibly displaced Rohingya voluntarily opted for
return to Rakhine state and gained confidence about
an environment conducive to their return, Bangladesh
would put in place all possible arrangements to
facilitate that process. At the ministerial meeting held
last month among China, Bangladesh and Myanmar in
the presence of the Secretary-General and his Special
Envoy on Myanmar, our delegation made our position
on that abundantly clear.

We recall that we proactively enlisted the support
of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) for facilitating the verification
process for return, and we welcomed reports on
Myanmar's memorandum of understanding with the
United Nations Development Programme and UNHCR
to gather an objective assessment of the situation on
the ground in Rakhine state. We have also stressed
that dismantling the remaining camps for internally
displaced persons in Rakhine state and allowing those
stranded along the border between our two countries
to return without fear of reprisal could be critical
confidence-building measures.

Along these lines, our Prime Minister, Sheikh
Hasina, presented a three-point recommendation in the
margins of the General Assembly's general debate last
month. First, Myanmar must abolish discriminatory
laws, policies and practices against Rohingyas and
address the root causes of forced displacement in a
genuine and timely manner. Secondly, Myanmar must
create a conducive environment by building trust
and guaranteeing protection, rights and a pathway to
citizenship for all Rohingyas. Ifneeded, it should create
a safe zone inside Myanmar to protect all civilians.
Thirdly, it must prevent atrocity crimes against
Rohingyas in Myanmar by ensuring accountability and
justice, particularly in light of the recommendations
of the independent international fact-finding mission
on Myanmar of the Human Rights Council. This, we
believe, constitutes the minimum requirement for
creating a situation that can be considered favourable
to the Rohingyas' sustainable return to Myanmar, and
accountability remains an integral part of it.

The evidence-based information and thorough
contextual analysis provided by the fact-finding
mission report (A/HRC/39/64) have validated what we
had logically assumed from the first-hand accounts
we had heard from the forcibly displaced Rohingya in
Bangladesh. Our highest political leadership had no
doubt that the violence and persecution suffered by the
Rohingya were tantamount to the gravest crimes under
international law. Our Prime Minister spoke with full
responsibility when she termed the crimes as genocide,
crimes against humanity and ethnic cleansing in her
addresses to the General Assembly at its seventy-
second (see A/72/PV.14) and seventy-third sessions (see A/73/PV.11).

The fact-finding mission has done an invaluable
service to history and humanikind by furnishing
its accounts in meticulous detail and by providing
substantive reasoning for its conclusions. Considering
the report's reliance on multiple sources and credible
evidence, we find its conclusion to be compelling and
unambiguous - the crimes against the Rohingya in
Rakhine State were committed by Myanmar security
forces with "genocidal intent", while war crimes and
crimes against humanity were committed in Rakhine,
Kachin and Shan States.

The question of accountability is therefore gaining
precedent. The perpetrators have been identified among
all those involved, including certain non-State actors.
It is critical that they all be held accountable for the
crimes they committed against innocent civilians. The
Rohingya have long been dehumanized by the Myanmar
authorities, but not to the extent that the international
community should absolve itself of its responsibility
to seek justice for them. The resounding plea of the
Chairperson of the fact-finding mission should continue
to echo beyond the four walls of this Chamber.

Having said that, we believe that it is the primary
responsibility of the State concerned to ensure justice
for such atrocity crimes. The State of Myanmar
has made repeated commitments to this effect and
commissioned certain mechanisms that eroded the
international community's confidence in any credible
domestic efforts to secure accountability. The current
commission ofinquiry is expected to present its finding
in a year's time, even as it provides modest assurance
to the Rohingya living in a climate of impunity for
near perpetuity.

Despite all prognoses otherwise, we will wait
for an independent and impartial judicial process to
emerge in Myanmar. We would consider this to be a
critical building block for democratic consolidation and
intercommunal reconciliation in Myanmar. The fact-
find mission's report has offered a mirror to Myanmar
society for the purposes of introspection and mending
the fractures running through its fragile democratic
polity. An honest reckoning with the report should
promote further cohesion Within society, provided there
is sufficient political will to make that happen.

The Human Rights Council has acted appositely
on the fact-find mission report, and decided on its
second iteration, while mandating the establishment
of an ongoing investigation mechanism to collect,
consolidate, preserve and analyse evidence of the
most serious international crimes and violations of
international law committed in Myanmar since 2011.
Any criminaljustice mechanism, be it national, regional
or international, would have access to an authoritative
and comprehensive body of evidence for exercising its
jurisdiction. In case of repeated obstruction to justice
at the domestic level, the international community
may have to consider good practices from comparable
situations and other possible means to pave the pathway
to accountability.

In the face of such glaring evidence of crimes as
presented by the fact-finding mission, the Security
Council has yet another historic responsibility before it
to do the right thing. In order to pre-empt the possible
recurrence of such crimes in Myanmar and elsewhere,
the Security Council should, as a first step, give due
consideration to the possibility of adopting a resolution.
It would be an affront to the victims to relegate the
action on the fact-find mission report solely to the
General Assembly.

Considering the trauma borne by countless
Rohingya men, women and children, the international
community should seriously consider setting up a
trust fund for victims, pending a judicial decision on
their reparation or compensation. As a State party to
the Rome Statute, Bangladesh would cooperate with
the International Criminal Court in pursuance of its
jurisdiction on the forced deportation of the Rohingya
from Myanmar's Rakhine state, including the possible
denial of their right to return. We shall also continue to
reach out our hands to our neighbours in Myanmar in
our shared quest for a sustainable future for our peoples
in rights and dignity.

The Council's decision today to hear the briefing
by the fact-find mission Chairperson has reinforced yet
again this Chamber's standing as the world's last resort
for upholding the causes of humanity and justice. We
reiterate our call on the Council to act as the custodian
of the Rohingya humanitarian crisis until the time a
durable solution is reached.

The meeting rose at 5.45 pm.
