Mr. Heusgen (Germany): Germany welcomes
today's adoption of resolution 2476 (2019), although
we are disappointed that it did not receive the Security
Council's full support.

We welcome the mandate for a strategic political
United Nations presence that will support the Haitian
Government in tackling the many challenges presented
by the extremely fragile political situation, including
ensuring the necessary structural reforms, starting a
constructive and inclusive national dialogue, protecting
human rights, meeting the people's humanitarian needs
and strengthening the police and justice institutions. Of
course, ownership belongs to the Haitians themselves
when it comes to shaping the future of their country.
Together with the international community, Germany
stands ready to support Haiti in that endeavour. We
want to make this transition work, and we want the
new special political mission to be able to work jointly
with the country team, effectively and efficiently, from
the outset.

One point I particularly want to highlight is that
while we were pleased to see the reference in the
resolution to the adverse effects of natural disasters on
Haiti's stability, we were surprised and disappointed
that there was no reference to the security implications
of the effects of climate change. At least since 2011 the
Security Council has repeatedly expressed its concern
about the possibility that the effects of climate change
may aggravate existing threats to international peace
and security, and has underlined the importance of
conflict analysis and contextual information, including
on the security implications of climate change in relevant
situations. In that regard, I would point to the 2011
presidential statement on the subject (S/PRST/2011/15).

Haiti is one of the countries ofthe world that is most
vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change.
The effects of climate change there constitute a threat
multiplier, bringing the risk of further destabilizing
the country, creating new conflict over increasingly
diminishing resources and derailing efforts aimed at
peacebuilding and stabilization. The Security Council
should therefore examine the situation more closely
with a View to including the effects of climate change
in its overall assessments and decision-making, and to
do that we need a proper information basis, including
a substantial risk assessment. Turning a blind eye
to the problem will not make a threat multiplier
like climate change disappear. Disregarding it and
assessing the country situation selectively jeopardizes
the effectiveness of the Council's work. In that
regard, I would like to note that the hearing last week
in Washington of the proposed new United States
Permanent Representative to the United Nations sent
some encouraging signals, in that she specifically
recognized the importance of climate change.

