Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): I too would like to begin by
thank the Swedish presidency for convening today's
debate and the Prime Minister of Sweden for presiding
over it earlier. We also thank the briefers for their
insightful coverage of this important issue.

The dreams and hopes of hundreds of thousands
of children continue to be shattered by conflict. Then
there are also those who may never even get a chance
to dream. Children become victims of unimaginable
horror everyday. The Secretary-General's report
(S/2018/465) confirms these horrors. Children are
killed and maimed, abducted to fight, sexually abused
and denied humanitarian aid.

All parties to armed conflict have the responsibility
to protect children from violence. And yet, all too often,
violations and abuses of international law affecting
children remain rampant. This disturbing trend shows
no sign of abating. Last year, we witnessed a significant
increase in the incidence of abuse of children, making
2017 another nightmare year for children trapped in
conflict and violence.

Despite some progress, the scale and the intensity
of today's conflict is stretching our capacity to
protect these children. In conflict zones and occupied
territories, we are witnessing a deeply troubling
breakdown in humanity and diminishing respect for
human life and dignity. Children are often at the heart of
conflict and are in consequence directly targeted. Their
homes and schools are destroyed and food and water
supplies deliberately cut off. Under foreign occupation
they are subjected to arbitrary arrests, detention and
torture - and mass blinding, too, as the use of pellet
guns by occupation forces in occupied Jammu and
Kashmir testifies. According to the recent report of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
on the situation of human rights in Kashmir, there
were "multiple cases of children under 18 years" being
arbitrarily detained and tortured under the cover of a
black law, the so-called Public Security Act.

The plight of children in Palestine, Indian-occupied
Jammu and Kashmir, Myanmar and Yemen should
galvanize the international community to find new and
effective ways to protect those most vulnerable. The
goal of protecting children can best be achieved by
preventing the outbreak of armed conflict in the first
place. The most effective way to protect children is
by preventing and resolving conflicts, ending foreign
occupation and, of course, by sustaining peace where
peace is possible. That must be our top priority and the
Council's.

My Government remains fully alive to its
commitments with regard to protecting children.
Pakistan was one of the earliest signatories to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and its two
Optional Protocols, and we have established a national
commission for child welfare and development that
coordinates, monitors and facilitates its implementation.
Last year, we also established a national commission on
the rights of children.

Lastly, I would like to say that 20 years ago, Graca
Machel asked the international community to come
together and address the plight of children in conflict
(see A/51/306), and proposed the appointment of a
special representative for children in armed conflict.
Pakistan fully supports the appointment and the
mandate of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, but we also
believe that its mandate should not become a tool for
achieving political objectives. The legal parameters of
the mandate, as provided for in the relevant Security
Council resolutions, must be respected. We hope that
principle will be kept in mind in future reports.

