We would like to thank the German presidency of the Security Council for convening this important debate and express our appreciation to the Secretary-General for his report (S/2020/487). We commend the efforts of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Patten, and the work of the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict. Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), on the impact and role of women in conflict prevention and resolution, and of resolution 1820 (2008), which classified the use of conflict-related sexual violence as an impediment to the restoration of international peace and security, we have witnessed important achievements in the fight against conflict-related sexual violence. Over the past decade, there have been examples of successful prosecutions of perpetrators by national and international tribunals, legislative reforms to enhance protection and ensure access to justice for survivors, and codes of conduct for security forces on conflict-related sexual violence. Most importantly, a global mindset that firmly renounces this crime and supports efforts aimed at its elimination has been formed. Despite important progress on policy and implementation, however, the Secretary-General's most recent report to the Council reveals that we face an increasingly complex global security environment in which sexual violence remains a cruel tactic of war, torture, terror and political repression and a brutal tool of displacement and dehumanization. An integrated and comprehensive approach, comprising an emphasis on prevention, holding perpetrators accountable and supporting survivors, is needed in order to effectively address sexual violence in conflict. First, we need to tackle the structural root causes that drive and perpetuate this violence, including gender inequality, which is exacerbated by conflict. Achieving gender equality, the empowerment of women and girls and the full recognition of their human rights are the essential steps for prevention and addressing impunity. This will also help further our agenda on women and peace and security. Ending violence against women is a part of this effort. The Council of Europe Convention on Preventing and Combating Violence against Women and Domestic Violence, known as the Istanbul Convention, stands out as a landmark document in this regard. Turkey is committed to fostering the objectives of the Convention and stands ready to share its experiences in its implementation. Secondly, we need to make sure that perpetrators of such heinous crimes are held accountable. Impunity must be put to an end both for perpetrators and those in the chain of command. Accountability is essential in terms of both a response and prevention. Ending impunity is a key deterrent to future violence of this nature, and it is a vital step in helping survivors to repair and rebuild their lives. This brings us to the third point, which is to provide survivors with both protection and legal action. Life-saving services, including medical care, psychological support and legal aid, should be made more available and accessible. To that end, the primary role of States should be strengthened and complemented by assistance from relevant United Nations entities, specialized agencies and peacekeeping missions. As the conflict in Syria enters its tenth year, millions of Syrians, particularly women and girls, continue to live under the threat of sexual violence. The horrific acts of sexual violence perpetrated by the Syrian regime, especially during arrest and detention and at checkpoints, have been documented in various United Nations reports. As a neighbouring country, which has opened its doors to Syrians fleeing war and violence in their own country, Turkey now hosts close to 4 million Syrians, of whom approximately 1.7 million are women. Turkey makes every effort to provide security and safety to Syrian women and girls who have fled the conflict in Syria. We attach utmost importance to their empowerment and self-reliance without any threat of sexual and gender-based violence. Since 2014, psychological and social support has been provided to a large number of refugees to ensure their adaptation to our country and access to services. In addition to benefiting from the same health-care services provided to Turkish citizens, necessary legal steps are taken in order to protect refugee women who are victims of violence. All women seeking asylum in Turkey who are identified as victims of violence have the right to stay in women's shelters. They also receive assistance from violence prevention and monitoring centres. People of Iraq from different ethnic and religious backgrounds - including Shias, Sunnis, Yazidis, Turkmen, Kurds, Arabs and Christians - faced the most evil practices of conflict-related sexual violence during the invasion by the Da'esh terrorist organization. It is also worth noting that a significant number of Yazidis who fled to northern Iraq because of Da'esh atrocities still cannot return to their homeland in Sinjar owing to the oppressive policies and practices of the terrorist organization Kurdistan Workers Party. Given the fact that accountability is one of the key factors in preventing conflict-related sexual and gender-based violence, we support the Secretary- General's call on Iraqi authorities to prosecute the Da'esh affiliates for crimes related to sexual violence. We are ready to assist the Iraqi Government in addressing the needs of survivors of conflict-related sexual violence. We note the efforts and the difficulties in monitoring and reporting cases of conflict-related sexual violence in Libya. We are also compelled to underline that, in its current form, the Libya section of the report is far from complete without reflecting the conflict-related sexual violence by Haftar's militia. The flagrant violations of international humanitarian law by Haftar's militia have once again become evident by the mass graves discovered in Tarhunah, as well as the improvised explosive devices and mines trapped to kill innocent civilians in Tripoli and other areas. The conflict-related sexual violence by Haftar's militia also deserves further attention. Furthermore, we would like to recall that the military offensive on Tripoli mentioned in the report was launched against the United Nations-recognized Government of National Accord, Libya's sole internationally recognized, legitimate Government, by rebels, insurgents and mercenaries affiliated with warlord Haftar. The findings of the Secretary-General's report on the situation of the Rohingya in Myanmar are once again distressing. The report not only reminds us of the widespread and systematic brutal attacks, including sexual violence perpetrated against the Rohingya community, especially in 2017, but also indicates the ongoing vulnerability of displaced Rohingya women and girls who are exposed to high risks of trafficking-related sexual violence, as well as detention and forced labour in camps. We expect the joint communique to prevent and address conflict-related sexual violence, signed in 2018 by the Government of Myanmar and the United Nations, to be fully implemented. It is also of great importance that the Government of Myanmar address the root causes of the problem in Rakhine state and create the necessary conditions for peaceful coexistence and a safe return of refugees. We welcome the provisional measures announced on 23 January 2020 by the International Court of Justice and expect full compliance with them. Turkey will continue to support Myanmar as it makes further progress to end human rights violations, including sexual violence. Let me conclude by reaffirming Turkey's strong commitment and continued support to international, regional and national efforts to prevent and respond to the consequences of sexual violence in conflict.
