Mr. Benomar (spoke in Arabic): Yemen is in the
throes of its transition. A few days ago, I sat beside
President Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi Mansour and the
Secretary-General of the Gulf Cooperation Council
(GCC), Mr. AbdulIatifbin Rashid AI-Zayani, to witness
the 565 representatives to the National Dialogue
Conference (NDC) celebrate the halfway mark of
their deliberations with the launch of their second
plenary session. The representatives came from all
the country's major political groups, including women
and young people, and together they are shaping the
future of their country. In a country awash with arms
and a history of conflict, such an inclusive dialogue is a
great achievement. It demonstrates the Yemeni people's
commitment to choosing dialogue over violence and
consensus over division.

But Sunday's sad incident shows that the transition
is delicate. I regret to inform the Council that a clash
erupted between security forces and Ansar Allah
demonstrators outside the National Security Bureau
in Sana'a, resulting in several deaths and dozens of
injuries. Yemen is nonetheless the only country in
the region to emerge from the cycle of violence with
a negotiated peace agreement that includes a clear
road map and timeline for a broad-based democratic
transition. The Government and people of Yemen are to
be congratulated for standing by their words despite the
challenges, and we urge them to stay the course.

Over the past few weeks, the representatives have
split up into nine working groups to discuss the major
issues facing the country, including the long-standing
conflicts between North and South. As may be expected
with such diverse and varied groups, which include
political opponents and even enemies, it has been
difficult to surmount injuries and grievances, and good
will has been tested. There are still deep divisions in the
working groups, such as those on Sa'ada and the South.
They require careful facilitation and a demonstration of
the greatest possible good will on all sides.

I am pleased to report, however, that progress has
been made overall. The majority of the working groups
have submitted their reports to the second plenary
session. More than 100 recommendations, many
involving constitutional human rights guarantees, have
been submitted for adoption. Despite the deep divisions
in the Sa'ada group, it has succeeded in arriving at a
consensus on the roots of the conflict. Going forward,
the representatives will still have to reach a consensus
on some major issues, including the structure of
the State, the system of Government and the issues
regarding the South and Sa'ada. That work will be
substantially assisted by the recent establishment
of the National Dialogue Consensus Committee,
tasked with harmonizing and reconciling the various
recommendations and assisting in the reaching of
consensus.

My team and other contributors have been working
closely with the Conference bodies to share the full
range of international experience, expertise and
facilitation. While we have no recipe for resolving
Yemen's many challenges, sharing comparative
experiences from other country situations has enabled
the representatives to make more informed decisions
as they explore different options. The next and final
session of the plenary and working groups will be
critical to reaching agreement on the principles and
main contours of a future Constitution.

I am pleased to note that the Dialogue is extending
well beyond the Conference. Men and women in
Yemen are engaged in discussions and debates about
the problems of their country and its possible future.
People are participating in seminars, round tables and
open tents put up in town squares. Developments within
the National Dialogue Conference working groups are
discussed daily in television and radio programmes,
newspapers and new media. In the past few weeks, the
working groups have begun their outreach to citizens
across various parts of the country. Collectively, they
have visited 18 governorates and spoken to over 12,500
people of all ages and backgrounds, including members
of local authorities, non-governmental organizations,
labour unions, and women's and youth groups.

On one of my visits, a woman told me that my
presence had broken the wall of fear. In 2011, it would
have been unthinkable for a delegation comprised
of women and young people to be welcomed at the
headquarters of an intelligence agency. As President
Mansour has remarked, we are engaged in more than a
political transition; we are witnessing a transformation
of the political culture.

The National Dialogue that is now under way
will be followed by a constitution-drafting process.
The Government of Yemen is committed to making
the process fully transparent and inclusive. The new
Constitution will be confirmed by a referendum,
followed by general elections for a new Government
that will enjoy full popular legitimacy. We understand
that there are no guarantees for what lies ahead. It is
an undertaking of great hope in a fragile environment,
where a range of perspectives and diverse interests are
seeking to realize a new and better order.

National Dialogue will need to find a consensual
settlement to the question of the South in order to
develop the foundations of a new Constitution. That is
being addressed by a dedicated working group with a
specific composition weighted in favour of the southern
movement, Hiraak. They will soon begin to debate
proposals on the status of the South and a new State
structure for Yemen. Yet some Hiraak remain outside
the process. In its first plenary, the NDC called for a
committee to be set up to reach out to southern leaders.
It is important for that to occur.

In the South, the streets are heating up. The
resentment pent up during more than two decades of
unaddressed grievances and systematic marginalization
is reaching a tipping point. Southerners have grown
wary of promises unmet. Since February, there has
been a significant increase in the frequency and number
of demonstrators pouring into the streets. Organized
acts of civil disobedience have been observed weekly,
sometimes resulting in injuries and deaths. The
establishment of two commissions to address the
unlawful or illegitimate seizure of property and unjust
dismissals from the military and civil services was an
important first step in addressing main grievances. The
two commissions are collecting complaints and related
submissions, but they need far greater resources to
accomplish their tasks and deliver effective remedies.
Moreover, without further confidence-building
measures by the Government or tangible improvement
in people's daily lives, the voices of discontent will
grow louder, narrowing the space for dialogue.

It goes without saying that the only peaceful route
to progress of any kind is through open dialogue and,
most importantly, by addressing the legacy of the
past. The Government has yet to meet its obligation
to establish a commission of inquiry into the events of
2011 or adopt a law on transitional justice. Only with
critical steps like those can Yemenis ensure a path to
national reconciliation and embrace a new Yemen.
Unfortunately, the partisan war continues to play out in
the media. Misinformation, fabrication and incitement
to violence are rife. It is time for politicians to stop
instrumentalizing the media. A media truce is badly
needed.

Other serious challenges weigh heavily on the
transition. The security situation remains fragile
in many parts of the country. Despite all efforts to
counter Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula, it remains
a lethal threat. Most recently, Al-Qaida has been
trying to establish a foothold in Hadramawt, with a
view to retaking control of that region. Despite the
progress made in the political process, there is ongoing
instability. Arms continue to be smuggled into Yemen,
although several shipments were recently intercepted.
Key political factions remained armed and appear to be
massing more weapons.

The humanitarian crisis in Yemen continues
unabated, with more than half of Yemen's population
in need of humanitarian assistance in terms of food,
health care, safe water and sanitation, and more than
1 million children suffer from acute malnutrition.
Meanwhile, as stability has improved, 90 per cent of
those displaced by fighting in southern Yemen have
returned to their homes. In northern Yemen, however,
prospects for the return of 300,000 internally displaced
persons remain poor, and their basic needs are acute.
Despite the gravity of the situation, the humanitarian
response plan is only 30 per cent funded to date.

Despite the aforementioned challenges, the
political transition in Yemen continues largely on
course. The electoral commission has already begun
preparations for the electoral process, including steps
to create a new biometric voter registry. Registration is
scheduled to begin in September. The timeline leaves
no room for any delays. In order to ensure the success
of the electoral and voter registration process, close
cooperation and coordination will be critical among
the political parties, the donor community and the
Government. Political parties of the former opposition
have expressed concern that local authorities, most
governors, security chiefs and electoral staff were all
appointed under the former regime and are linked to the
former ruling party. Members of the former opposition
are demanding that action be taken to build confidence
in the electoral process. On the other hand, General
People's Congress leaders are opposed to any change in
appointments, which they view as contrary to the GCC
initiative.

Critical steps have been taken to restructure the
armed forces. Many of the military commanders who
played major roles in the violent clashes of 2011 have
been removed from their posts or reassigned outside of
the military. A new structure for the military is being
implemented, including the establishment of seven
military regions. Both the Republican Guard and the
First Armoured Division have been dissolved and their
units integrated into the new regional structure. Despite
these substantial moves, much remains to be done to
ensure the professionalization of the armed forces.

Let us make no mistake - there are those who
wish to undermine the transition. Sabotage attacks
on electricity lines have increased, causing misery
and anger throughout the country. Families are being
plunged into darkness and unbearable heat. I have
witnessed people's resulting frustration, exhaustion and
increasing anger. Last week, I spoke to many people in
the city of Hudaydah, which has seen frequent protests
in recent months. There and in many parts around the
country, patience is wearing thin. Attacks on oil and gas
pipelines also continue. The interruption of Yemen's
energy exports and constant repairs of its electricity
lines are costing Yemen hundreds ofmillions of dollars.
While the perpetrators of the sabotage are said to be
known, impunity prevails. The people of Yemen are
demanding justice. Those responsible for these crimes
must be brought to account.

In all my consultations with political leaders, I have
reiterated that the only way to a peaceful, stable and
prosperous Yemen is through the National Dialogue
and the transition process. All Yemenis have a solemn
responsibility to advance their legitimate interests and
aspirations through the process, in line with relevant
Security Council resolutions and the Transition
Agreement.

Yemenis have embarked on an extraordinary
course based on an agreed road map. They deserve
to be supported and are counting on the international
community, especially the Council, to fully understand
the importance of continuing to accompany them through
the entire transition process, to meet the challenges and
to deliver all available political and financial support.
Perhaps the most important ingredient for a successful
transition is the persistence of all those involved.
Experience shows that there is no off-the-shelf recipe,
perfect formula or predestined outcome. Yemen is its
own unique country and its people have their own rich
history and complex dimensions.

A new dynamic is emerging in Yemen with the
new inclusive politics. The cooperation of all Yemeni
factions is critical, and this cooperation is not always
forthcoming. In tackling its own difficult political
situation, Yemen needs all the support of its friends.
Unfortunately, despite substantial pledges of financial
contributions through the Friends of Yemen process, so
far very little of that has materialized in actual transfers,
outside of the significant Saudi contribution. In that
regard, I would like to pay tribute to the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia. It has been the largest contributor and
the first to deliver. I hope others will follow suit. This
is the time to help Yemen by delivering on pledges
and supporting the transition in every way. On the
Government side, key reforms need to be completed as
envisaged in the Mutual Accountability Framework.

Yemen remains a priority for the Secretary-
General, and I will remain fully engaged with all sides
to assist them along the way. I commend President
Mansour for his leadership and the efforts of the
Government of National Reconciliation led by Prime
Minister Basendwah. The Yemeni people are counting
on the Security Council to continue speaking in one
voice in support of the transition.

I commend the contributions and support of the
Gulf Cooperation Council. In addition, I want to thank
the European Union, the Friends of Yemen and the
active diplomatic community in Sana'a. Together, we
must do everything possible to ensure that the progress
we have seen in the National Dialogue and other areas
will lead to meaningful changes in security, governance
and development, and to concrete improvements in the
lives of all Yemenis towards a more peaceful, stable,

democratic and prosperous future in which human
rights are protected by the rule of law. The Yemeni
people are demonstrating that they deserve no less.

