Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories is a cause for great concern. There have been
recent incidents of Palestinian extremists firing rockets
into the territory of Israel from the Gaza Strip and
response attacks by the Israel Defense Forces. Innocent
people have become the victim of those incidents, all
of which have led to an increase in tensions and to a
deterioration in Israeli-Palestinian relations.

This meeting of the Security Council is taking
place against the backdrop of today's tragic events at
the central bus station in Tel Aviv, scene of a terrorist
act for which Islamic Jihad has claimed responsibility.
Russia firmly and categorically condemns the recent
bloody attacks in Tel Aviv carried out by extremists.
They have again struck innocent people; there can be
no justification for that. We express our condolences to
the bereaved families and offer our sympathies to those
who have suffered as a result of the attack.

We note that President Abbas of the Palestinian
National Authority condemned that terrorist act. The
intentions of those who perpetrated it are clear: to
worsen the already challenging situation in Palestinian-
Israeli relations as much as they can and to again
unleash a cycle of violence and lay to rest any hope for
a long-term settlement leading to the establishment of a
Palestinian State enjoying good-neighbourly relations
with Israel. Under such conditions, it is important that
we prevent a deterioration of the situation, which might
lead to direct confrontation. We need to send a clear
signal to both sides that they must refrain from policies
leading to the use of force to bring about a settlement,
and must work out a dialogue based on the road map.

At this critical juncture we call upon the
Palestinian Authority to do its utmost to prevent anti-
Israeli acts, above all terrorist attacks, and to do
everything in its power to ensure that the situation is
properly monitored in the areas under its control. The
international community expects the Palestinians to
reaffirm that they will implement of all of the
obligations that they have undertaken under bilateral
agreements and agreements with Israel, as well as their
commitments to the principles set forth in the
30 January statement of the Quartet of international
mediators. Those principles provide for the
abandonment of violence as a means of achieving
political aims, the recognition of Israel's right to exist
and respect for and compliance with previous
commitments and arrangements - particularly the
road map, the implementation of which would be the
most reliable way to bring about a just, negotiated
settlement of the issue.

We also call upon the Government of Israel to
demonstrate restraint, despite the difficult
circumstances, and to prevent a collapse into direct
confrontation. Israel must also prevent unilateral acts
that prejudice final status agreements, particularly with
respect to its settlement activities and the building of
the separation wall. It must also refrain from its
practice of extrajudicial killings.

We are certain that only joint efforts can prevent
all terrorist attacks, end the cycle of violence and
renew the political process, on the basis of the road
map. In particular, we firmly believe that the
resumption of contact between the parties as soon as
possible, based on the road map, will bring about a
settlement of the current crisis. The Russian Federation
will continue to robustly support efforts to that end,
including within the framework of the Quartet.

Given the worsening humanitarian situation in the
Palestinian territories, the provision of international
assistance to the Palestinian National Authority must
be continued, free from political preferences. The
international community should do everything it can to
ensure that assistance to the Palestinians continues
with a view to addressing their pressing social and
humanitarian needs. As representatives of the Russian
Federation have stated on a number of occasions,
ending such assistance could have a serious impact and
would only cause the situation to deteriorate and lead
to a new outbreak of Violence and confrontation,
worsening an already difficult humanitarian situation
in the Palestinian territories.

We believe that the Quartet and the entire
international community must prevent events from
developing in that direction. The Russian Federation is
making a contribution to the Palestinians and will, in
the near future, provide $10 million as urgent
assistance to the Palestinian National Authority for
humanitarian needs. We anticipate that those measures
will contribute to preventing a further deterioration of
the humanitarian situation in the Palestinian territories.
