Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would first like to thank Under-Secretaries-General
DiCarlo and Lowcock for their briefings.
China is closely monitoring the situation in north-
western Syria. Last September, Russia and Turkey
signed a memorandum of understanding reiterating
their determination to combat terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations, with a view to maintaining stability
in north-western Syria. In the past few months, terrorist
groups have tightened their grip on Idlib, and in the areas
they control have threatened civilians' physical safety
and launched frequent attacks on Russian military
bases and Government-controlled areas, which have
resulted in civilian casualties and seriously undermined
regional security. The international community will
not tolerate such reckless action on the part of terrorist
forces. China supports the counterattacks in response
to the terrorist groups" heinous acts. We believe that
in order to bring about genuine improvement in the
situation in Syria, it is imperative to address both the
symptoms and root causes of the problem. Here I would
like to make the following three points.

First, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015),
we should continue to promote a Syrian-led and -owned
political process. The United Nations should continue
to play its role as the main mediation channel and
address the legitimate concerns of all parties, including
the Syrian Government, in a balanced manner.
China supports the joint efforts made to promote the
establishment of the constitutional committee and
the continued important role of the Astana process.
In this regard, we support the work of the Secretary-
General's Special Envoy for Syria in consulting with
the relevant members of the international community
in Geneva, and we look forward to further progress in
the consultations.

Secondly, it will be imperative to fight terrorism
resolutely and safeguard the independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Syria in order to restore
security and stability across the country as soon as
possible. Counter-terrorism is a major part of the
solution to the Syrian problem. If terrorism is not
eradicated, there can be no peace for the Syrian people
and no security for the countries of the region. The
international community must harmonize standards,
crack down resolutely on all terrorist groups listed
by the Council and continue to consolidate counter-
terrorism achievements.

Thirdly, we must take into full account the
humanitarian situation throughout Syria. We commend
the United Nations and other relevant parties for
their humanitarian operations there. Humanitarian
assistance should be provided to all regions and people
in need, and we also support targeted humanitarian
assistance measures in north-western Syria. In the long
term, the international community should help Syria to
restore its basic economic and social order and support
the participation of its people in the development and
building of their nation.

Since the beginning of the Syrian crisis, China has
provided the country with food, medical services, office
supplies, public transportation, personnel training and
other kinds of humanitarian assistance. In future, we
will continue to provide such assistance and support
to the best of our ability. China is ready to work with
the other members of the Council to promote a political
solution to the Syrian problem and jointly address
serious counter-terrorism and humanitarian challenges.

