Mr. Gonzalez de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): Like the speakers who took the floor before
me, I would like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Mission in Kosovo, Mr. Zahir Tanin, and to welcome
the presence of the First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia,
Mr. Ivica Dacie, as well as Ms. Vlora Citaku.

As the Security Council is well aware, without
prejudice to its position of principle, Spain has always
been prepared to constructively support measures and
processes that are compatible with our position and that
can as a benefit the people of the territory of Kosovo
as a whole. In that context, Spain has from the outset
supported the high-level talks between Pristina and
Belgrade facilitated by the European Union. We believe
that the dialogue should continue to play a key role and
remain a priority. It is very important for the dialogue
to continue not only at a technical level, but above all
at the political level. It is crucial that the agreements
achieved thus far be implemented and that work
continues in the joint quest to find solutions to specific
problems encountered by the citizens of Kosovo.

We are aware of the fact that circumstances such
as respective cycles of elections explain the absence in
recent months of high-level meetings in the framework
of that dialogue. However, now that those events are
behind us, it is time for the parties to decisively return
to the dialogue with renewed political courage. We
are also aware that none of the parties is 100 per cent
satisfied by the dialogue. That is logical, for the process
is still a work in progress. But the progress made since
the process began, in April 2013, is undeniable. There
has been progress at the political level and citizens have
enjoyed specific benefits. That should be enough to
justify the renewal of the parties' decisive and genuine
commitment to the process.

In the same manner and for the same reason, there
must also be courage and political will to implement the
commitments undertaken to date. In that respect, Spain
remains convinced that the establishment of Serb-
majority communities and municipalities is essential
and must be prioritized. That is both important for
both parties and an unavoidable step in achieving
genuine reconciliation among the various communities
in Kosovo. While it is a key issue, unfortunately it
remains unresolved.

I would like to again express Spain's full support
for the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
and Kosovo and for the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General. My country is fully aware of the
important continuing role that the Mission is called
upon to play in Kosovo today. We highly commend
Special Representative Tanin's prioritized attention to
reconciliation, among other issues, and to communities
living peacefully among one another, with full respect
for human rights. All of those issues are essential if we
truly wish to definitively overcome the situation that
gave rise to the conflict in Kosovo in the first place.
The role of political leaders and representatives
is in all self-defined democratic societies. Their
responsibilities lie beyond mere management of public
affairs. They must serve as an example of living together
in peace. In that respect we must take note ofthe positive
elements indicated by the Special Representative and
highlighted in the report (S/2016/666) of the Secretary-
General that relate to certain improvements in the
political environment in Pristina. However, that path
still lies far ahead. We urge all political actors to
definitively reject all incendiary rhetoric and support
for violent or illegal actions and to fight such actions
with the weapon of the law, thereby setting a responsible
example in the exercise of public functions.

It is also our responsibility to do what is right
here at the Security Council. Presentations in our
regularly scheduled debates should always take place
in a constructive spirit, with a view to achieving
definitive reconciliation, as we all desire, and not just
the implementation of resolution 1244 (1999). Hence
the importance of those discussions and of organizing
them on a regular basis.

