Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): May I begin
by joining colleagues in thanking Special
Representative de Mistura for his briefing on the
Secretary-General's latest report (S/2008/688). I would
ask him through you, Mr. President, if he could pass on
our thanks to the United Nations team working in Iraq.
They continue to do excellent work and have played a
really key role in the progress we have seen, and which
was so fully reported in Mr. de Mistura's briefing. I am
also grateful to Ambassador Khalilzad for his
presentation on behalf of the Multinational Force in
Iraq (MNF-I), to which the United Kingdom continues
to contribute over 4,000 troops.

While Iraq still needs to overcome some serious
challenges, it is with pleasure that we note the
continued progress over the past quarter. We have
heard about it in some detail from previous speakers,
but it is worth recalling some of the key steps forward.

In terms of security, this period has seen a further
decrease in reported incidents of violence to a level as
low as it was five years ago. The Iraq security forces
have demonstrated increasing capability, as reflected in
the fact that Iraq now has lead responsibility for
security in 13 out of the 18 provinces. Further process
in national reconciliation is required in order to ensure
that those gains are sustained, and in that respect the
Iraqi Government's assumption of responsibility for
support to the Awakening movement is an important
step.

The United Kingdom shares concerns about the
intimidation and violence towards Iraq's minority
communities, for example the Christian community in
Mosul. We welcome the swift action taken by the
Government of Iraq and are encouraged by the reports
from the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees this week that, as a result of that action,
many families are now returning to the area.

On the political front, the passage of the
provincial election law in September was a significant
step forward, as Mr. de Mistura said. The holding of
the elections will mark another milestone in democratic
progress in Iraq and should also contribute to the
causes of reconciliation and good governance by
giving those who boycotted previous elections the
chance to be represented in local administrations.
While the details of the quota for guaranteed seats for
minorities have proved to be contentious, it is welcome
that Iraq's political leaders have acknowledged the
principle that minority rights should be protected in
that way. We value and commend the work undertaken
by United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI) in terms of both electoral assistance and in
facilitating final agreement on the election law.

The United Kingdom has consistently urged
increased regional and international engagement with
Iraq and we warmly welcome the recent arrival of
ambassadors from five regional countries. We also
welcome the important support provided by UNAMI to
the Iraq Neighbours Group process. As a participant in
that process, the United Kingdom hopes that it can
deliver concrete improvements in cooperation between
Iraq and its neighbours on security, energy and
humanitarian issues. Increased trade and investment
between Iraq and its neighbours can also make an
important contribution to stability and prosperity in the
region, and that should be one focus for further
engagement.

We take this opportunity to reiterate that external
support for illegal armed groups outside the political
process in Iraq is unacceptable. We continue to
encourage all those who have influence on the parties
who provide such support to press for it to come to an
end.

As the European Union presidency has indicated,
the European Union attaches importance to a
constructive and forward-looking relationship with
Iraq. The recent decision to extend the European Union
Rule of Law Mission for Iraq, which offers training
and capacity-building in the criminal justice system,
shows the European Union's continued commitment to
support the rule of law in Iraq.

I would like to close by outlining my own
Government's support for the Government of Iraq. As
set out by the British Prime Minister on 22 July this
year, our armed forces in southern Iraq remain focused
on two remaining key commitments: to train and
mentor the Fourteenth Division of the Iraqi Army and
to prepare Basra International Airport for transfer to
Iraqi control. We remain on course to fulfil those tasks
in the coming months, following which our military
mission will change fundamentally to a normal
bilateral defence relationship of the kind we have with
other friends and partners in the region. We are in
discussion with the Government of Iraq over a bilateral
agreement that will provide the legal basis for both the
fulfilment of those outstanding commitments and for
the longer-term defence relationship. We look forward
to its successful conclusion before the end of this year.

The transition in our presence will mark a new
chapter in our relationship with and our support for
Iraq. We look forward to having a close and
substantive bilateral relationship, while continuing to
offer political and practical support to Iraqi-led efforts
to build State capacity, improve security and the rule of
law, and deliver economic opportunity for the Iraqi
people.

As conditions in Iraq improve, a close and
productive relationship between it and international
organizations becomes increasingly important to allow
Iraq to achieve its full potential. The United Nations
has led the way in that area and we remain strongly
supportive of the role that UNAMI is playing on a
range of issues in Iraq. We welcome the Government of
Iraq's decision to provide the United Nations with
financial support to build a permanent mission in Iraq,
and we believe that this reflects the United Nations key
role in the future development of a stable, secure and
prosperous Iraq.

