Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): It is a pleasure
for me to have this opportunity to brief the Security
Council on the situation in Afghanistan. It so happens
that I recently visited Afghanistan for a week and I
would like to share my impressions with the Council.

My foremost impression, based on visits to Kabul
and Mazar-e-Sharif and on reports I received from our
Afghan and international colleagues of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
is that we owe those colleagues an enormous debt of
gratitude. They are working tirelessly under extremely
difficult circumstances to implement the Mission's
mandate. Obviously, last April's tragic incident in
Mazar-e-Sharif left scars. But the construction of a new
compound for the UNAMA regional office there is
nearly completed, and the staff are still on active duty,
providing a continuity that is greatly encouraged and
appreciated by Governor Ata Mohammad - whom I
met - and by the region's population in general.

The future role of the United Nations, adapting
the work of the Organization to the priorities emerging
from the transition process, and the transformation of
Afghanistan were all the subject of extensive
discussions during meetings I held with various
officials and high-level interlocutors from civil society,
the media, the international community and the armed
forces. Everyone acknowledged the essential role of
the United Nations, both in the past and in the future.

During those meetings, we maintained that the
success of the Kabul process depended upon Afghan
institutions acknowledging, and increasingly taking, on
responsibilities, the review of activities called for in
UNAMA's mandate, and the support to Afghanistan
provided by United Nations bodies. That review, which
is currently under way following the request made by
the Council in resolution 1974 (2011), is focused in
particular on the best way for the United Nations to
support the process of assuming greater responsibility.

Many representatives from Afghan civil society
and the international community on the ground also
expressed their approval of a continued United Nations
presence, and even a strengthened one, given the
reality in the transition and post-transition periods.

Civil society representatives, both in Kabul and
during their meetings with the Secretary-General in
Bonn, firmly reiterated their positions with regard to
the human rights situation in Afghanistan. They also
forcibly reaffirmed that no circumstances justified
11-64359
moving backwards on the very significant progress
registered in that area.

The joint United Nations-Afghan Government
chairmanship of the Joint Coordination and Monitoring
Board (JCMB) reflects the crucial role played by the
United Nations in Afghanistan with regard to
facilitation and support. I participated in the latest
JCMB meeting in Kabul, held on 30 November, the
outcome of which is reflected in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2011/772*). The meeting called
for increased willingness and capacity on the part of
the Afghan Government to manage its development
programme and coordinate international assistance. It
also took note of the added value provided by the
United Nations in that regard.

From Kabul I rejoined the Secretary-General's
delegation to the International Conference on
Afghanistan in Bonn. The Conference provided a
timely opportunity, 10 years after the 2001 Bonn
Agreement, for the international community and
Afghanistan to assess, reaffirm and expand the
partnership, both during the transition and in the
post-2014 period - that is, the decade of
transformation through 2014.

During the Conference, the Secretary-General
emphasized the need for the Afghan Government and
its international partners to also focus on non-military
aspects of the transition. International assistance must
support the efforts made by Afghans to strengthen their
institutions, advance socio-economic development and
promote the rule of law and respect for human rights.
That process takes time in the best of circumstances,
and Afghanistan will be no different. It is for that
reason that the long-term commitment to Afghanistan
undertaken at Bonn by the international community -
during the transition and the subsequent
transformation - is so important.

The declaration issued by the Conference, which
highlights the crucial role of the United Nations in
Afghanistan, is also important. During meetings on the
sidelines of the Conference, the Secretary-General
underscored the three future priorities of the United
Nations: first, to provide security and development
assistance; secondly, to promote and support an
inclusive reconciliation process led by Afghans and
based on dialogue and consensus; and, thirdly, to
continue to promote human rights, in particular the
rights of women and children.
11-64359

The United Nations is committed to the
Government and people of Afghanistan for the long
term. We have supported the Afghan population for
more than half a century. We will remain in
Afghanistan well beyond 2014, for as long as Afghans
need us.

With regard to major meetings on Afghanistan
since the latest Council deliberations, the Istanbul
Conference for Afghanistan: Security and Cooperation
in the Heart of Asia launched the Istanbul Process. The
13 participating countries reaffirmed their previous
commitments, including with regard to the country's
territorial integrity. They also announced joint
principles to guide their support for a secure, stable
and peaceful Afghanistan.

The Istanbul Process has put in place a follow-up
framework based on concrete confidence-building
measures in response to the crucial challenges facing
Afghanistan and a large part of the region in the
security, political and economic areas. Those
challenges include the threat posed by terrorism and
drug trafficking, as well as the need for peace and to
strengthen trade links. We look forward to the concept
paper to be presented by Afghanistan early next year
ahead of the Kabul ministerial conference to be held in
July 2012, which will be an additional sign of the
taking on of greater responsibility of the Process for
the future by national authorities.

(spoke in English)

Politically, there have also been a number of
important steps forwards since our last debate (see S/PV.6625). At the traditional Loya J irga in November,
approximately 40 working groups made up of
representatives from every province debated the future
of the High Peace Council and of dialogue itself. They
concluded that there was no alternative to peace,
reaffirmed the Council's mandate and recommended,
wisely, that dialogue take place with interlocutors who
are known, verifiable, can take responsibility and be
held accountable, and respect the rights and aspirations
of all Afghans, especially women.

As a result of the assassination of Professor
Rabbani, the Jirga requested the Government to
appoint a new chairperson to lead the High Peace
Council in his stead.

There was a clear reaffirmation from both the
Loya Jirga and the Bonn Conference outcomes of the
3

commitment to pursuing a peace process, but next
steps remain to be defined.

In another positive development, with a working
quorum achieved on 8 October, the lower house of
parliament - the Wolesi Jirga - has now resumed its
legislative work. The orderly resolution of the year-
long dispute over election results points to a growing
respect for institutions, processes and lawful
procedures.

With parliament's approval, in mid-October, of
the supplemental budget to recapitalize Kabul Bank, a
positive domino effect has also had the result of
dissolving a major blockage within the development
agenda. Indeed, in November, the International
Monetary Fund (IMF) and the Government concluded
negotiations on a new IMF programme. That has
enabled international donors, first, to re-engage in
support of current development programmes through
the JCMB process, with two Board meetings held in
quick succession to approve nine new national priority
programmes; and secondly, at Bonn, to commit to
longer-term development cooperation, including a
reconfirmation of commitments to channel more aid
through the Government budget.

Through that revitalization of the Kabul process
and the reconfirmation of aid effectiveness
mechanisms, the Afghan Government will be better
positioned to meet its own commitments to improved
governance and the rule of law, greater fiscal
accountability and enhanced delivery.

In terms of counter-narcotics, the 2011 Afghan
Opium Survey, which was released in October,
revealed an increase in poppy cultivation and in the
expected production of opium this year. However,
during the past month two important steps were taken
at the regional level, which is indeed the level at which
this issue must be fought. Under the triangular
initiative sponsored by the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC), the ministers for counter-
narcotics of Afghanistan, Iran and Pakistan met to sign
a declaration to strengthen joint planning and
operational capacities. The following week, UNODC
launched its 2011-2014 regional programme to enhance
cooperation with all the countries of the region,
especially with regard to information sharing.

In terms of the transition of security
responsibilities, which is a key component of the
transformative process, I saw for myself on my recent
visit to Afghanistan that this is proceeding apace. As
the Council is aware, at the end of November President
Karzai approved the second tranche of areas to be
handed over. But there is no room for complacency.
For the transition to be sustainable, security has to be
linked to development and the Kabul process. The
Afghan people must see tangible improvements to their
daily lives, especially in terms of economic
opportunities. It is therefore more urgent than ever
before that the civilian side of transition proceed
equally strongly and briskly. Thus Bonn has come at a
crucial time for this process to gain momentum. More
specific commitments from the international
community will be expected at next year's conference
in Tokyo.

Also noteworthy, and promising if sustained, are
recent apparent signs of a relative decline in the
number of security incidents as we at the United
Nations record them. As of today, this year there has
been a 21 per cent rise in incidents, as compared to
2010, but that was mainly due to the elevated number
of incidents in the early part of the year. In September,
October and November, the number of incidents fell, as
compared to the previous three months. It also fell in
comparison to the same period in 2010 - although we
must remember that parliamentary elections in
September last year greatly skewed the figures for that
month.

This is good news in a sector that has had little
positive to report for a very long time. Nevertheless,
we should not deceive ourselves. We have again
witnessed large-scale attacks over recent weeks. We
must continue to exercise great caution and vigilance
as the volatile security situation continues to impact
the work of the United Nations in Afghanistan,
constraining operational access and perpetuating high
levels of risk for our staff, as well as for the Afghan
population.

We still have a long way to go with our work, as
the title of a recently released UNAMA human rights
report on the implementation of the law on the
elimination of violence against women tells us. The
rights of women and of detainees are highlighted in
this report. We will continue to pursue such reviews
and to encourage and support Afghan civil society to
play a similar role and to make Afghan voices heard.

Regrettably, we also have a long way to go on the
protection of civilians. Civilian casualties remain at
high levels, with nearly 800 civilian deaths over the
last three-month period. Dozens of innocent
worshippers were killed on a single day in Kabul and
Mazar-e-Sharif on 6 December - an important
religious day of commemoration. Such attacks deserve
the strong condemnation they have received from the
widest range of voices, both inside and outside
Afghanistan. Unfortunately, Afghans have become all
too familiar with such pain and hardship. We must keep
our eye on the pressing humanitarian concerns that
continue to afflict this country.

The drought this year has had a devastating
impact, particularly in the north and the west, so much
so that the Emergency Relief Coordinator increased
this year's consolidated appeal by $129 million -
nearly 30 per cent - to respond, under the leadership
of the Afghan Government, to the resulting needs. Next
year's appeal, which was launched last week, reminds
us of the importance of bridging the gap between
humanitarian interventions and development to get at
the underlying structural problems, which can prevent
many of the natural disasters we see recurring year in,
year out. In this area, too, the Government is taking a
strong leadership position and will need our support as
part of our commitment to long-term engagement.

With a clear message of support from the
international community and the Afghan Government
in Bonn and Istanbul for the crucial role of the United
Nations in Afghanistan, it is time to look again at that
role and refocus our mandate, adjusting it to the
evolving situation on the ground. To this end, and in
line with the Council's instructions and the call from
the Government earlier this year to the Secretary-
General, the process of reviewing UNAMA's mandated
activities and of United Nations support in
Afghanistan, led by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, is under way. I am pleased to report that
during my visit to Kabul we officially launched the
review process, together with Foreign Minister
Rassoul, in the presence of other key ministers,
including Deputy Foreign Minister Ludin, who is the
Afghan Government's focal point for the review. I wish
to thank him for his leadership.

An inter-agency team appointed by the Secretary-
General is working under the terms of reference that
were widely consulted and agreed with Council
members and the Afghan Government, as well as with
key partners and stakeholders. The team returned from
Afghanistan yesterday. They held extensive

consultations with a wide range of interlocutors in New
York before deployment and during their three-week
stay in Afghanistan. The team will now conduct a
series of debriefings before compiling their findings
and recommendations, which will aim to inform the
Council's discussions related to the mandate renewal in
March 2012.

I also wish to inform the Council that the planned
and smooth process of succession in UNAMA's senior
leadership is under way. Mr. Staffan de Mistura, who
successfully led the Mission through a very tumultuous
period, completed his service as Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on 14 December to take up a
position within his Government. I expressed the deep
appreciation and gratitude of the Secretary-General and
of myself for Mr. De Mistura's professionalism and
dedication during his tenure. We wish him well in the
next step in his very distinguished career.

I am pleased to introduce Mr. Jan Kubis, whom
many of you already know, who has been appointed by
the Secretary-General as the next Special
Representative and Head of UNAMA. Mr. Kubis is an
accomplished and successful diplomat and politician.
He has had a long and high-profile career, including as
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Slovakia and as
Secretary-General of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, prior to heading the United
Nations Economic Commission for Europe, where he is
currently serving until his deployment to UNAMA on
16 January. We wish him well as well in his most
challenging task and request the Council's
understanding and full support.

