Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): I thank Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016). The recent developments serve to underscore the ongoing significance of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The parameters for its settlement have long been known - two States, living side by side in peace and security within secure and recognized borders based on the 1967 lines, both with Jerusalem as their capital. On that basis, it is now our responsibility to work towards a resumption of dialogue between the two parties. The announcement of the normalization of Israel's relations with the United Arab Emirates and Bahrain signals a new dynamic, which may make a positive contribution to regional stability. We welcome it. However, regional stability also requires a resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict that respects the aspirations and rights of both parties and is consistent with international law and the parameters agreed by the Security Council. France, which is a friend of both the Israelis and the Palestinians, remains convinced that neither of the two peoples will be able to fulfil its aspirations at the expense of those of the other. France will not compromise Israel's security, just as it will not abandon the Palestinian people in the pursuit of their rights. In conjunction with its European and Arab partners, France is ready to support a gradual resumption of dialogue. In that spirit, Minister Le Drian and his German, Egyptian and Jordanian counterparts met in Amman on 24 September in the presence of the European Union Special Representative. The four ministers expressed their determination to act collectively to that end on the basis of tangible and realistic commitments to be made by both parties. It is also important that the parties resume their cooperation at all levels, in accordance with the agreements reached, including in dealing with the current pandemic. In order to achieve a resumption of dialogue, there is an urgent need to re-establish a climate of trust between the parties. That first requires that the suspension by the Israeli authorities of the planned annexation of Palestinian territories become a definitive measure. That is the message that our ministers reiterated in Amman. It is also the message that, together with my European counterparts, we conveyed ahead of this Council meeting. It also requires an end to the settlement policy and the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016). France is very concerned about the continuing settlement activities and the unprecedented increase in the demolition of Palestinian structures over the past six months despite the health situation. Settlement activities must not allow a de facto annexation. France calls on Israel to suspend the construction of new housing units in the West Bank settlements and East Jerusalem, particularly in sensitive areas around Jerusalem, such as Givat Hamatos, Har Homa and in the E-1 area, and to implement an effective freeze on demolitions. France also calls for progress in the intra-Palestinian reconciliation process and hopes that the meeting in Ankara will allow progress to be made in that direction. We welcome the Palestinian Authority's renewed commitment to holding elections and encourage it to make rapid progress in preparing for this important date for the Palestinian people. Moreover, France will continue to give its full support to the work of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. We call on all States to contribute to its budget to help it overcome its financial crisis. Lastly, France remains committed to upholding international humanitarian law and human rights, in particular through support for Palestinian and Israeli civil society organizations. France stands ready to support any initiative based on international law and the agreed parameters. It calls on the Council to come together on that basis, which we have built together.
