Mr. Raytchev (Bulgaria): Allow me, first of all,
to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting
of the Council on Kosovo. I would also like to thank
Assistant Secretary-General He'di Annabi for his
comprehensive briefing.

Bulgaria, an associated country of the European
Union, fully supports the statement that will be made
later in this debate by the representative of Greece on
behalf of the European Union. I shall therefore limit
myself to a few brief comments in my national
capacity.

We welcome the progress achieved in the peace
process in Kosovo and extend our thanks to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration in Kosovo
(UNMIK), Mr. Michael Steiner, for his efforts aimed at
normalizing life in the region.

Bulgaria fully shares the view of the Contact
Group on Kosovo expressed in Berlin on 19 May 2003
that considerable practical work still remains to be
done in order to fulfil the benchmarks - especially
those in the area of democratic governance - before
the issue of Kosovo's status can be addressed. In that
context, we believe that the final word on the status of
Kosovo should be given to the United Nations, in
compliance with resolution 1244 (1999).

As a country of the South-Eastern European
region, Bulgaria expresses its legitimate concern about
the ongoing unilateral attempts and acts from different
sides directed at implementing solutions not supported
by the international community. In that connection, we
think that destructive action aimed at obtaining
unilateral political benefits should be categorically
condemned.

We emphasize once again our position that the
political structures of all communities in Kosovo
should demonstrate a higher political culture by
bringing to an end all attempts to ignore the
recommendations of the Special Representative; such
attempts undermine and delay the process of
normalization. As a factor of stability in the region,
Bulgaria is interested in seeing the process of
normalization continue in a speedy, organized and
peaceful manner. That would have a strong, positive
impact on the overall development of South-Eastern
Europe and on its prosperity.

We are aware of the fact that the process of
transferring competencies from UNMIK to the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government in
accordance with paragraph 11 of resolution 1244
(1999) will not be an easy one. We hope that the
recently established Transfer Council will proceed
cautiously in its work by simultaneously taking into
account the need for the swift achievement of the
benchmarks and the legitimate interests of all
communities and inhabitants of Kosovo. An important
element in that process is the implementation of a
realistic road map for the transfer of powers that more
clearly marks the way towards implementing the
"standards before status" policy on the basis of the
benchmarks.

In our View, local authorities should make real
efforts, monitored by the international community, to
build a functioning administration at all levels in
Kosovo that reflects the multi-ethnic character of the
region and serves all of Kosovo's inhabitants in a
professional manner.

Bulgaria considers the continuing acts of inter-
ethnic violence and the activities of organized crime in
Kosovo as a strong destructive factor. We therefore call
on local political leaders to exert their authority and
influence in order to establish relations based on inter-
ethnic tolerance. For that reason, we strongly condemn
the murder ofa Serb family in Obilic earlier this month
and hope that those responsible will be brought to
justice.

We support the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to combat
organized crime and the trafficking of human beings,
as well as his efforts to revitalize the economy by
attracting investment and to solve the daily practical
problems ofthe population in Kosovo.

The presence of UNMIK and KFOR plays a key
role in Kosovo's security as well as in the wider region.
Bulgaria will continue to actively participate in these
operations of the international community aimed at
maintaining peace and security.

Finally, we believe that in the forthcoming period
all local political actors should focus their energy on
solving concrete problems and normalizing life in
Kosovo, rather than on making declarations calling for
independence or division, which provoke concern in
the region and in the international community. That
would be appropriate behaviour and would lead to a
timely resolution ofthe status issue in compliance with
resolution 1244 (1999).

