The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Belgium.

I would like first of all to thank the Under-
Secretary-General, Mr. Pascoe, and the Assistant
Secretary-General, Mr. Mulet, for their briefings. I
would like to reiterate at the outset my country's
confidence in the impartiality of the Secretariat of this
Organization.

Belgium expresses its very serious concern at the
disturbing evolution of events on the ground, which
have been marked by an escalation of military
operations and a territorial extension of the conflict to
areas beyond South Ossetia, in particular towards
Abkhazia. Furthermore, the events of recent days have
created a very serious humanitarian situation and have
led to considerable damage. Above all, they have taken
the lives of a large number of victims.

Belgium would like firmly to stress three
elements. First, Belgium wishes to express its
unconditional support for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Georgia within its internationally
recognized borders. Secondly, Belgium calls for an
immediate ceasefire without any preconditions and a
return to the situation that existed on the ground prior
to 6 August. Thirdly, Belgium emphatically recalls how
important it is for all parties concerned to emerge from
a military approach and adopt a peaceful approach.
Only a political process can be the basis for lasting
peace in the region. We therefore support the various
diplomatic initiatives that are currently under way and
that are aimed at helping the parties to find a solution.

Finally, Belgium expresses its grave concern with
regard to the measures that led yesterday to the forced
withdrawal of military observers of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Georgia from the Kodori Valley
and recalls its full support for that United Nations
operation.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The representative of Georgia has asked for the
floor to make a further statement, and I call on him
now.

