I would like to commend the Indonesian presidency for having convened this timely high-level open debate of the Security Council on "Pandemics and the challenges of sustaining peace". Allow me also to express my deep appreciation for the informative briefings given by Secretary-General Antonio Guterres; Mr. Ban Ki-moon, former Secretary- General; and Ms. Sarah Cliffe, Director of the Center on International Cooperation at New York University. Romania aligns itself with the statement delivered on behalf of the European Union. I will make now a few remarks in my national capacity. The COVID-19 pandemic has had a devastating effect worldwide, affecting in particular vulnerable communities - women and children, people with disabilities, the marginalized, displaced persons and refugees - and exacerbating already existing inequalities. As has been reiterated, the pandemic is adding yet another layer of complexity to already fragile situations. The pandemic is not merely a health crisis. Its direct and indirect consequences, including unemployment, food insecurity, lack of access to basic services and the inability to send remittances, can act as risk multipliers and increase tensions and fuel instability. By exacerbating the drivers of conflict, the pandemic directly undermines the social fabric of societies. Its corrosive effects span the social, economic and political dimensions. The way in which we address this unprecedented challenge will represent one of the biggest tests for our global solidarity and our capacity to react collectively. We are of the view that the pandemic poses a significant threat for hard- won peacebuilding and development gains. Resolution 2532 (2020) recognizes that the COVID-19 pandemic is likely to endanger international peace and security. Disruptions have already been noticed across the United Nations system, impacting peacekeeping operations and special political missions and affecting the work of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). The pandemic has the potential of tipping countries over the edge into violent conflict, especially countries emerging from conflict or fragile States. In that context, we stand fully behind the Secretary-General's appeal for a global ceasefire. Warring parties need to step back from hostilities, silence the guns and concentrate on the common enemy, the pandemic. By opening precious windows for diplomacy, as the Secretary-General himself has stated, the ceasefire could create more opportunities for building peace. The pandemic has brought to light that the root causes of instability, violence and conflict can run the entire political, development and human rights spectrum. Hence, the humanitarian development-peace nexus must be the framework within which the United Nations system, Member States, specialized agencies and other relevant actors should work to achieve inclusive sustainable development and sustain peace. An adequate response requires a whole-of-system and whole-of-society approach. We must step away from thinking in silos. In that connection, we salute the Secretary-General's efforts towards a United Nations-wide response, and we stand behind the measures proposed in his policy papers to address the impact of the pandemic by using a multidimensional and cross-pillar response. Despite the dire picture, we believe that crises can reveal opportunities. At the institutional level, we are of the view that the PBC, in its advisory role to the Security Council, can provide the Council with particular insights on regional and country-specific situations. The PBC has a unique capacity to foster greater coherence and coordination, thus contributing to building stronger partnerships among the various national, regional and international actors. We reiterate our strong support for the United Nations peacebuilding architecture and the 2020 peacebuilding architecture review process and their instrumental role in creating synergies among security, political and development actors. Additionally, we encourage the continuing involvement of regional and subregional organizations, and emphasize the importance of using their existing and potential capabilities to address the pandemic. Owing to their knowledge of their respective regions, regional organizations are well-positioned to understand their specific dynamics. They also offer a deep and accurate portrayal of regional perspectives and dynamics. The whole international community can benefit from the experiences of different regional organizations to develop best practices and approaches to development and security concerns. Romania has been a steadfast supporter of regional organizations. In 2005, under the Romanian presidency of the Council, we promoted the very first United Nations resolution on cooperation with regional organizations, resolution 1631 (2005). Nowadays, the practice of cooperating with regional organizations has been institutionalized as one of the cornerstones of the peace and security architecture, but Romania was the first country to enshrine that item on the Council's agenda, in 2005. As we mark the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations this year, and as we find ourselves confronted with different and more complex challenges, this crisis highlights the opportunity to build back better. The pandemic has made inequalities and fractures in society all the more obvious, making it easier for Governments to target specific objectives in an effort to rebuild. We strongly believe that we can do that by adopting people-centred and conflict-sensitive responses and by giving countries the opportunity to renegotiate their social contracts through inclusive and comprehensive dialogue. Secretary-General Antodnio Guterres spoke about the need for networked multilateralism in which the United Nations works hand-in-hand with regional organizations, international financial institutions, development banks, specialized agencies and civil society to bring multilateralism to the people. Obviously, the international community is going through a crisis, but we have now the unique opportunity to come together and shape the "future we want, the United Nations we need" by pooling our energy, capacities and skills.
