Mr. Gombo (Chad) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank the French delegation for having organized this
meeting on cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in maintaining
international peace and security, with a focus on the
European Union. I would like to convey my gratitude
to Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon and Ms. Federica
Mogherini, High Representative of the European
Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, for their
briefings.

The Charter of United Nations confers upon
the Security Council the primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security. In
Chapter VIII, the Charter provides for partnerships
with regional and subregional organizations with a
view to maintaining international peace and security. In
that regard, Chad welcomes the progress made through
partnerships between the United Nations and regional
organizations, particularly the European Union. We
believe that the United Nations and the European Union
are complementary and that the cooperation between
them is exemplary.

We have taken note of the various activities
carried out by the European Union around the world,
some of which are referred to in presidential statement
S/PRST/2014/4, of 14 February. Given the multiple
crises currently facing the world, particularly in Africa,
we urge the United Nations, the European Union and
the African Union to strengthen their triangular
cooperation. In Africa, we must tackle together the
new wave of challenges represented by terrorism,
violent extremism and transnational organized crime,
especially in West and Central Africa, the Sahel and
the Maghreb.

We encourage the United Nations, the European
Union and the African Union to consider ways to
strengthen their partnerships for the prevention,
settlement and management of conflicts and for
peacekeeping. We reiterate our call to continue to pursue
together the aim of an Africa free of armed conflict by
2020, in keeping with the solemn declaration adopted
on the occasion of the fiftieth anniversary of founding
of the precursor to the African Union.

We welcome the contributions of the African Union
and its regional economic communities, which initiated
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur, in the Sudan, the African Union Mission in
Somalia, the African-led International Support Mission
in Mali and the African-led International Support
Mission in the Central African Republic (MISCA). We
welcome the important role played by the European
Union, particularly its African Peace Facility, to
support African Union operations.

In the Central African Republic, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), which took
over from MISCA, has achieved some improvement,
despite the continuing presence of armed groups.
We are nonetheless concerned by continuing acts of
violence taking place in Bangui and other provinces,
including murders, arbitrary detention, obstacles to
the provision of humanitarian aid, drug-trafficking,
arms trafficking, the illicit exploitation of the country's
natural resources, attacks targeting international forces
and the kidnapping of humanitarian workers and even
members of the Government.

We welcome the role played by the forces of
Operation Sangaris and the European Union Force,
as well as their contributions to maintaining order
in Bangui and some other provinces, including the
training of the first police and gendarmerie units. The
drawdown of those forces, planned for March 2015, is
nonetheless cause for concern, as it risks compromising
MINUSCA's aim of deploying troops and police beyond
Bangui to ensure the smooth holding of the elections.

Moreover, we condemn the situation of the civilian
population, which has seen scant improvement, as well
as that of displaced persons, who remain in distress
due to the prevention of the delivery of food aid. We
call for the necessary steps to be taken to ensure that
displaced persons and refugees are able to participate
in the upcoming electoral process.

In Mali, the will of the parties, the support of
the international community and the determination
of the mediation team allowed the parties to reach
an agreement in Algiers on 1 March, following eight
months of work. We commend Algeria and the entire
mediation team for their efforts. We believe that the
agreement needs to be signed by all of the parties
concerned, as it represents a decisive step towards a
solution to emerge from the crisis.

Moreover, Chad firmly condemns the terrorist
attacks committed last weekend, including in Bamako,
and the attacks against the Kidal headquarters of
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali. We express our
condolences to the families of the victims and to the
Governments of the countries affected. We believe
that those acts of violence were aimed at undermining
the ultimate signing of the agreement, whose
implementation could make possible the return ofpeace
and stability. The international community must send a
firm, clear message to warn those who obstruct peace.

Chad acknowledges the active contribution of
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali throughout the process
of the Algiers talks and calls on it to be ever more
vigilant in dealing with other possible terrorist attacks
against its facilities and personnel. We ask all countries
and organizations that have influence over the Malian
parties and that have not yet done so to persuade them
to join the 1 March agreement as soon as possible so as
to enable it to be signed on 28 March as expected.

In conclusion, we express our gratitude to
the European Union for its contributions to the
maintenance of peace and security around the world,
in particular in Somalia, Mali and the Central African
Republic. We call on the United Nations, the European
Union and the African Union to further strengthen
their trilateral cooperation to respond to all the
challenges facing Africa. In that respect, the situation
in Libya - and the Sahel in general - the terrorist
threat posed by Boko Haram, illegal trafficking and
transnational organized crime should command the full
attention of the international community. To better face
those challenges, particular emphasis must be placed
on the relationship between development and security.
In that respect, the effective implementation of the
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel will,
in our humble opinion, contribute to improving, at the
very least, the security situation.

