The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.

We thank Mr. Zarif for introducing the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2013/72) on the activities of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK). We welcome the participation
in this meeting of Prime Minister Dacie of Serbia.
We share his assessments. We listened very closely to
Mr. Thaci, as well.

Russia's position with respect to the non-recognition
of the unilateral declaration of independence of Kosovo
is unchanged. Resolution 1244 (1999) remains fully in
force as the mandatory international legal basis for a
comprehensive settlement of the Kosovo issue. We
anticipate that the dialogue to be held at the highest
political level between Belgrade and Pristina, under
European Union mediation, will contribute to a long-
term settlement of the issue of Kosovo. At the same
time, the Security Council still has the final word.

The United Nations Mission is the core international
civilian presence in Kosovo and must carry out its
functions in full, in accordance with its mandate under
the Security Council. To that end, it must be endowed
with all the necessary capacities and resources.

We believe that Kosovo made a serious mistake in
its decision to establish a new administrative office in
northern Mitrovica, which is financed, inter alia, with
resources assigned earlier to UNMIK administrative
tasks in the northern part of the city. That decision has
raised additional tensions in northern Mitrovica.

There has been a series of inter-ethnic and
sectarian incidents in Kosovo. Unfortunately, the most
flagrant of those do not receive due consideration or
analysis in the Secretary-General's report. The wave
of anti-Serbian acts that swept through Kosovo in
January recalls the tragic events of March 2004. We
are particularly concerned about the events that took
place at the time of the Serbian Orthodox Christmas in
Kosovo. The detention and beating of Serbian believers

who arrived at Gracanica - in addition, reports
have said that took place in the courthouse building
in Pristina - have again demonstrated the inability

of international entities, above all the Kosovo Force
(KFOR) and the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo (EULEX), to appropriately withstand acts of
provocation by the Kosovar Albanian authorities. Two
months have already passed. What are the results of
the investigation? Was it neutral and impartial? We are
concerned about the widespread attacks against Serbian
cemeteries, which have resulted in the desecration
of more than 150 grave sites in more than a dozen
municipalities.

There was also an arson attack against a church in
the town of Obilie, as well as an attempt to burn down a
Serbian city hall building in Mitrovica. In that context,
the incident that stands out is the memorial to victims
of the Second World War, which was blown up in the
town of Vitina. We view that as an act of desecration
against the memory of the victims of fascism and those
who fought against it.

Over and over again, we have drawn attention to
the fact that progress on the issue of the resettlement
of Serbian refugees and internally displaced persons
is essentially nonexistent. An analysis of that situation
demonstrates that the Kosovar Albanian authorities
systematically impede their return to the province, the
restoration of their property rights and compliance with
internationally recognized fundamental human rights
and freedoms.

There is a conscious effort to create conditions
aimed at pushing the remaining Serbian population
out of Serbia, under the threat of reprisals, which is a
kind of ethnic cleansing by peaceful means, with all the
ensuing consequences.

We hope that in future reports on UNMIK and
on the situation in the province there will be an
objective picture drawn of the situation of the Serbian
population in Kosovo. We call on Mr. Zarif to provide a
fundamental assessment of the situation and to take an
active stance in accordance with his mandate.

The Russian Federation emphasizes that the
decisions taken with respect to northern Kosovo
must take into account the view of the local Serbian
population. Ifthat is not done, compromises will remain
only on paper.

Without genuine steps carried out in the areas
of inter-ethnic dialogue and confidence-building,
the prospects for a multiethnic society in Kosovo are
unrealistic.

We draw attention to the fact that, in the report,
attention is focused on the pace of the investigation of
the incidents reported by Council of Europe Special
Rapporteur Dick Marty on the illegal trafficking of
human organs in Kosovo. However, that is not enough.
We are looking forward to results. All perpetrators of
such acts must be brought to justice. If EULEX does
not have sufficient capacity to ensure an effective,
objective and impartial investigation, we will not
remove that issue from the United Nations agenda.

Under the mandate of the Security Council, KF OR
bears core responsibility for the maintenance of security
in the province. Any change in its function or format
must be approved by the Council.

We hope that NATO will recognize the possible
consequences of the transfer of KFOR's responsibility
for the safety and security of Orthodox monasteries
in the southern part of the province to Pristina's law
enforcement entities, and therefore carry out effective
measures aimed at avoiding sectarian or inter-ethnic
clashes.

We have repeatedly discussed the distressing
situation in the provinces home to Serbian Orthodox
churches, which have been the subject of vandalism and
attacks on their clergy. That problem calls for focused
attention. The situation is totally intolerable with respect
to the Visoki Decani Monastery, which UNESCO has
designated as a World Heritage Site. Local authorities
are inciting the populace to protest with a demand to
confiscate the land of the Monastery. The decisions of
the Kosovo courts have been ignored, as have the calls
of the international community.

We are concerned about statements regarding this
year's conversion of the Kosovo security force into a
full-fledged armed force. The Kosovo security force
consists essentially of Albanians, the majority of
whom were earlier militia members. We view that as a
potential threat to regional stability.

One must also highlight the heightened Albanian
rhetoric. Statements have not gone unnoticed in terms
of the intention of Pristina to give patronage to ethnic
Albanians regardless of their country ofresidence. That
constitutes a direct step towards the destabilization not
only of Kosovo, but of Serbia's neighbours, including the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro 1 now resume my functions as President of the
and Greece. Security Council.

The stabilization of the situation in Kosovo There are no more names inscribed on my list. The
remains far off. Problems in the province can be Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
solved only through political means. We anticipate that of its consideration ofthe item on its agenda.
all international presences will fully adhere to that
common position within the framework of efforts to
implement the provisions of resolution 1244 (1999).

The meeting rose at 1 p.m.
