Mr. Ettalhi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): I am pleased at the outset to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. We will strive to
cooperate most positively with you. We also express
our high appreciation for South Africa's effective
leadership of the Security Council in April.

We thank Mr. Jurica, Mr. Verbeke and
Mr. Urbina, Chairmen, respectively, of the Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1373 (2001), 1267
(1999) and 1540 (2004), for their valuable briefings.
We highly appreciate their efforts to ensure the
Committees' success.

The progress achieved by the sanctions
Committees in promoting national counter-terrorism
capacities, implementing the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and fulfilling international transparency
commitments can only enjoy our support as a very
important step towards eradicating both the causes and
the symptoms of terrorism.

Our unanimous determination to reject any
justification for terrorism cannot be at the expense of
dealing objectively with the causes of terrorism.
Occupation, the levelling of accusations against
civilizations and cultures, the denial of the legitimacy
of resistance to occupation and the application of
double standards in the implementation of international
instruments: those all give rise to much anger and
violence.

With respect to the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), we
have no doubt that the large number of Preliminary
Implementation Assessments (PIAs) that have been
adopted, as noted by the Chairman in his briefing,
reflect the easing of demands on States to update their
reports. We all hope that the new PIA matrices devised
by the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate will reflect every State's performance in
keeping with the criteria of transparency and
objectivity and will take account of human rights
issues. We hope that the overall review of resolution
1373 (2001), which is expected to be included in the
Committee's next report to the Council, will be
accurate, cautious and realistic and will avoid hasty
classifications.

Turning to the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) - the Al-Qaida and Taliban
Sanctions Committee - Libya considers that there is a
great need to improve the criteria for adding and
removing names from the consolidated list, with a view
to enhancing the accuracy and completeness of the list.
We believe that the Committee should set criteria and
terms for the submission of names for inclusion on the
list, including the provision of accurate information on
the individuals or entities in question. Libya stresses
that our measures should be just and that the work of
the Committee should focus on human rights; this
would enhance the effectiveness of the implementation
of the sanctions regime established under resolution
1267 (1999).

We therefore appreciate the Council's adoption of
resolution 1735 (2006), which establishes coordination
mechanisms to handle requests for the removal of
names from the consolidated list, as a very important
step towards improving the sanctions regime and
increasing its transparency. We believe, however, that
this step is not enough and that it does not meet the
need for transparency in guaranteeing justice and
clarity in these sanctions measures. We urge the
Committee to continue to implement the provisions of
resolution 1452 (2002) regarding exemptions, with a
view to easing the severity of the sanctions on listed
individuals and their families and addressing the
humanitarian difficulties they may be facing. Here, we
stress that the Committee should consider the obstacles
that impede speedy action on requests for exemptions,
in particular the use of delays and holds to stymie such
requests.

With respect to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), Libya once again
denounces the existence of weapons of mass
destruction. We are convinced that the only guarantee
against access by non-State actors to such weapons is
their total elimination. Libya therefore believes that the
goals of disarmament and non-proliferation are
mutually supportive; continuous, irreversible progress
must be made on both fronts. Libya believes it
important to ensure that there is no contradiction
among the provisions of resolution 1540 (2004), the
United Nations Charter, existing multilateral treaties on
weapons of mass destruction, other instruments
adopted within international organizations in this
sphere, and the role of the General Assembly.
We believe that the important issue of preventing
weapons of mass destruction from falling into the
hands of non-State actors requires the active
participation of all Member States. We believe that the
subject should be considered in the General Assembly
with a view to agreement on a legally binding
instrument on this issue.

In conclusion, Libya once again reaffirms its
support for all international counter-terrorism efforts
and its support for all efforts to reach the international
community's goal of eradicating terrorism and bringing
about a world of peace and security for all.

