Mr. Covie (Yugoslavia) (spoke in Serbian; English interpretation provided by the delegation):
I would like to take this opportunity to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this meeting today. I am
very pleased that a question was asked - perhaps
indirectly - today about the participation of the
Povratak Coalition in the Government of Kosovo. Of
course we are aware that the decision will be up to the
deputies of the Povratak Coalition. They want to be
real partners; they are not interested in mere window
dressing. The way in which the issue of their
participation was presented to the deputies of Povratak
confused them; they said that they had not been
consulted and had not come to an agreement in this
regard.

As the Council knows, an offer was not even
made to them to sign the coalition agreement on the
Government of Kosovo. However, Mr. Steiner has had
several talks with the deputies of Povratak and they
feel that it will be necessary for them to consult further.
They also believe that their unity must be preserved
and that attempts should not be made to divide them.
There have been some efforts to create different
factions within the Coalition, in the belief that that
would be the quickest way to achieve a result.

The Povratak deputies were informed about the
agreement made with the Albanian leaders only after it
had been signed. They were informed about the
ministerial positions in the Government only after all
the ministerial positions had been filled. We must try to
understand their point of view, because the Serbs in
Kosovo have had a very different experience from that
of the Serbs who left Kosovo, and they have different
opinions. I want to be very clear that neither Belgrade
nor I have ever planned to block the participation of the
Serbian deputies in the Government of Kosovo. Their
participation is blocked by the situation in Kosovo.

It is important to recall that there are three times
as many Kosovo Serbs in Serbia and Montenegro -
internally displaced persons and refugees - than in
Kosovo itself. I say this in support of my statement that
they hold different views than those who remained in
Kosovo.

In order to help the Serbs to survive in Kosovo
within a truly multi-ethnic society, it is absolutely
essential that we make substantive progress on returns.
I have heard and fully recognize the arguments made
by Assistant Secretary-General Annabi and am
prepared, upon my return to Belgrade, to consult with
the representatives of Povratak in order to have them
further clarify their position. The final decision,
however, will be up to them.

Nevertheless, given their genuine concerns, I note
that it will be necessary in exchange to provide them
with specific assurances that all will be done to
improve the process of the return of Serbs and non-
Albanians to their homes in Kosovo. We must not
allow security issues to dominate the return process or
to be used to discourage potential returnees. The
Belgrade authorities are fully prepared to provide the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo and KFOR with all the assistance necessary to
resolve these issues and to improve the return process.

Finally, the representatives of Povratak are
grateful for the offered position of Minister of
Agriculture. However, they asked me to convey their
message to the Council that this portfolio has no
importance whatsoever to the future and survival ofthe
Serbs in Kosovo. I therefore request the Council's
assistance and support in doing our very best, jointly,
to encourage them to enter the Kosovo Government.
We cannot succeed in this unless we cooperate very
closely in this regard. We are at the Council's disposal
and I wish to assure members that we will do our
utmost, without exerting undue pressure.

