I would like to warmly thank all present for their constructive participation in this high-level meeting. As President of the Security Council, I am honoured to have this opportunity to discuss what post-coronavirus disease (COVID-19) global governance should look like. It is said that only a crisis that is, or is perceived to be, a crisis produces real change. We missed the opportunity for real change during the financial crisis of 2008. Are we going to miss the opportunity provided to us by COVID-19 to rebuild global governance? What are the challenges of our time and what governance is needed to respond to those challenges? The first challenge that I want to address is global political governance. In that regard, at the seventy-fourth session of the United Nations General Assembly, I already reaffirmed the need to support the Secretary-General in his efforts to reform our Organization with a view to establishing a more democratic multilateral system (see A/74/PV.4). What was valid 75 years ago is no longer valid today. The functioning of the General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and the Security Council must reflect to the current world situation. With regard to particularly the Security Council, where we are proud to sit, all regions of the world, including Africa, must be fairly represented. The number of permanent seats must be increased and the right of veto must be abolished or expanded to the new permanent members in order to establish democracy and equality. Moreover, Africa has a common position on this issue, which is expressed through the Ezulwini Consensus. As for the General Assembly, the ongoing demand of Member States is that of a rebalancing of power between it and the Security Council. The second challenge concerns the issues of peace and security. In view of the perceived shortcomings of the concept of peacekeeping, there is an urgent need to return to the concept of collective security and give more weight to United Nations peacekeeping operations under Chapter VII of the Charter of the Organization. As the nature of conflicts changes, the mandates of United Nations forces must also adapt. The greatest current threat to global peace and security comes from non-State criminal groups. The demand for a return to the concept of collective peace cannot be met with a right of veto, as no State should have the right to block the decisions of the international community in the face of a common threat on the basis of its own interests or friendships. Moreover, the risk of a confrontation between States, particularly between major Powers, is not zero. The possibility that one or other of those Powers may fall into the Thucydides Trap cannot be ruled out. The international community must work to prevent such an outcome, including through the denuclearization of our planet. The third challenge concerns the deepening of inequalities - inequalities among and within countries. "The difficulty lies not so much in developing new ideas as in escaping the old ones", said a leading economist. That is why the world always reforms after shocks. The current model dates from the aftermath of the two oil shocks of 1973 and 1979. Its complete supremacy has even made people believe in "the end of the history". But it has produced inequalities such that the world is, in that respect, in the same position as it was at the end of the nineteenth century. The gap between the richest and the poorest is widening and the middle class, one of the foundations of modern democracy, is weakening. The gap between the richest and the poorest is greater today than it was in ancient Rome, where the economy was based on slavery. All specialists agree that this trend will increase in the current context of low economic growth and high returns on capital. Such escalating inequality is the greatest threat facing the global economy. I recall article 1 of the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen of 1789: "Men are born and remain free and equal in rights. Social distinctions may be founded only upon the general good." These inequalities are not always justified by merit, so they are not based on common good. They are incompatible with the principles of social justice that are the foundation of democratic societies. Experience shows that the invisible hand of the market cannot correct them. Reducing inequality requires not only massive investment in education and training, but also the design and implementation of expansionary economic policies and the introduction of a tax on financial transactions, or even a progressive global tax on capital, which would also put an end to the tax competition that States are engaged in today. The fight against inequality requires an in-depth reform of the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank and the World Trade Organization. The fourth challenge concerns the fight against poverty. The time has come to build a world free of poverty. "A world free of poverty" is the motto of the World Bank. Furthermore, let me recall article 25 of the 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights: "Everyone has the right to a standard of living adequate for the health and well-being of himself and of his family, including food, clothing, housing and medical care and necessary social services, and the right to security in the event of unemployment, sickness, disability, widowhood, old age or other lack of livelihood in circumstances beyond his control." To guarantee this right, a total war must be declared on poverty. We produce enough wealth in the world to eradicate it. We can defeat the two horsemen of the apocalypse - hunger and disease. Nothing must stop us in this fight, because poverty destroys freedom and dignity. It is a breeding ground for terrorism and organized crime. That is why there must be an unbiased discussion of universal basic income for all individuals. Experiences have shown that this does not encourage laziness and idleness. We have evidence of this in the Niger with the unconditional money transfers that we provide for the benefit of the most vulnerable populations. The fight against poverty, in particular unemployment, requires a better sharing of working time. It also requires reform of global financial and economic institutions. It also demands that we put an end to this globalization that accepts the free circulation of capital, goods and services but refuses the free circulation of people. In fact, only 3 per cent of the world's people lives outside their country of origin. The fifth challenge relates to climate change. Since the beginning of the industrial era, we have had development models that attack nature. Nature is taking revenge on us through extreme weather events. The many hurricanes and storms, floods, droughts, melting glaciers, rising sea and ocean levels, coastal erosion, the appearance of new diseases, damage to biodiversity and so forth are clear signs of this. Moreover, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change has regularly drawn attention to global warming. Our production model is generating ecological damage, with serious consequences for the planet. The World Wildlife Fund for Nature estimates that more than 50 per cent of vertebrates have disappeared in the past 40 years. The global population of wild animals has decreased by more than 68 per cent. The new post-COVID paradigm must take this into account and call for the full and urgent implementation of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change. Therefore, it is clear that the instruments put in place in the aftermath of the Second World War are no longer sufficient to address the challenges of poverty, social inequality, climate change, terrorism, organized crime and cybercrime, the peaceful coexistence of peace and global security. The COVID-19 pandemic undoubtedly marks the end of an era. It underscores the urgent need to rethink our collective security system. It has shown the reality of our humankind and of all the countries of the world, which have all been equal in the face of suffering, be they big or small, rich or poor, weak or powerful. It is up to all of us to work together to draw the necessary lessons and reflect on the essential reforms of global governance. We must create a post-COVID-19 world of peace, solidarity and prosperity for all, a world of solidarity, dignity, equality, justice and freedom.
