Mr. Algahrah (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, we would like to thank the Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs for his
important briefing this morning and for the information
he provided. The briefing highlighted the gravity of the
situation in the occupied Palestinian territories at all
levels and the suffering of the Palestinian people,
which has become clear to this Council and every
member of the international community.

We would also like to associate ourselves with
the statements made by the representatives of the
Sultanate of Oman on behalf of the League of Arab
States, of Syria on behalf of the Organization of the
Islamic Conference, and of Egypt on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

A full year has elapsed since the start of the war
launched by the Israeli occupation forces on Gaza and
the adoption of resolution 1860 (2009). Despite all the
assistance extended to reconstruct Gaza, which has
been blocked by the occupation forces, the widespread
and brutal destruction is still visible to all. Israel
continues its policy of collective punishment against
the population of the Gaza Strip. It continues to block
the reconstruction of Gaza in the wake of the
destruction caused by the war unleashed by Israel. It
continues to close crossing points, erect new
checkpoints and build the separation wall. All those

practices by the Israeli occupiers clearly reflect
continued Israeli aggression against the Palestinian
people.

Decades of Israeli occupation of Palestinian
territory have created a tragic situation for the
Palestinian people, in which, for many, life and death
have amounted to the same thing and in which hope for
a better future has dissipated. Those decades of
occupation have engendered a climate of frustration
and injustice and an environment marked by the worst
human suffering imaginable and by a lack of dignity
and the rule of law. In that environment, killing,
depopulation and the plundering of wealth have
become the norm.

Ever since when Israel announced its annexation
of Jerusalem in 1967, a bitter sequence of events began
to change the demographics and the character of the
Holy City, with the Judaization of the city and its
depopulation of Arab residents. In 2008, Israel
confiscated the identity cards of 5,000 Palestinians, on
the pretext that they reside beyond the municipal limits
of Jerusalem. It intends to do the same to between
50,000 and 100,000 Palestinians in the near future.
This Judaization, depopulation and confiscation of
residency permits can only be described as ethnic
cleansing.

Israel has long operated beyond the framework of
international law, the principles of the United Nations
and international humanitarian law, including by
enshrining the concept of "natural growth" - which
amounts to natural extermination. The situation in East
Jerusalem is deteriorating day by day. The demolition
of houses, depopulation and the confiscation of identity
cards are intended to change the natural features,
demographic character and legal status of the city.

Whenever we consider the Palestinian question,
we condemn the continued settlement activities and
call for an immediate end to them, including so-called
natural growth, and for the removal of all settlement
outposts established since 2001. Today we reaffirm that
the establishment and construction of settlements is
illegal under international law. This represents an
obstacle to peace - indeed, to the first step towards
peace, which is negotiations. There can be no
negotiations while settlements are being built at a
feverish pace, thereby imposing a new reality that will
make any future resolution of the Palestinian question
impossible. If we understand the facts about the
settlements and why they are being built, and if we
understand the policy of Israel, then a condition for a
return to negotiations is a complete halt to settlement
activity, especially in East Jerusalem. If Israel
continues to claim that it wishes to resume negotiations
and that it is committed to peace, its first gesture
should be an immediate halt to all settlement activity in
the occupied Palestinian territories, along with the
dismantlement of existing settlements.

In an earlier statement, the Secretary-General
declared the settlements to be illegal and called upon
Israel to fulfil its Road Map obligation to freeze all
settlement activity, including so-called natural growth,
and to eliminate all outposts established since March
2001. The Quartet has called upon Israel to halt the
settlements and has requested the countries sponsoring
the peace process to work to put a stop to the
settlements. Also, we have called upon all countries of
the world to help put a stop to them.

Has the Security Council translated these appeals
into actions? Will the Council not heed the concerns
and positions stated by so many countries by
compelling Israel to stop settlement activity and
remove existing settlements? Saudi Arabia is
concerned by the complete inaction by the Security
Council in the face of Israel's policy of State terrorism.
This reflects duplicity and double standards - at the
expense of the rule of law and respect for international
legality in relations among countries. The Security
Council faces a deadlock, as its resolutions cannot be
implemented. This is another outcome of double
standards in relations among countries and of the use
of the veto to paralyse the Council and render it unable
to serve the interests of those countries affected by this
situation.

If the Council breaks this deadlock, then all States
Members of the United Nations will respect its
resolutions. That would restore the Council's credibility
and its role in the maintenance of international peace
and security.

