Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I express my appreciation to you, Sir, for
presiding over this open meeting. I wish to thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo, Assistant Secretary-
General Mueller and Ambassador Apakan, of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
for their briefings.

China has been closely following the developments
in eastern Ukraine. We are concerned about recent
conflicts in the area causing civilian casualties. We
have noted that the Minsk Tripartite Contact Group
held consultations on the implementation of the Minsk
agreements to promote a peaceful settlement of the
Ukrainian issue. While the international community
continues to step up its mediation efforts, we call on both
parties to the conflict to strictly abide by the ceasefire
mechanism and stay the course to a political settlement.

In seeking a fundamental and long-term solution
to the Ukrainian issue, it is necessary to take care of
the legitimate rights and interests of all the regions
and ethnic groups, as well as to address the legitimate
concerns of all the relevant parties to balance their
different interests. China believes that the Ukrainian
issue involves a complicated historical genesis and
reality and that the conflict needs to be addressed at
its roots.

China has consistently maintained that all the
parties concerned must fully implement resolution 2202
(2015). They must effectively cease all hostilities, fully
implement the Minsk agreements and stay committed
to seeking a comprehensive, lasting, balanced solution
to the Ukrainian issue. That must be done through
dialogue and consultation in order to take forward
peace, stability and development in Ukraine and
promote harmony among all ethnic groups in Ukraine,
as well as to facilitate peaceful coexistence between
Ukraine and the countries of the region.

The international community should continue to
support the diplomatic efforts of all the relevant parties
for the political settlement of the Ukrainian issue.
Council discussions should be conducive to a genuine
relaxation in the situation of the relevant regions in
Ukraine and help move towards a proper solution to the
Ukrainian issue.

