Mr. Eitel (Germany): I want to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of March. Your proven skills, your
realistic attitude and the down-to-earth way in which you
conduct business make us look forward to working
successfully under your guidance.

Let me take this opportunity also to convey our
gratitude and our appreciation to Ambassador Albright for
her very effective way of presiding over the Security
Council, which helped us through 29 days - and one
long night - of February.

Germany supports fully the statement Italy has made
on behalf of the European Union.

As the Secretary-General has pointed out, his recent
report of 15 February 1996 represents the fourth time in
less than seven weeks that he has brought the issue of
Burundi to the attention of the Security Council. The
Secretary-General goes on to say that he has done so in
the conviction that the situation in the country is
desperately serious.

It is therefore most appropriate, Mr. President, that
you have provided an opportunity to the members of the
Council and to the general membership of the United
Nations to express their views on the situation in Burundi
and to discuss what the international community should
do. As members know, Germany strongly supports this
increase in transparency.

Even if the situation at present is somewhat calmer,
our deep concern remains. We are concerned at the acts
of violence. We are concerned at the incitement to ethnic
hatred. We are concerned that the situation might escalate.
We are concerned at the humanitarian situation. Burundi
needs serious and comprehensive dialogue leading to a
permanent political settlement and national reconciliation.
This is not an easy task under the prevailing
circumstances. But it is not impossible either. The
signatories of the Convention of Government have agreed
to a national debate. This should be the framework for the
much-needed dialogue.

 

Dialogue will not be possible in a violent environment.
Therefore, all parties, including and particularly those who
hold extremist positions, are called upon to refrain from
acts of violence. Furthermore, the dissemination in Burundi
of propaganda which incites hatred must stop. The radio
waves in Burundi should be used to promote reconciliation
and dialogue, and to relay constructive information.

It is the responsibility of the Burundi parties to do
everything they can to achieve a peaceful settlement. But
they are not alone. Efforts are being made to help bring
about the settlement by the Secretary-General and his
Special Representative, by the Organization of African
Unity, by the European Union, which has just nominated a
special representative for the Great Lakes region, by former
Presidents Nyerere and Carter and by the other facilitators
appointed by the Cairo Conference. This long list of
facilitators alone shows how difficult the situation is.

Governments, in their bilateral contacts, also support
efforts to bring about a peaceful solution. My Government
is among them. The economic recovery of Burundi, with
the assistance of the international community, will only be
possible in a peaceful and stable environment.

What happens in Burundi will have repercussions
beyond the country's borders and, depending on what road
it takes, may pose a threat to the stability of the whole
region or reinforce it. Preparations for convening a
Regional Conference for Peace, Security and Development
in the Great Lakes Region should therefore be intensified.

Today, the Council will vote on the draft resolution
concerning the situation in Burundi. For the reasons stated,
Germany strongly supports this draft resolution and will
vote in favour of it.

