Ms. Ghelani: Violence, extreme poverty, climate
change and population growth are driving record
levels of vulnerability among millions of people in
Central Africa. My briefing today focuses on the main
humanitarian crises in the region, including those
affecting the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Central African Republic, Chad and Cameroon.

Out of the estimated more than 180 million people
living in Central Africa, nearly 26 million people will
need humanitarian assistance and protection in 2019.
That is a dramatic increase of 22 per cent from 2018.
One person out of seven in Central Africa is caught up
in a crisis and in urgent need of humanitarian assistance
and protection. That is compared to a global calculation
of 1 in every 70 people.

Around half of those requiring humanitarian
assistance and protection in Central Africa are
found in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
humanitarian situation in the country has deteriorated
further in 2018 and is one of the world's largest and
most complex crises. As noted in resolution 2439 (2018),
the Ebola epidemic in the north-east is occurring in a
context of much wider humanitarian needs. Ebola has
already claimed 289 lives and is still spreading. The
response is particularly difficult given the extremely
challenging security environment, with attacks against
civilians by non-State armed groups interrupting Ebola
containment efforts. To mitigate the possible impact
in the event that the outbreak spreads to neighbouring
countries, the Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. Mark
Lowcock, yesterday approved a $10 million regional
allocation from the Central Emergency Response
Fund (CERF).

The welcome attention given to the Ebola outbreak
should not, however, overshadow the multitude of
simultaneous crises that affect the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. In all, more than 12 million people need
humanitarian assistance. The current cholera outbreak
is the largest on record over the past 15 years. With
more than 26,000 people affected and almost 900
deaths this year, cholera has killed even more people
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo than Ebola.
The security situation has deteriorated in the east of the
country, causing new and large-scale displacements of
people in search of safety and protection. Furthermore,
the influx of more than 360,000 Congolese nationals
returning from Angola is adding pressure to the
fragile Kasai province, already affected by years of
inter-ethnic conflicts.

I have just returned from the Central African
Republic, where, as Special Representative Fall noted in
his briefing, the humanitarian situation is also extremely
dire. Areas that were relatively stable in the past, such
as the south-east, where recovery and development
programmes are about to be rolled out, have this year
relapsed into conflict. The escalating violence has
taken a heavy toll on the people of the Central African
Republic, with 2.9 million people - well over half the
population - now requiring humanitarian assistance.
The number of internally displaced persons has reached
more than 640,000 - an increase of over 60 per cent in
this year alone. One in four children in the country is
displaced. While the needs have grown, the increasing
number of security incidences, including direct attacks
on aid organizations and their staff, has made it even
harder to access the people requiring assistance.

As previously noted, the worsening situation in
the Central African Republic has also had a significant
impact on neighbouring countries. Cameroon is today
hosting 268,000 refugees from the Central African
Republic, while Chad is hosting more than 100,000
refugees. That translates into a significant burden on
already vulnerable host communities, and many of the
refugees have few prospects of returning home to the
Central African Republic in the near future.

Furthermore, Chad and Cameroon, in addition to
Nigeria and the Niger, are seriously affected by the crises
involving Boko Haram in the Lake Chad basin. Now in
its ninth year, that regional crisis has led 2.4 million
people to flee their homes, and some 10.8 million
people currently require humanitarian assistance and
protection. Continuing insecurity remains a major
impediment to people being able to return home and
re-establish their livelihoods. The protection situation
in the Lake Chad basin remains particularly serious,
with frequent killings, kidnappings, suicide bombings
and other attacks attributed to Boko Haram, as well as
high levels of sexual and gender-based violence. Girls
remain at serious risk of kidnappings and continue to
be used for suicide attacks. As Special Representative
Fall noted, the situation for women and children is
particularly concerning.

Beyond the regional crisis in the Lake Chad
basin and the influx of refugees from the Central
African Republic, Cameroon is facing an additional
humanitarian crisis in its South-West and North-West
regions, as already expressed. Since the Council was
last briefed by Special Representative Fall on Central
Africa half a year ago (see S/PV.8284), internal
displacement in those parts of Cameroon has tripled and
today counts more than 430,000 internally displaced
persons. In addition, more than 30,000 Cameroonians
have fled across the border to Nigeria, seeking refuge.
This is now one of the fastest-growing displacement
crises in Africa. The majority of the displaced persons
are hiding in dense forests, without adequate shelter
and lacking food, water and basic services. Schools and
markets are also being disrupted and there are alarming
health needs.

As highlighted in the report of the Secretary-
General (8/2018/1065), we note with grave concern the
deteriorating situation with respect to the protection
of civilians, including reported killings, the burning
of homes and villages, extortion and kidnappings in
the South-West and North-West regions of Cameroon.
There have been multiple attacks on schools and threats
against students and teachers, including two large-scale
abductions and subsequent releases last month of 78
students and 3 teachers in Bamenda and 20 students
in Kumba.

Despite limited access, humanitarian partners are
scaling up their presence in those parts of Cameroon.
Food distribution has so far reached more than
17,000 people and some 4,000 people have received
shelter materials. However, severe underfunding has had
a significant impact on the humanitarian community's
ability to respond to the escalating crisis. The main

sources of funding are currently CERF - whose
rapid response allocation will be depleted at the end
of this month - and the agencies' own internal,

unearmarked funding.

The lack of funding experienced by humanitarian
partners in Cameroon reflects a broader regional trend.
This year, every single humanitarian response plan in
Central Africa - for Burundi, Cameroon, the Central
African Republic, Chad and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo - is funded far less than the global average
of 56 per cent. Cameroon is the least funded of all, at
39 per cent of the requirements. This needs to change
if the humanitarian response in the region is to be fully
effective, and we are calling on Member States for their
urgent support.

Over the past six months, not only have the
humanitarian crises in Central Africa persisted, but
several have grown further. Many of the crises are
rooted in ongoing armed conflicts. Strengthening the
protection of civilians - a core issue on the Security
Council's agenda - is of the utmost importance in
that region. Our hope is that today's discussion will
take us further towards a collective response that is
commensurate with the needs and aspirations of the
people in Central Africa.

