Mr. Rasmussen (Denmark): Our discussion here
is timely and relevant. Terror attacks in several
countries during the last years have underlined our
obligation to joint, efficient action against this major
scourge of our generation.

Let me be very clear: Terrorism can never be
justified. Terrorism is never a legitimate weapon. The
targeting and deliberate killing of civilians are
unacceptable. Full stop. I therefore find it appalling
that today, four years after two passenger planes
created havoc in this very city, a few countries are still
blocking agreement on a common definition of
terrorism.

Each and every Government has an obligation to
destroy terror networks, to dismantle training facilities
and to cut off the supply of money and recruits. There
ought to be absolutely no doubt or ambiguity about
that. It must be made completely clear to our citizens
what is acceptable and what is not. Freedom of speech
and expression is the very foundation of any modern,
democratic society, but that must never be an excuse
for inciting terrorism and fostering hatred.

I see a major role for the United Nations in this
battle, and I welcome the Secretary-General's outline
of a counter-terrorism strategy, but that is not enough.
We need to empower the United Nations so that it can
fulfil its obligation to ensure security for all in the age
of global terrorism.

All Member States need to sign, ratify and
implement the United Nations terrorism conventions.
All countries must incorporate the relevant provisions
into their national legislations in order to hamper the
terrorists' room for manoeuvre, and the United Nations
should constantly ensure that Member States fulfil their
obligations. Countries that lack the necessary
capacity to enforce the new legislation deserve our full
and generous assistance. Countries that lack the
necessary political will deserve our wrath and
condemnation.

The threat of terrorists or irresponsible dictators
armed with weapons of mass destruction is a shared
nightmare for all mankind. This Council has the
obligation to ensure that the nightmare never
materializes.

The nuclear programmes of Iran and North Korea
are a particular and urgent concern. We shall be ready
to deal with them here at this table if other avenues
fail. Acquiring nuclear weapons does not enhance the
security of any State; it only decreases it for us all.

Seventy per cent of all conflicts discussed by this
Council take place in Africa. The impact on civilians
on that continent is particularly devastating. Africa
alone has around 20 million refugees and internally
displaced people. For that reason, the resolution put
forward here today by the Council's three African
members is an important one. I hope that the adoption
of that resolution will enable the international
community to better prevent international disputes and
internal crises from spilling over into armed conflicts,
in particular in Africa.

