Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): I begin by thanking
your country, Colombia, and you personally,
Mr. President, for steering this very important open
debate on the situation in the Middle East. I would also
like to convey our appreciation to Under-Secretary-
General Lynn Pascoe for his comprehensive briefing
this morning. I also wish to state that the Bangladesh
delegation aligns itself with the statements delivered
by the representatives of Egypt and Tajikistan on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, respectively.
In addition, I wish to briefly make certain points that
Bangladesh believes to be of importance.

The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question, has always been of major concern
to the international community and the United Nations.
A durable and sustainable resolution of the Arab-Israeli
conflict, including the issue of Palestine, which is at
the root of the long-lasting crisis, must therefore be our
collective strategic objective. All Member States
should pledge complete commitment to that objective
and throw their full moral, diplomatic, political and
economic support behind its early realization.
Bangladesh is always ready to play a constructive role
in that collective endeavour to achieve a just, lasting
and comprehensive peace in the Middle East based on
the two-State principle. Bangladesh joins the
international community in reaffirming its full support
for the Palestinian people in their just and legitimate
struggle for self-determination and freedom from
continued occupation and oppression.

The people of Palestine are being denied their
fundamental right to self-determination and to live
freely in their own land, and displaced Palestinians
have been denied their right to return home and to live
in dignity and safety. Unfortunately, this appears to be
the result of a collective failure on the part of the
international community, in particular the people of
Israel, who have suffered deprivation as they have
failed to rise to the occasion by guaranteeing the
people of Palestine their fundamental right to self-
determination and a sovereign State of their own, side
by side with theirs. In order to achieve a lasting
solution in the Middle East, it is very important to
address the key issue, which is Israel's prolonged and
illegal occupation of the Arab territories.
We commend the leadership of President
Mahmoud Abbas of the Palestinian Authority and
continued Palestinian State-building efforts. However,
we are concerned about the disproportionate military
strikes and unabated atrocities, causing civilian
casualties. Therefore, we call for maximum restraint
and respect for international humanitarian law.
Furthermore, we regret the discontinuation of Israel's
10-month moratorium on settlement activity, and
strongly reaffirm that unilateral actions by either party
cannot prejudge the outcome of negotiations.

Let me also reiterate our support for the
conclusion of such negotiations by September. It is our
belief that further delay in the resumption of
negotiations is detrimental to the prospects for regional
peace and security. We urge the parties and others
concerned to urgently strive to expedite Israeli-
Palestinian and comprehensive Arab-Israeli peace,
which is essential to avoid outcomes detrimental to the
region.

My delegation believes that direct negotiations
will be successful only if there is sustained regional
and international support for the talks, the parallel
process of Palestinian State-building and the pursuit of
a just, lasting and comprehensive regional peace, as
envisaged in the Fourth Geneva Convention; the
relevant General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions, particularly resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973) and 425 (1978);the principle of land for peace;
the Madrid terms of reference, which guarantee Israel's
withdrawal from all occupied Arab and Palestinian
territories to the 4 June 1967 line; the Road Map and
the Arab Peace Initiative, which are the best guides for
achieving a two-State solution.

In conclusion, let me reiterate Bangladesh's long-
standing position that the continued illegal occupation
of Palestine over the past six decades is the root cause
of violence, unrest and destabilization in the region.
Let me also reiterate our full support for a lasting
peace for all inhabitants of the region, Arabs and
Israelis alike, and our strong commitment to the
realization of an independent, sovereign and viable
State of Palestine, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its
capital, living side by side in peace with all its
neighbours.

In this holy month, when the people of Israel
celebrate their freedom from slavery and the clutches
of Pharaoh, we look forward to a global commitment
and meaningful action on the ground for the people of
Palestine to be freed from Israeli occupation, ending
years of deprivation, suffering, attacks, counterattacks,
death, misery, fear, uncertainty and tension for all
people of this region, Arab and non-Arab.

