The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the consideration of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the consideration of the
item, without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ileka
(Democratic Republic of the Congo) took a seat
at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council pays tribute once
again to the extraordinary commitment of the
citizens of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, demonstrated by their peaceful
participation in the first stage of democratic
elections of historic importance to their nation.

"The Security Council commends the
substantial efforts being made by the United
Nations Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) and the international
community as a whole in support of peace and
democratic elections in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. It stresses its commitment to the
peaceful conduct of the second round of the
presidential election and of the provincial
elections scheduled for 29 October 2006, and its
determination to ensure that the peace process in
2

the Democratic Republic of the Congo succeeds,
in the interests of the Congolese people, as well
as Central Africa and the Great Lakes region.

"The Security Council deplores the violence
that erupted in Kinshasa on 20 to 22 August 2006
between security forces loyal to President Kabila
and Vice-President Bemba, and commends the
effective action of EUFOR RD Congo in support
of MONUC.

"The Security Council shares the serious
concern expressed by the International
Committee in Support of the Transition (CIAT),
in its statement of 11 September 2006, regarding
the unchecked circulation of weapons and armed
individuals in Kinshasa. It endorses its call for a
cantonment of the security forces of both
candidates and of troops of the Forces armees de
la Republique democratique du Congo in the
province of Kinshasa, and for a ban on the
circulation of armed individuals in this province.

"The Security Council calls on all political
parties and in particular President Kabila and
Vice-President Bemba to restate their
commitment to the peace process and to work
within the framework they have agreed to
establish with the facilitation of MONUC as a
means of peacefully resolving political
differences. It welcomes the meeting that took
place between President Kabila and Vice-
President Bemba as a first step in this direction
and encourages them to continue to seek a
peaceful resolution of their differences.

"The Security Council recalls its support to
the Independent Electoral Commission and to the
High Media Authority. It urges all candidates and
all parties in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to banish any message that could incite
hatred and violence and to comply with the codes
of conduct that those institutions have
respectively elaborated for the conduct of free,
fair and transparent elections in a peaceful
climate. It commends the role of the International
Committee of Eminent Persons and reiterates its
support for it. It emphasizes again the importance
of respecting the electoral calendar.

"The Security Council invites the
Committee established pursuant to resolution
1533 (2004) to examine the situation in Kinshasa,
06-532 14
if appropriate, in the context of the arms embargo
imposed by resolutions 1493 (2003) and 1596
(2005) and renewed by resolution 1698 (2006). It
also expresses its readiness to consider possible
measures against individuals and entities who
would further threaten the conduct of free and
fair elections, in particular through the use of
'hate media', preventing equal and responsible
access to media, inciting violence and recourse to
violence to prevent elections, dispute their
outcome or subvert the peace process.

"The Security Council emphasizes the need
for all political parties to act responsibly within
the framework of democratic institutions after the
elections.

"The Security Council underscores to the
Congolese parties the importance of preventing
impunity for those responsible for violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law
that constitute crimes."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2006/40.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.25 p.m.

