Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): We
appreciate Peru's cooperation, work and efforts to hold
this important meeting during its presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I would like also to
thank the briefers, the Secretary-General's Envoy on
Youth and the two young women from Haiti and the
Central African Republic. I also thank Mr. Simpson
for preparing the progress study on youth, peace and
security (see S/2018/86). We thank the Peacebuilding
Support Office and the United Nations Population Fund
for their great efforts over the past two years. I would
like also to thank the United Nations Development
Programme and all those who contributed to the
implementation and design of this important first study
on youth, peace and security.

We are proud to once again attend an interactive
and constructive discussion on the youth, peace and
security agenda, which was launched by Jordan during
our membership of the Council in December 2015 (see S/PV.7573), based on the vision of His Royal Highness
Crown Prince Al Hussein bin Abdullah 11, who presided
over a historic meeting on this topic during Jordan's
presidency of the Security Council (see S/PV.7432).

We recall that the Council adopted resolution 2250
(2015) as the first resolution ofits kind-unprecedented
international recognition of the need for young men
and women to contribute to global efforts to enhance
sustainable peace. The resolution has paved the way
for the participation of youth in decision-making at
all levels and supported youth in building capacity
to take the initiative and participate in charting their
present and their future. It has helped to transform the
stereotypes that youth are the problem and the culprits
or victims of violence, into a positive perspective that
sees youth as partners in combating violent extremism
and terrorism and achieving a much-needed culture
of peace.

The youth, peace and security agenda is crucial.
More than half of the world's population are under
the age of 30, with 70 per cent of them living in two
regions torn apart by conflict, namely, the Middle
East and Africa. The international developments
and challenges that we face, especially in the Middle
East, have created a reality that lacks stability and has
negatively impacted youth and children, who have lost
their opportunities and access to quality education
due to displacement and slow economic progress. That
requires serious international and national attention to
provide development needs in the areas most affected
by conflict, as part of the conflict prevention effort.
That would help to enhance the resilience of youth
vis-a-vis the challenges they face.

In the light of the reality in our region, we have
launched the youth, peace and security agenda based
on our conviction that there needs to be a voice given
to youth at all levels. They need to contribute to
policies and institutional programmes regarding their
future, which would help us empower and support
them in improving them skills and realizing their true
potential. In turn, that would serve their societies and
countries. Resolution 2250 (2015) was therefore a
historic resolution aimed at peacebuilding, sustainable
development and enhancing trust between youth and
those who provide them with empowerment, as well as
the activation and operationalization of the role played
by civil society and youth organizations.

Jordan takes a leading role in the fight against
terrorism at the regional and international levels.
We have established several initiatives and believe
there must be concerted international efforts against
terrorism, violent extremism and radicalization, while
employing a moderate counter-narrative. To that end,
with the cooperation of Norway, we participate in the
Group of Friends on Preventing Violent Extremism,
which supports the United Nations Office of Counter-
Terrorism and provides guidance to youth through
United Nations agencies' various counter-terrorism
initiatives and projects. We are also the co-facilitators of
the sixth review of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy. We hope that a draft resolution
is agreed to improve the international response to
countering terrorism.

It is not enough to invest in policies and security
plans. We must invest in policies and sustainable
development plans that focus on quality education,
employment, the role of women and addressing the
root causes of inequality and social injustice and that
enhance the loyalty of youth to their societies and
homelands. That would create a link between peace
and security and development. National strategies
in support of youth need to be coupled with policies
that support childhood, which is a strong basis for the
upbringing of a very positive youth generation.

Jordan believes that investment in youth is done
through a number of means: first, by establishing a
modern educational system that caters to labour market
needs and eliminates poverty and unemployment;
secondly, by enhancing the culture of peace among
youth, improving their participation in decision-making
at the national and political levels and encouraging
their voluntary work; thirdly, the economic integration
of youth into their societies that goes beyond simply
providing them with job opportunities and by enhancing
their participation in strategies at the national and local
levels; fourthly, by enhancing the role of the media
through different platforms that would support youth
and improve media coverage on the positive input of
youth and their role, as well as encouraging creativity;
and fifthly, by enhancing the role of youth in social
peace and cohesion and enhancing dialogue for the
exchange of experiences.

We are implementing the Sustainable Development
Goals and the 2030Agenda for Sustainable Development.
In that connection, our national strategies and policies
have linked the important role of young men and
women to those goals, which we cannot achieve without
youth participation and without providing every
opportunity for youth to build their capacity and realize
their potential in order to achieve development. In our
younger societies, youth are the link between peace,
development and human rights.
Jordan welcomes the progress study mandated
by resolution 2250 (2015). The report of the
Secretary-General on peacebuilding and sustaining
peace (S/2018/43) enjoys our support, as do the
recommendations that are part of the reform of the
United Nations development system and other United
Nations reform processes. That constitutes a road map
for the implementation of resolution 2250 (2015) and for
enhancing the participation of youth in peacebuilding
and their ability to create positive change. We call for the
implementation of such a mandate - particularly as we
are investing in the capacity of young men and women,
providing them with useful political participation and
ensuring all forms of protection against violence - so
that they are able to exercise their rights.

We support national, regional and international
partnerships and the establishment of new dialogue and
accountability mechanisms at the United Nations level.
Jordan has begun to implement resolution 2250 (2015),
as well as other relevant recommendations, and has
established the Champions for Youth group. So far, it
includes 24 member States, in addition to the European
Union. The aim is to follow up the implementation
of resolution 2250 (2015) and maintain international
political momentum. Jordan has cooperated with
other United Nations agencies and partners to create
programmes for young men and women refugees, in
particular Syrian refugees.

At the national level, we have also developed
policies and strategies in line with resolution 2250
(2015). We established the Youth 2250 project, which
seeks to raise awareness among young people about the
implementation of the resolution. In that regard, we thank
the European Union for funding the project. Jordan also
developed a national youth strategy for the period 2017-
2025 in order to identify priorities in supporting youth,
including training programmes for civic education and
participation in decision-making at the local level. That
is in addition to our national strategy for women, which
we developed to implement resolution 1325 (2000), on
women and peace and security.

We have also included a youth pillar in our
comprehensive strategy to combat violent extremism,
and amended our national laws to include provisions
that enhance the role of youth and their positive
political participation.

Jordan has also launched a number of initiatives
that empower youth and enhance their participation,
including providing young entrepreneurs with financial
support for their projects and helping them find creative
solutions to challenges in their communities. That
serves to promote Jordan's efforts to safeguard young
men and women and prevent an environment conducive
to extremism. Among the most prominent of our
initiatives are the King Abdullah II Award for Youth
Innovation; our Achieve Initiative, which was awarded
the Alexander Bordini International Prize for 2016; and
our National Democratic Empowerment Programme.

Finally, we face great opportunities but also great
responsibilities. We must translate the demographic
opportunity that is our youth into genuine peace
through frameworks that support young people and their
capacity at all levels to build sustainable world peace.

