Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I also thank Special
Representatieve of the Secretary-General Jan Kubis
and Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, Mr. Yury Fedotov, for their briefings.
And I acknowledge the presence of the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, His Excellency
Mr. Zahir Tanin, and thank him for his statement.

My comments will focus on three aspects of the
situation in Afghanistan: political developments,
humanitarian issues and counter-narcotics efforts.

On political developments, we note with satisfaction
that, despite the Taliban's threats to launch a campaign
of violence to disrupt the recent elections, millions of
voters turned out to cast their ballots. According to the
Secretary-General's report (S/2014/420), a series of
televised debates between the presidential candidates
and local mobilization around the provisional council
elections contributed to civic awareness and a high
voter turnout. That is a clear indication that the
people of Afghanistan have embraced democracy. We
congratulate them on the success of the elections and
look forward to the announcement of the final results
next month. In the meantime, we urge the candidates to
refrain from inflammatory rhetoric and other acts that
could endanger the national security of Afghanistan.

In terms of gender and women's empowerment,
we are pleased to note that all the campaign platforms
addressed women's issues. Three teams had women
as vice-presidential candidates and 296 of the 2,591
candidates to provincial council elections were women.
In order to encourage the participation of women in
voting, the Government trained 581 female police and
2,245 women in addition to recruiting 13,690 female
searchers for the elections. Women also have a legally
mandated 20 per cent of the seats in the provisional
councils across the country. Of the 362,780 party and
candidate agents registered for the first round of the
elections, 23 per cent were women. Viewed against
the recent history of women's limited participation in
Afghan politics, that level of involvement in politics by
Afghan women is highly significant. It shows the extent
to which women have been empowered in Afghanistan.
We would like to acknowledge the support of the United
Nations to the electoral process in Afghanistan through
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
and the United Nations electoral support project.

On humanitarian issues, we take positive note of
the approval by the Internally Displaced Persons Task
Force of a road map for the implementation of a national
policy on internally displaced persons (IDPs). We hope
that this will enhance the management of the IDP
problem in Afghanistan. We are concerned, however,
by the constraints that are hampering humanitarian
access. Those include attacks against personnel, assets
and facilities. Some of those attacks have resulted in
the deaths of humanitarian personnel. We pay tribute to
the members of the humanitarian community working
across Afghanistan under challenging circumstances.

On counter-narcotics, we commend the Afghan
authorities for their efforts in fighting drugs production
and trafficking. The eradication of 1,473 hectares
of opium poppy is a significant achievement in the
Government's war on drugs. Since criminal gangs
and terrorist groups are known to fund their activities
through drug production and trafficking, the efforts of
the Afghan Government in fighting those crimes would
deny them a source of funds and, it is hoped, reduce
their capacity to organize.

Still on counter-narcotics, we understand that
there is almost always a regional dimension to drug
trafficking. That makes international cooperation
an essential part of an overall strategy of drug-law
enforcement. In that regard, Nigeria welcomes the
progress made within the framework of the regional
programme for Afghanistan and countries in the region
in the areas of law enforcement, criminal justice,
demand reduction and research advocacy.

We also take positive note of the progress achieved
under the regional cooperation frameworks, including
the Afghanistan-Kyrgyzstan-Tajikistan Initiative and
the Triangular Initiative, involving Afghanistan, Iran
and Pakistan. The positive outcomes of those initiatives
include enhanced cooperation in drug control, border
management and law enforcement. We encourage the
Afghan authorities to strengthen counter-narcotics
cooperation with their neighbours to consolidate the
gains made in the war on drugs.

I wish to conclude by commending Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Kubis for his
leadership and commitment to attaining his mandate.
Our commendation also goes to the staff of UNAMA
for their hard work in challenging circumstances.
Our wish is to see a peaceful, prosperous, stable and
democratic Afghanistan.

