Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I wish
to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
important open debate on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. Azerbaijan's interest in the issue under
consideration is obvious and results from the practical
experience of addressing the impact of armed conflict
on civilians and engaging in international efforts to
ensure respect by the parties concerned for their
obligations under international law.

The occupation of a considerable part of
Azerbaijan's territory, resulting from the aggression of
neighbouring Armenia, has had a significant influence
on the humanitarian aspect of the problem and affects
primarily the most vulnerable groups of the population.
Azerbaijan continues to suffer from one of the highest
proportions of refugees and displaced persons in the
world. Most serious international offences were
committed in the course of the conflict. Suffice it to
say that, on one night alone in February 1992, when
the town of Khojaly, in the Nagorny Karabakh region
of Azerbaijan, was captured by invading Armenian
troops, 613 civilians were killed, including 106
women, 63 children and 70 elderly persons. Following
Armenia's military occupation of Azerbaijan's
territories, the Security Council, in its relevant
resolutions, condemned, inter alia, attacks on civilians
and the bombardment of inhabited areas and expressed
grave concern at the displacement of large numbers of
civilians in my country.

Concern about the extent to which the rules of
international humanitarian and human rights law are
being observed in Azerbaijan's occupied territories was
heightened when the General Assembly decided to
address the matter and adopted two resolutions, first at
its sixtieth session and again at the sixty-second
session. Against the background of the lack of progress
in overcoming the consequences of the conflict and
their adverse implications for civilians, we look
forward to further concrete measures aimed at ensuring
compliance with international law and the effective
protection of civilians.

The year 2009 marks the tenth anniversary of the
Security Council's consideration of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict as a thematic issue. This
year also marks the sixtieth anniversary of the Geneva
Conventions of 1949, which constitute an essential
legal framework for the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. However, we should recognize with
deep regret that a defining feature of most, if not all,
conflicts has been the failure of the parties to respect
and ensure respect for their legal obligations to protect
civilians and spare them the effects of hostilities.

As pointed out in the recent report of the
Secretary-General on the issue (S/2009/277), the
significant development of international norms and
standards for the protection of civilians and other
important steps taken by the Council to enhance
protection have not been matched by requisite actions
on the ground, and numerous challenges remain. As a
consequence, civilians, including women and children,
continue to suffer from inadequate protection in
situations of armed conflict.

Further efforts to strengthen the protection of
civilians, in particular through measures insisting on
strict compliance by parties to armed conflict with their
obligations under international humanitarian, human
rights and refugee law, remain crucial, and must be an
absolute priority for the United Nations, the Security
Council and, above all, Member States.

Particular consideration must be given to
implications for the protection of civilians in situations
of armed conflict aggravated by population
displacements, foreign military occupation and
attempts to change the demographic balance in
occupied territories. The impact of conflict on housing,
land and property in such situations requires a more
consistent approach in order to ensure the safe and
dignified return of those forced to leave their homes.

It is important that the recognition of the right to
return, along with increased attention to its practical
implementation and concrete measures aimed at
overcoming obstacles preventing return, be applied by
the Security Council, the General Assembly and other
relevant United Nations bodies with more systematic
regularity. Ensuring the right to return constitutes a
categorical rejection of ethnic cleansing and provides a
significant measure of justice to those displaced from
their homes and land, thereby removing a source of
possible future tension and conflict.

As highlighted in the report of the Secretary-
General, integral to these challenges is the need to
ensure accountability for violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law, on the part of
both individual perpetrators and parties to conflict.
There must be consistent commitment on the part of
States to their obligation to prosecute those responsible
for breaches of international humanitarian law or
international human rights law. In cases in which such
breaches constitute war crimes, crimes against

humanity or even genocide - for which universal
jurisdiction is provided with regard to alleged
offenders - it is important that the prosecution of

individuals be undertaken through the domestic legal
systems of involved States and third-party States, while
State responsibility is enforced through relevant
inter-State mechanisms.

In that regard, it is important to emphasize that
ending impunity is essential in order to ensure not only
individual criminal responsibility for serious crimes,
but also sustainable peace, justice, truth, reconciliation
and the rights of victims.

