Mr. Gillerman (Israel): At the outset, please
allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the
presidency for the month of February. I would also like
to congratulate your predecessor, the Ambassador of
France, for his handling of that very difficult position.

I must tell the Council that I find it very symbolic
that my first statement to the Council should be on an
issue that has particular resonance for the people and
Government of Israel. Since the very moment of its
establishment, Israel has been the target of terrorism,
perpetrated with the support and sponsorship of
extremist elements and regimes operating in various
countries in our region. Even after 54 years of
independence, the threat of terrorism has hardly abated.
On the contrary, terrorism continues to be a daily fact
of life for Israelis. The Palestinian campaign of terror
persists. It has so far included literally hundreds of
attacks and suicide bombings, including the Passover
massacre in Netanya and the bombings of a
discotheque in Tel Aviv, public buses and shopping
centres.

Let me be personal for just one moment and tell
the Council about my little grandchild, Ron, who is
four years old and attends a kindergarten in the heart of
Tel Aviv. Being a very devoted and crazy grandfather, I
sometimes chuck everything aside and go to pick him
up. Every time I do that, my heart breaks at the sight of
the armed guard who stands outside my innocent little
four-year-old grandchild's school to protect him and
his fellow children. Israel is the only democracy in the
world whose kindergartens, schools, universities, cafes
and restaurants have to be protected by armed guards. I
take the liberty to say that I am probably the only
Ambassador in this room today who confronts an
armed guard when he goes to pick up his little
grandchild from kindergarten.

For countries blessed to have terrorism remain an
abstraction, my country today offers a glimpse into
what might be in store if terrorism is not confronted
resolutely, with a united front and without fear. In the
face of all this, the people of Israel have demonstrated
their strength and their resilience by continuing to live
their lives and by refusing to succumb to fear. Our real
heroes are the bus drivers, students, shoppers and
commuters who, while taking all necessary
precautions, continue to lead full and vibrant lives.

It is as a result, unfortunately, of Israel's long
experience confronting terrorism that we consider
ourselves a natural partner in the intensified campaign
to rid the world of the scourge of terrorism undertaken
by this Council in the wake of the attacks of 11
September 2001. In this connection, I am pleased to
inform the Council that the Israeli Government has
recently ratified two important anti-terrorism treaties:
the International Convention for the Suppression of
Terrorist Bombings of 1997 and the International
Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of
Terrorism of 1999.

Israel supports the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), and I would like to commend
Ambassador Greenstock for the wonderful and very
devoted work he is doing. We believe that intensive
international cooperation is a critical weapon in the
counter-terrorist arsenal. Israel stands ready and
willing to share its knowledge and expertise - and is
already doing so with many countries in the world -
and to collaborate in joint efforts aimed at coordinating
and strengthening our collective response.

At the same time, we would like to see the CTC
take a more proactive role beyond the technical work
of collecting and analysing country reports. We would
like to see the CTC organize discussions on particular
issues related to the counter-terrorism effort, including
aviation security and the threat of non-conventional
weapons. We would further like to see more
transparency in the work of the CTC. We believe that
more comprehensive information should be made
available to the international community to ensure that
every Member State has the ability to make a
contribution.

We must battle terrorism on all fronts. This means
more than using the full range of economic, military,
legal and diplomatic tools at our disposal. It also means
making no distinctions between so-called bad terrorism
and good terrorism. Terror is terror is terror. Despite
the seeming universality of this fight, there remain
those who persist in drawing distinctions between
varieties of violence deliberately targeted against
civilians. The international community must stand
firmly by the principle that the use of violence against
civilians for political means is completely and utterly
unacceptable, regardless of cause or motive.

This position was made explicit once again last
month when the Security Council, meeting at the level
of Ministers for Foreign Affairs, affirmed in resolution
1456 (2003) that

"any acts of terrorism are criminal and
unjustifiable, regardless of their motivation,
whenever and by whomsoever committed and are
to be unequivocally condemned". (Resolution 1456 (2003), annex)

Israel believes that such a declaration and a matching
commitment to action are essential to our fight against
terrorism. Concessions in the face of terrorism
anywhere are an invitation to terror everywhere.

We can never allow the apologists for terrorism to
invoke the mantra of root causes to justify murder
while laying the moral foundation for future attacks.
Terrorism is not the product of poverty or despair, as
certain representatives, cynically motivated by their
own narrow political interests, would like us to believe.
To draw on an example from close to home, Palestinian
prosperity and political aspirations have only ever been
advanced through negotiations and the rejection of
terrorism and violence. The resort to terrorism is what
has brought despair. Let me make this very, very clear:
It is not poverty that breeds terror; it is terror that
breeds poverty.

If the battle against terror is to succeed, groups
that use it cannot be allowed to reap political gains and
be honoured with central roles on the world stage.
Those who kill themselves in order to kill others are
murderers, not martyrs, and we cannot permit their
crimes to be sanitized with such terms as "martyrdom"
and "resistance". Terrorism should harm the political
ambitions of those who engage in it, not invite
appeasement and concessions from those too frightened
to confront it. Political advances won through terrorism
are the surest guarantee of more terrorism.

I therefore call on the Security Council to
implement a policy of zero tolerance for terrorism. The
time has come to stop talking and to start acting.
Terrorism is evil and evil cannot be appeased, it cannot
be assuaged; it must be fought and defeated.

The fight against terrorism must begin at home.
Our efforts will be successful only if every single State
undertakes a sincere and irrevocable commitment to
eradicating terrorism from its soil. In the past 18
months, Israel has updated and improved its already
expansive body of domestic legislation, counter-
terrorist measures and cooperative partnerships.

If the events of 11 September have taught us
anything, it is that even one State continuing to support
and provide safe harbour to terrorists constitutes a
threat of unimaginable proportions. It is therefore
essential that all States make ironclad commitments
that are manifest in real practical measures, including
intense cooperation with the international community
and the Counter-Terrorism Committee. The problem in
this area may be less with those States that lack the
capacity to fight terrorism than with those rogue
regimes that lack the will to do so, or worse, actively
use and support terrorism to further their subversive
agenda. Of highest concern are those rogue regimes
with biological, chemical and nuclear weapons that can
be transferred to terrorists who have no compunctions
regarding their use.

In this connection, we note the irony of the
remarks made on Friday in this Council by the Foreign
Minister of Syria, the representative of a State that is
among the world's foremost sponsors of terrorism. The
Syrian delegation rarely foregoes an opportunity to
launch one of its ritual diatribes against Israel,
regardless of the issue on the Council's agenda. I need
hardly point out the appalling contradiction between
Syria's membership on this Council and its continued,
extensive and unapologetic support for no fewer than
10 separate terrorist organizations. In flagrant violation
of resolution 1373 (2001) and basic norms of
international law, the Government of Syria continues to
provide financial and logistical support and safe
harbour to known terrorist groups that operate freely
and openly in Syrian-controlled territory.

The international community must not allow
Syria to abuse its position on the Council, as it has
done repeatedly, to divert attention from its failure to
comply with resolution 1373 (2001). Of what use is the
campaign against terrorism if others see that States that
manifestly fail to live up to their obligations escape
condemnation and are even elevated to positions of
prominence at the United Nations?

As the body charged with monitoring the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), the CTC can
make a vital contribution to our efforts, provided that it
is focused and substantive and is prepared, in addition
to its other activities, to identify and exert pressure on
those States that are failing to fulfil their
responsibilities. The CTC must have the courage to
name and shame those States that continue to support
terrorism even as the world unites to confront it. Yes,
the time has come to name them and shame them.

We also must acknowledge the role of incitement
in encouraging and legitimizing acts of terrorism. No
child, anywhere, is born wanting to be a suicide
terrorist, and in our region we are faced with constant
reminders of how these children and these suicide
bombers are created. The mass media, educational
institutions and religious and political figures of the
Palestinian Authority inculcate and glorify hatred and
offer the moral sanction of both man and God for acts
of mass murder. Terrorists must hear not just from this
Council, but also from their own people, from their
own societies and from their own spiritual and political
leaders that the indiscriminate murder of innocents is
always wrong and unjustifiable.

We must confront the poisonous well of
incitement from which future terrorists are nourished
and sustained. Resolutions adopted by the Council in
the future should clearly refer to the role of incitement
in glorifying and promoting terrorism. We further hope
that the CTC will place the fight against incitement at
the forefront of its efforts.

Finally, the fight against terrorism is not for the
faint of heart. We cannot afford to tire or grow
complacent. Those seeking to murder innocent
civilians, precisely because they are innocent, and to
give up their own lives in the process, are not easily
deterred or dissuaded. We are locked in a battle of
endurance, one that requires sustained political will to
see it through to its conclusion.

The world is now engaged in a harsh battle
against the forces of terrorism. We face a difficult road
ahead, but great struggles have always yielded great
rewards. The defeat of terrorism will be the defeat of
those who wish to turn history backwards, to stop the
march of human progress. Defeating terrorism will
throw open the door to a bold new future and to an era
of peace and prosperity, not only in the Middle East but
also around the world.

Even in these dark days, the people of Israel have
never lost their hope and their desire for peace. Even
with the threat of terrorism a constant and pervasive
presence, we continue to believe that the day will come
when children like my grandchild Ron will no longer
need armed guards to protect them at school. It is
precisely the belief that a peaceful future must
ultimately arrive that gives us the strength to endure.

The day will yet arrive when discussions like
these will seem anachronistic, a relic of a past that has
been supplanted by a peaceful present and a limitless
future. It is my belief that with proper leadership and
sufficient resolve that day may not be far off.

