Mr. Gunnarsson (Iceland): Allow me to thank the
Chinese presidency of the Security Council for having
organized this quarterly debate on the situation in the
Middle East, including on Israel and Palestine.

The region of the Middle East is witnessing an
unprecedented series of conflicts and crises, inflicting
suffering on millions of civilians. The international
community, led by the Council, is addressing those
crises in all their urgency, from Syria to Libya and
to Yemen. Iceland praises the countries in region that
are hosting such a large number of refugees and is
contributing new funds to assist countries in the region
dealing with refugee crisis.

As has been observed, we live in an age when
wars have no winners, only losers. Broad support
has been expressed for highlighting prevention and
political solutions in the conclusions of the report of
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
(see S/2015/446) and the Secretary-General's report
(S/2015/682) on their implementation. We urge the
Security Council to refocus its preventative and political
powers on the oldest conflict in the Middle East. The
Israeli-Palestinian conflict is a primary example in
which decisive action by the Security Council and the
international community is needed to prevent further
degeneration of the situation. The simmering nature of
that conflict is in danger of moving to a boil. The spate
of violent attacks against Israeli civilians continues,
with the death of 30 innocent Israeli civilians in recent
months. That is unacceptable, as is the targeting of any
other innocent civilians. Of deep concern as well are
the killings by Israeli security forces ofa large number
of Palestinians in relation to the spate of attacks, raising
questions of due process and the excessive use of force.
Israeli security forces have killed approximately 180
Palestinians since last September. Al-Haram Al-Sharif
has remained quiet in recent months. We would
encourage all parties involved to make sure that it
continues to do so. Action to prevent further conflict
is urgent.

First, it is urgent to defend the only clear course
to sustainable peace, the two-State solution. Israel
continues with illegal settlements, land appropriation
and punitive demolitions, despite international
condemnation. Those actions are in breach of
international law. They also seriously threaten the
viability of the two-State solution. Iceland urges
the Security Council to go beyond the words of
condemnation expressed by individual Council
members and to take action as a body to send a clear
signal to the Israeli authorities that settlements are
unacceptable. If we are all as serious about the two-
State solution as we say we are, the Security Council
must defend it.

Secondly, the international community needs to do
more to lend impetus to the search for peace. Iceland
welcomes the launch by France of an international
support group and the call for a peace conference. In
the search for peace, we should not forget the huge
potential that exists in involving women on all sides.

Thirdly, ways need to be found to re-establish
trust among the parties. That is principally the
responsibility of leaders on both sides, who need to
be open to creative and innovative solutions. But the
international community, led by the Security Council,
should search for ways to bring a sense of hope and a
horizon of security for the Palestinians and for Israel.
That should include looking at measures to establish
international protection.
Fourthly, the situation in Gaza needs to be
normalized as part of a preventative approach. The firing
of rockets from Gaza into Israel is totally unacceptable.
The authorities on the ground are responsible for
preventing such action. Israeli responses should be
proportionate. But if Gaza is not to become a breeding
ground for radicalization, then reconstruction must be
accelerated and the Strip's isolation lifted.

Iceland condemns all acts of violence against
civilians. We believe that the security Council must
take firm action to safeguard the path to peace and the
two-State solution in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
We also believe that broader international involvement
is now necessary to break the impasse, and we welcome
the French initiative.

