Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): The Kingdom
of the Netherlands would like to thank the Lithuanian
presidency of the Security Council for its initiative
in hosting this important debate today. In honour of
your presidency this month, allow me also to say in
Lithuanian: "Aciu ponia Presidentas".

We welcome the adoption this morning of resolution
2222 (2015), which we co-sponsored.

I would, of course, like to align my intervention
with the statement made by the observer of the
European Union. I will read out a shortened version
of my statement; the full version will be available on
Twitter.

Freedom of expression is a top priority for my
country. It is crucial in achieving the three ambitions
of the Kingdom of the Netherlands here at the
United Nations: peace, justice and development.
Security Council resolution 1738 (2006) condemned
attacks against journalists in conflict situations.
Nevertheless - and other speakers have also said this
today i journalists, including bloggers, are still the
target of aggression, harassment, arbitrary detention.
even extra-judicial killings. In the Kingdom of the
Netherlands we remember in particular the seven
Dutch journalists who lost their lives in past decades in
various conflict areas, just doing their job.

Threats againstjournalists directly affect the role of
journalists before, during and after conflict. Journalists
play a critical role in reporting on conflicts, revealing
the horrors of war and prompting investigations of
abuse. Journalists help to create an atmosphere of
tolerance through the gathering and dissemination
of non-partisan information. The role of the media is
relevant for promoting human rights, peace and conflict
resolution.

Therefore, it is vital thatjournalists be able to work
freely without interference, without fear. Overall, the
role ofjournalists in countries affected by conflict is
unique, involving great risks and personal sacrifice. In
this context, there is a specific role for United Nations
peacekeeping missions in the protection of civilians,
including journalists. An example of this is the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali, in which the Netherlands is a partner
with around 500 men and women. Freedom of the
press is a critical element in the integrated approach
we pursue in Mali, combining diplomacy, defence and
development.

The protection ofjournalists in conflicts is closely
connected to the prevention and prosecution of violence.
Violent acts against journalists must be prosecuted.
Over the past decade around 700 journalists have been
killed worldwide for bringing news and information
to the public. Imagine - this means more than one
journalist killed every week for ten years. Nine out of
ten of these killings go unpunished.

We must fight this impunity of violence against
journalists. First, impunity perpetuates violence and
quite literally kills the story. Secondly, it leads to a
climate of self-censorship. Journalists fearing for their
own lives or for the lives of their loved ones refrain from
covering stories, often the ones that most need to be
told. That impunity needs to be addressed. Prosecution
is the best prevention.

Where a free press is threatened and investigative
and independent journalism is absent, corruption and
illegal activity are allowed to flourish. Journalists
deserve full protection - not only in words, but also
in deeds. In this regard I would like to point out the
importance of the report of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services produced last year that covered
the mandates for the protection of civilians in United
Nations peacekeeping operations (A/68/787). The report
highlighted the need for further interventions to ensure
adequate protection, a protection that is certainly also
needed for journalists. It is of course the responsibility
of States to maintain a safe environment for the media
and to investigate and prosecute those responsible for
committing violent acts againstjournalists.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands looks forward
to further cooperating with the United Nations and its
Member States to ensure better protection for journalists,
flag bearers of freedom of expression. Journalists are
crucial for peace, justice and development.

