Mr. Tangara (Gambia): As an opening salvo,
I wish to congratulate the Republic of Senegal on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council. We
are confident, Sir, that, given the pivotal role being
played by Senegal in global peace and security and
the renowned international credentials of your Foreign
Minister, Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye, this debate will go
down in the annals of Security Council deliberations as
one of the most insightful and productive.

Today's debate on "Peace operations - facing
asymmetrical threats" is timely. The concept of
peacekeeping was launched by the United Nations to
douse the flames of inter- or intra-State conflicts, save
lives and property and facilitate and foster reconciliation
and reconstruction. In line with that vision, the brave
men and women known as the Blue Helmets of the
United Nations are at the front line of conflicts, risking
their lives daily and, at times, paying the ultimate price.
Unfortunately, the theatres of peacekeeping operations
have been radically changed and compromised by
serious challenges involving violent and fatal attacks
on United Nations peacekeeping troops. The situation
is so serious that in certain zones of conflict our
peacekeepers are more preoccupied with protecting
themselves than with implementing their mandate.
Several factors can be identified for the deteriorating
security environment in countries in which there are
United Nations peacekeeping operations.

To start with, many, if not most, of the countries
with peacekeeping operations are plagued with multiple
rebel movements that have carved out fiefdoms, thus
threatening national cohesion. Criminal gangs have
also weighed into the equation by taking advantage of
security lapses to further their criminal enterprises.
The peacekeeping environment is also compounded by
the proliferation of arms, and, in many instances, the
national army, which should handle national security, is
ill-equipped to handle the situation. Another worrying
development is the involvement of terrorist groups in
peacekeeping areas. In Mali, for example, we have
seen how terrorists can wreak havoc on a country
and peacekeepers. It is disheartening to recall how
rampaging terrorists in Mali desecrated mosques and
holy shrines, vandalized historical monuments and set
on fire ancient libraries and artifacts. Their attacks
on United Nations peacekeepers have been roundly
condemned, and we again raise our voice to reiterate
our condemnation.

The Gambia wishes to reiterate the call for
collective action against terrorism and criminals who
attack United Nations peacekeepers. Terrorism has
no regard for humankind. Criminals bent on peddling
drugs and profiting from human trafficking and other
nefarious activities will continue to attack United
Nations peacekeepers, who are perceived as obstacles
to their evil enterprises.

(spoke in French)

Although United Nations peacekeepers are not
involved in Nigeria in the fight against Boko Haram, we
all know of the ongoing situation in that country, and we
commend the concerted efforts of the Niger, Nigeria,
Chad and Cameroon in combating that domestic enemy.
It is an enemy that sleeps and eats among us but, given
the slightest opportunity, when our guard is down,
attacks. It is therefore important to work collectively in
the area of information-sharing networks.

(spoke in English)

We therefore call on all countries, especially those
in the subregion, to work on establishing a network of
information-sharing so that we can find the enemy who
lives among us.

All the lapses and atrocities that I have enumerated
are possible because of the existence of porous
borders, which allows the free movement of rebels and
their weapons.

We place a high premium on United Nations
peacekeeping operations because they are an effective
way to save countries from disintegration. It is an
effective way to prevent war and civil strife. Indeed, it
is an effective way to protect the weak and the innocent.
However, despite all their merit, peacekeeping
operations will continue to be under threat unless
concrete actions are taken to revamp their mandate and
bolster their strength to make them not only a deterrent
force, but also a force of potency wherever the need
arises. That is not a call to make our peacekeepers into
counter-terrorism forces. Rather, it is meant to address
the charge that, if peacekeepers cannot protect or defend
themselves, then they cannot be expected to protect and
defend innocent civilians. The Gambia is of the view
that, for peacekeeping operations to be effective and for

peacekeepers to be safe, the following factors must be
allowed to prevail.

First, in the planning and deployment of a
peacekeeping force, the Security Council should
consider arming peacekeepers with weapons that can
match the lethal force of rebels, terrorists and criminal
gangs who may attacks civilians or peacekeepers.

Secondly, as a matter of urgency, the Security
Council should set up a military panel composed
of reputable senior experts to review the rules of
engagement in peacekeeping operations and set out the
modalities for the protection of peacekeepers.

Thirdly, the Security Council should also consider
setting up regional rapid deployment forces that can
be mobilized to enter a country in which peacekeepers
may be under siege or in danger.

Fourthly, countries agreeing to a United Nations
peacekeeping force must be made to enter into an
agreement with the United Nations to undertake judicial
reforms to facilitate peace and the rule of law.

The Security Council should also exercise leverage
to get countries in conflict to embrace peace by setting
up peace and reconciliation councils.

There are many other suggestions to be made, but
we believe that this set of proposals is fundamental to
a comprehensive review to address the asymmetrical
threats to peace operations.

In conclusion, no task currently undertaken by the
United Nations is more noble than that of peacekeeping,
and I wish to put on record the appreciation of the
Gambia for the invaluable contribution of Blue Helmets
to world peace and security.

