Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Spain and the United Kingdom are participating jointly
today under the so-called Toledo formula. As such,
Spain aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
by the representative of the United Kingdom. We also
align ourselves by the statement to be delivered by the
observer of the European Union. We are grateful for
the opportunity afforded to us by this debate, as well as

for the briefings on the cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union, a key alliance for peace
and security on the African continent.

Although this decade has seen significant progress
in that partnership, the rapid Changes and growing
complexity of global threats force us to adapt our
responses and take full advantage of our respective
competitive advantages. The advantage of the Security
Council flows from the primacy conferred upon it
by the Charter of the United Nations on peace and
security issues, while the African Union's is rooted in
due acknowledgement of the efforts of a dynamic and
growing continent that is determined to forge its own
future. The challenge today is to go from more or less
improvised cooperation, depending upon the urgency
of each emerging conflict, to a more institutionalized
partnership that inspires confidence, is more effective
and enhances synergies. That renewed partnership
cannot be limited to deploying operations, but rather
must encompass every phase ofa conflict. I shall focus
on prevention and mediation, and the representataive of
the United Kingdom will cover peacekeeping aspects.

Prevention is key. The report (see S/2015/446) of
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
report itself lays out the crucial primacy of politics.
We know that the vast majority of conflicts in the
African continent are politically based, and that they
all require a political solution. It is worth noting that
it is was trust and team work between the region and
the United Nations that made it possible to settle crises
in places such as Burkina Faso, and that it is a lack of
understanding that hinders progress in other conflicts.
There is a long path ahead of us, especially if we are
to go from early warning signals to joint mobilization.
Improving coordination, reducing response time and
speaking in a unified voice continue to be significant
challenges. The contribution of the United Nations
Office to the African Union is undoubtedly essential
in that regard. That is why welcome the ongoing review
aimed at strengthening it.

Moreover, we should implement some of the
proposals that several delegations made during the
24 May open debate (see S/PV.7694) on cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union,
to which the Ambassador of New Zealand referred
in his statement. Those proposals include early, joint
identification of potential crises, sharing information
and increasing communication between the respective
secretariats and Councils, holding informal
brainstorming meetings and deploying joint missions
on the ground. Cooperation on sanctions is another
area to be looked into, as the effectiveness of sanctions
largely depends upon regional implementation, and
their legitimacy would be bolstered by the express
political support of the region.

Finally, regarding mediation and the peaceful
settlement of conflicts, a United Nations-African
Union partnership would have obvious benefits. In
that regard, we note and commend the initiative of
the African Union to create a specialized registry of
women mediators for the continent at the disposal of
both the African Union and the United Nations. We also
point to South Sudan as a future test case for the United
Nations-African Union partnership, and to recall that it
was the solidarity of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, the African Union and the Ssecurity
Council in calling for an end to the clashes that made it
possible to reach the August 2015 peace agreement. We
believe it is time to once again raise our voice together.

