Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I, too,
would like to thank most warmly the Under-Secretary-
General for Peace Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
for his briefing on the significant developments in
the Sudan over the past weeks. I also welcome the
Ambassador of the Sudan and his delegation, which
represents the new face of the Sudan, which we support.

That leads me to the first point I wanted to make
here: that it is clear that we must support the Sudanese
transition. We hope that the transition will be a success
and make it possible to meet the legitimate aspirations
of the people of the Sudan. The transition will succeed
if it can deliver on the two priorities set by Prime
Minister Abdalla Hamdok - bringing about peace and
relaunching the economy. We must do our utmost to
assist the Government of the Sudan in succeeding in
these two areas.

The President of France assured Mr. Hamdok, who
visited France at the end of last month, that we stand
determined to support the Sudan at this critical juncture
of its history. France will therefore provide economic
support of€60 million for the transition period. We also
wish to accelerate the tackling of Sudan's external debt
and welcome the fact that the donors' conference will
be held in France. Finally, it is vital that the Sudan be
removed from the list of State sponsors of terrorism.

We call upon all rebel groups to participate in the
discussions that began in Juba some three days ago,
on 14 October. It was in that spirit that we facilitated
a meeting between the Sudanese Prime Minister and
Abdul Wahid Al-Nur in Paris on 29 September.

Finally, we welcome the signing by the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the
authorities of the Sudan of an agreement paving the
way for the opening of several offices in the Sudan,
including in Darfur. This is a crucial step for the
strengthening of the rule of law in the Sudan, and we
support the efforts of the Sudanese authorities in the
promotion of human rights, access to justice and the
fight against impunity. We call on them in that respect
to start a new chapter in the relationship with the
International Criminal Court and to cooperate with its
Prosecutor, Ms. Fatou Bensouda.

Against that backdrop, the second point I wish to
make today is that in order to better support the peace
process in the Sudan, and, as my colleagues from
the United Kingdom and Germany have just noted,
we should not be hasty in withdrawing the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID).
France takes note of the call made by the Sudanese
authorities to avoid creating a security vacuum in
Darfur during the peace negotiations. They also called
upon international partners to support the peace
process and the implementation of the agreement. In
that context, we believe that the recommendation of the
Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission to maintain the same ceiling of
UNAMID personnel for a period of six months is
entirely justified. The drawdown of UNAMID right
in the middle of negotiations would risks derailing the
peace process.

We also support the recommendation to reframe
the UNAMID mandate in support of the peace process
and State liaison functions. However, the protection of
civilians and support for the delivery of humanitarian
aid must also remain mission priorities for UNAMID
right up to the end of its mandate.

My third and final point concerns our support for
the creation of an ambitious follow-on mechanism in
the wake of UNAMID's departure. We must continue
to support and consolidate peace in Darfur after the
departure of the Blue Helmets, as we have done in other
countries. We understand that the Sudanese authorities
need more time to determine their expectations
concerning such a follow-on mechanism and hope
that the tripartite structure will be able to make more
specific recommendations to the Security Council in
December, as has been announced.

We also welcome the recommendations of the
Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission concerning the United Nations-
African Union political strategy in the Sudan. We,
too, believe that the United Nations and the African
Union should support the negotiation process and the
implementation of the agreement, particularly the
security arrangements and the quest for safe, dignified
and sustainable solutions for displaced persons
and refugees.

Finally, the support of the United Nations and the
African Union for the drafting of a new constitution and
in the preparations for elections will be very important.
