Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Guehenno, for updating the Council on
the situation in the field. We would ask him to convey
to all the personnel of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and of
the Kosovo Force (KFOR) our expressions of support
for their work.

In my statement today, I shall focus on three areas
that I had originally planned to address, plus one that I
think I should add in the light of what others have said.
The first three are security problems, the organization
of elections, and the peace plan proposed by the
Belgrade authorities.

With respect to security problems, as has been
said, we must condemn attacks on United Nations
personnel, who, along with the personnel ofthe various
humanitarian agencies, are unconditionally serving the
local population; that must be understood and respected
by every one ofthe actors in this conflict. The rights of
all minorities must be respected, as stipulated in the
resolutions and statements adopted by the Security
Council. We reiterate our appeal to the parties to
comply with those provisions.

The efforts of KFOR to control attacks by
Albanian extremists carried out from the safety zone in
southern Serbia have yielded results, as reflected in the
number of detainees and decommissioned weapons and
in the reduction in the number of violent attacks. It is
clear that the situation in the zone remains tense and
should thus continue to be of concern to the
international community. We cannot let the Presevo
valley - in which the safety zone was set up to
provide a solution - become a greater problem for the
region.

I believe we all agree that general elections must
be organized in Kosovo. What divides us is the when,
the how and the why. It is not entirely clear what
bodies will be elected and what their functions will be.
Until that is clarified, UNMIK cannot set a date.

Turning to the peace initiative offered last week
by the Deputy Prime Minister of the Republic of
Serbia, Mr. Covic, we consider that the proposal to
include the Albanian population in the search for a
final solution for southern Serbia could be a first step
towards a negotiated result. We are aware that a
number of elements remain to be negotiated among the
parties, and we hope that they will reach an agreement
as soon as possible so as to put an end once and for all
to the violence in the Presevo valley. If the parties feel
that the international community should assist in that
process, we would be prepared to do this; if, on the
other hand, they feel we should simply be observers,
we would do that as well.

At the 18 January meeting of the Security
Council on this item, I said that,

"To a large degree, the legitimacy and prestige of
the Security Council and of the United Nations
are at stake when it comes to the effectiveness of
[the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia] and its officers. Furthermore,
the validity of international criminal law is also at
stake." (S/PV4258, p. 21)

And today, I wish to - indeed, I must - conclude my
statement with a comment on the same subject: the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia. Ambassador Lavrov of the Russian
Federation made reference to the Tribunal, and
specifically to Ms. Carla Del Ponte.

I knew Ms. Del Ponte when I served as Attorney-
General in Colombia and when she held the same post
in Switzerland. I know her commitment, her values and
her respect for the rule of law. It is not my purpose to
defend her today; we will have another opportunity to
evaluate the work of the Tribunal. Nor do I wish to go
into detail about the specific situation to which
Ambassador Lavrov made reference, when he spoke of
the "unacceptable" "top-secrecy" (supra) of the
summary of the report on the topic he mentioned, and
when he said that only the full report would suffice. I
wish simply to observe that the administration of
justice is a very difficult and risky job. But it is
governed by certain sacred rules, one of which is the
obligation to be discreet and not to make public
anything or any evidence that could affect or destroy an
investigation and that could thus weaken the Tribunal
itself - which I think would run counter to what the
Security Council should be doing. As I said on
18 January,

"we believe that the Security Council should do
everything in its power to ensure that we achieve
the objective for which the Tribunal was
established." (S/PV4258, p. 21)

