Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, allow me to welcome His Excellency,
Mr. Marcel Amon-Tanoh, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Republic of Cote d'Ivoire. I congratulate him
on the well-deserved election of his country as a
non-permanent member of the Security Council
for the period 2018-2019 earlier today, which is of
obvious significance.

Today, Cote d'Ivoire is turning the page and
moving past its crisis once and for all. Cote d'Ivoire,
a brotherly country, will, through its membership in
the Council, once again play a deserved role in the
international arena as a representative of the African
continent and a defender of its people's interests. In
that regard, I would like to assure the Minister that
Egypt will continue to promote its ongoing cooperation
and coordination with C6te d'Ivoire and provide the
necessary support to the country as it fulfils its role.

Allow me also to thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Ms. Aichatou Mindaoudou,
for her valuable briefing and appreciated efforts, and
the civilian and military personnel of United Nations
Operation in C6te d'Ivoire (UNOCI) for their hard
work. They have played a pivotal role in leading to
the current watershed moment. The Council celebrates
this turning point as the peacekeeping mission ends
in Cote d'Ivoire and the national authorities return
to governing all of the country's affairs. Optimism
prevails regarding a more stable and prosperous future
at all political, economic and security levels.

UNOCI would not have been successful in
achieving its goals had it not been for the national
and popular political atmosphere, which facilitated a
diligent approach to shaping Cote d'Ivoire's future.
In addition, regional and international stakeholders
unified their vision for Cote d'Ivoire, aware of their
role in supporting Cote d'Ivoire in ending the crisis.
They helped make it happen.

The successful closure of UNOCI is only the
start of a new phase, anchored in peace and stability,
that will help Cote d'Ivoire to achieve sustainable
development. The successes in Cote d'Ivoire deserve
to be celebrated, but the remaining challenges
deserve our full attention. We are confident in the
ability of the Ivorian Government and people to make
further progress on their current path. However, the
international community must also continue to provide
necessary support.

In conclusion, the Council celebrates the closure
ofa success story that was not easy. The mission faced
challenges, difficulties and failures. Had it not been
for the determination of stakeholders to overcome
such hurdles, we would not have reached this point
today. We believe it important to draw lessons from
UNOCI that will help us in dealing with similar crises.
We therefore call on the Secretariat to conduct a
comprehensive study of the role of the United Nations
and the international community in the settlement of
the Ivorian crisis. The study should include an objective
analysis of the mandate and role of the peacekeeping
operation, the contributions of political mediation, the
effects of sanctions regimes, and all factors related to
the international community's perspective with respect
to the crisis.

Once again, I wish the people and the Government
of Cote d'Ivoire success.

