Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): Let me congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month oprril, as well as to express our
appreciation for Angola's presidency during the month
of March.

My delegation welcomes the adoption of resolution
2279 (2016). We consider today's decision to be the next
important step towards the stabilization of the situation
in Burundi. Our unity demonstrates the Council's
readiness to take responsibility and to react in a timely
and efficient manner.

The message to the Government of Burundi should
be clear: it should respect, protect and guarantee
all human rights and fundamental freedoms for all
citizens of the country; and all those responsible for
gross violations and abuses of human rights, as well
as violations of international humanitarian law, in
Burundi should be held responsible.

We welcome the active role of the African Union
and of the East African Community in the mediation
efforts. In that regard, we would like to underscore that
every tool available to ensure the implementation of
commitments in the area of human rights by all sides
has to be applied in full. To that end, the cooperation
of the Government of Burundi with all United Nations
and African Union human rights observers, as well as
with the United Nations independent investigation on
Burundi established by the Human Rights Council last
December, is of the utmost priority.

(spoke in French)

Taking into account the main role of the countries
of the region in mediating and finding a lasting solution
to the crisis in Burundi, we would like to underscore
the need to increase the pressure by the international
community on the Government of Burundi in order to
set a concrete and precise timetable of steps to relaunch
the inter-Burundian dialogue in a truly inclusive
manner.

My delegation believes that the contribution of
police is very important to increase the capacity of the
United Nations to monitor the security situation and
promote respect for human rights. At the same time, we
would like to underscore that the effectiveness of that
future presence will depend upon on the impartiality of
the mandate and clear goals, as well as the availability
of the necessary means to carry out its functions.

