Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): Thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this briefing. I would
also like to thank the High Commissioner for Human
Rights, Ms. Navanethem Pillay, and the Special Envoy
for the Prevention of Genocide, Mr. Adama Dieng, for
their extensive briefings.

Only last month we commemorated the twentieth
anniversary of the Rwandan genocide (see S/PV.7155).
As we adopted resolution 2150 (2014), we recommitted
to preventing and fighting genocide and other serious
crimes against humanity. We also reaffirmed the
principle of the responsibility to protect populations
from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity. And yet, three years after
South Sudan's independence, the reports from that
country read like catalogues of barbarity, with
all actors 4 Government forces, opposition and
militias - committing shocking atrocities. Incitement,
targeted killings, rape and torture are the typical
ingredients that lead to a situation of genocide. Even
places that are supposed to be considered safe shelters,
such as places of worship, hospitals and United Nations
bases, have been brutally attacked. The despicable
attacks in Bor on the United Nations compound and the
slaughter of civilians in mosques and churches in Bentiu
deserve the strongest condemnation of the Council and
the entire international community.

What is also troubling is a fact that the High
Commissioner mentioned - that sowing season will
likely be missed, and as many as 7 million people
will soon face a terrible famine. And to think that the
two rival leaders and their supporters would prefer
to continue their bloody rivalry rather than grant one
month ofcalm for the people to plant their crops, in order
to save them from the horror of death by starvation. It is
definitely very hard to confront such facts.

We note President Salva Kiir's statement earlier
today that he is ready to meet face to face with Rick
Machar. We have not heard a denial of that from
Machar, and we assume that he is also ready to meet.
It is absolutely crucial that the two leaders renounce
and denounce all violence and call on their forces
and supporters to lay down their arms, stop targeting
civilians and pursue a path of genuine dialogue
and reconciliation. Both the Government and the
armed opposition must cooperate in investigating the
horrendous crimes that have been committed. The
perpetrators must be arrested and prosecuted with full
respect for internationally recognized standards of due
process. Accountability is a must. If there is no end to
impunity, violence and atrocities will continue.

The Council must see to it that current and future
investigations examine the extent to which political
and military leaders knew or should have known about
what was going on, and failed to take all necessary and
reasonable measures to prevent the war crimes and
crimes against humanity committed by themselves
or by subordinates under their effective control and
authority. We welcome the efforts of the commission
of inquiry of the African Union and urge it to continue
documenting all atrocities committed on both sides.
We look forward to the report of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) on Violations and
abuses on the ground. As some speakers have already
said, the Human Rights Council's active involvement is
also essential.

It is time for the warring leaders to place the
interests of their country and people above their
own. We have a tiny glimmer of hope today with the
announcement by President Kiir, and we urge the
leaders to take advantage of this window of opportunity.
The political leaders must act on their words and must
stop the violence. The Security Council, for its part,
must ensure that if that does not happen, we will use
all the tools at our disposal to send a clear, strong
message that war crimes, crimes of sexual violence
and atrocities will no longer be tolerated. I understand
the differences of opinion on the use of sanctions, but
my delegation believes that, if nothing else works, the
threat of targeted sanctions is a useful tool that must be
made real and imminent if we want the warring parties
to change their behaviour. Referral to the International
Criminal Court should also be on the table.

Deterrence on the ground must be strengthened. We
are looking into revising the UNMISS mandate to that
effect. The deployment of a regional task force to protect
ceasefire monitors and deter Government and rebel
forces from staging assaults is to proceed at full speed.
We would like to express our appreciation to UNMISS
and to Special Representative Johnson for doing their
utmost under extremely difficult circumstances.

We regret the continuing challenges in relations
between the Government of South Sudan and UNMISS.
The Government must stop the harassment of the
United Nations Mission and its staff and make it clear
to the public that it appreciates UNMISS's lifesaving
role and are fully committed to cooperating and
providing safety and security to its personnel, as well
as to ceasing all status-of-forces agreement violations.
It is totally unacceptable that a United Nations mission,
carrying out vital work in extreme conditions at a risk
to the lives of the peacekeepers and supported by the
international community, should be attacked or abused
in any way. With the growing number of crises in the
world, peacekeepers and the funds for them are in
ever greater demand. Countless victims of violence
elsewhere would be happy to have those peacekeepers
protecting them, and I think the Government of South
Sudan should keep that in mind. They are doing a vital
job.

In conclusion, we call our leaders "leaders" not
simply because that is the only word we have, but
because we expect them to show true leadership. If
in future President Salva Kiir and Rick Machar want
to be considered leaders by their own country, this
is a moment for them to show that, to step up to that
leadership and make sure that the danger of destroying
the independence so hardly won just a few years ago
does not become a gruesome reality.

