Mr. Gata Mavita Wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): As your
presidency of the Security Council comes to an end,
Madam President, allow me congratulate you on the way
you have conducted the meetings during the month and
thank you for taking the initiative to organize today's
meeting, which addresses the evolution of the electoral
process in my country, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. I would also like to take this opportunity to
express my delegation's thanks to the members of the
Security Council for the ongoing interest and support
they have always shown the situation in my country.
After having followed the various statements of
the speakers who preceded me, it seems important
to me, on behalf of my Government, to express our
understanding of the situation that is the subject of our
discussions. Before continuing my remarks, I would
like to apologize for the absence of the President of
the Independent National Electoral Commission, who,
because of his busy schedule, could not be here today.

To return to our topic of the day, as we reported last
month before the Council (see S/PV.8318), the electoral
process has evolved sufficiently. As of today, the
deadline to submit candidatures has passed. It should be
noted in that regard that the Commission received 19,437
applications for the provincial elections, 15,222 for the
legislative elections and 25 for the presidential election.

With particular regard to the presidential election, as
those present have followed, His Excellency Mr. Joseph
Kabila Kabange, President of the Republic, has kept
his word, thereby complying with the declaration to
respect the Constitution of the country that he made
well before the beginning of the electoral process and
has maintained throughout the process.

After the submission of various applications for
candidature, the Commission, in accordance with the
law, proceeded to review them, after which the files
of those candidates who did not meet the eligibility
conditionsprescribedbylawwere declaredinadmissible.
Speaking of only the case of the presidential election,
out of the 25 applications registered by the Independent
National Electoral Commission, six were not selected.
As members of the Council can see, the process has
reached cruising speed and is nearing its point of arrival.

Despite the enormous and valuable efforts by the
Government and the Commission to obtain the results
achieved today, some continue to be sceptical and ask
questions, five of which seem particularly important to
me and deserve a clarification from our part. Those are
questions regarding the voting machines, the 6 million
potential voters registered without fingerprints, the
financing of the elections, logistics and the casing of
the political climate.

As far as the voting machines is concerned, the
Commission is aware of the apprehensions that have
been raised by some. The Congolese themselves have
also raised them. In order to bolster confidence and
dispel any doubts, the Commission has undertaken an
outreach and awareness-raising campaign on the use
of such machines for several months. The campaign,
which began with opposition and majority political
parties, as well as civil society, continues today in the
outlying regions with the rural populations. As we
already pointed out to the Council on 26 July, although
wrongly called "voting machine", it will not vote in the
place of the voter. Its role is to print the ballot that the
voter will put into the ballot boxes. In any case, my
delegation reassures the Council that remains open
and will deliver all the information that the Council
would like on the technical aspects related to the use
of the machines.

With regard to the 6 million voters registered
without fingerprints, the International Organization
of la Francophonie (IOF), which carried out the
audit of the electoral register and noted the situation,
made recommendations to improve registration. is
working to that end. It is also important to note that
the International Organization of the Francophonie
emphasized in its conclusions that this situation does
not call into question the status of the persons concerned
as voters. In that regard, the International Organization
of la Francophonie states in its conclusions that

"The presence of 16.6 per cent of voters without
fingerprints throughout the national territory does
not, however, call into question their status as
voters, in accordance with the law."

It is important to underline here that the audit carried
out by IOF demonstrates the will of the Government
and the Commission to ensure the transparency of the
process for credible elections.

With regard to election financing and logistics,
the Government is determined to continue its efforts
to make sure that the process takes place on time and
to use only funding from the country itself. As we
have always stressed, our country remains open to the
contributions of other partners, provided that they are
without conditions and are respectful of our sovereignty.

Finally, with regard to the casing of the political
climate, so as not to go back to the explanations already
given in previous statements, it seems important
to summarize by saying that the Government has
already taken a series of measures to respond to
requirements formulated in the 2016 New Year's Eve
political agreement in relation to the release ofpolitical
prisoners. Those who were part of that category have
actually been released. The pending cases, so-called
emblematic, which we have also often mentioned
before members of the Council, concern people who
have committed common law offenses.

Members will agree with us that the public
authorities, who are supposed to protect the weakest
and promote the rule of law and the equality of citizens
before the courts, cannot interfere in that kind of
situation without violating the Constitution by creating
a double standard of justice in the country.

I would be remiss were I to conclude on this
point without coming back to challenges involving
those candidates whose candidacies were invalidated.
My delegation would like to inform the Council that
elections in every country throughout the world are
conducted based on an electoral law, which determines
the criteria that candidates must meet. The same
applies to the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It
is therefore natural that candidates who have not met
the prerequisite legal conditions may not run. As some
Council members acknowledged, such candidates can
file an appeal from now until 19 September before
the relevant Court to restore their rights. Should their
appeals be rejected, however, my Government would be
grateful it the Council and the international community
would ask the unfortunate candidates to accept the law
to its full extent, the country's laws and the Constitution,
as President Kabila has done.

The Congolese people are looking forward to the
holding of elections, which, as members know, will
take place on 23 December. The Government and
the Commission are working to ensure that they are
conducted smoothly, transparently and peacefully. That
goal can be achieved only with the commitment of all
political actors - of every stripe - who must refrain
from any type of rhetoric or behaviour that could
lead to tensions or public disorder. The Government
therefore expects all political actors in the country to
support that process constructively through positive
actions. The Government expects the same behaviour
of international partners. In that regard, my delegation
would like to note the following points.

The electoral process in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo has been negatively affected to a great degree
by many instances of outside interference - a situation
that continues until this day. That state of affairs has
hardly moved the process forward and has, among other
things, resulted in the postponement of elections, which
unfortunately was blamed on a single person- President
Kabila. The process has also suffered from the
no-confidence crisis fuelled by suspicions instilled in
the Congolese people, whereby they doubted themselves
and became sceptical of the solemn promise made
by the Head of State to respect the Constitution. My
delegation believes that the international community,
which bears its share of responsibility for that situation,
must adopt measured and deliberate language to
help dispel the crisis at the process' current stage.
The results achieved by the Commission so far must
motivate us to trust that institution and allow it to
complete its task, while avoiding interference in its
work for reasons that pertain more to speculation than
reality. Constructive contributions aimed at improving
the process are welcome. They must be done in mutual
respect among partners.

Lastly, since the fulfilment of the promise made by
the Head of State to respect the Constitution, the political
situation in the country, as well as at the international
level, is enjoying a period of respite. Our wish is to see
the situation continue so as to allow, for the first time
in the history of our country, a peaceful transition of
power at the highest level of the Congolese State. From
that perspective, the Congolese Government and people
also are also counting on the United Nations, especially
the Security Council, the mission of which is to ensure
international peace and security.

The meeting rose at 11.55 am.
