The President: I thank Ambassador Skoog for
his briefing and for his effective work as Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya.

It is now my pleasure to switch hats and deliver
a statement on behalf of Italy. Again, I wish to thank
Special Representative Salame for his briefing,
Ambassador Skoog for the update on the sanctions
committee and Minister Siala for being at our
meeting today.

In Libya, stability and security across the
Mediterranean are at stake. A political solution is
indispensable. There are no military shortcuts, because
if a party goes for the military option, the crisis could
continue for a long time and Da'esh could re-emerge.
The fight against terrorism must remain a strategic
priority and the control of the Libyan borders is also
very critical. Today, for instance, after the defeat of
Da'esh in Iraq and in Syria, foreign fighters may return
to Libya and, from there, to Europe.

Italy has saved and welcomed thousands of
refugees and migrants by combining solidarity and
security, but, especially at this moment, the focus on
the Libyan borders has become a security imperative.
It is a task that must be shared by the main actors of the
international community.

Only two months have passed since Ghassan
Salame laid out his action plan. We appreciated the
constructive approach of the discussions in Tunis. The
image of the two delegations sitting at the negotiating
table was a very good signal. We do not underestimate
the difficulties of a complex process. We are aware
that critical issues remain unresolved. Obstacles
and challenges are real. However, we stand firmly
behind Mr. Salame's efforts. Rushing to elections
without progress on security and reconciliation may
be counterproductive. Elections have to be kept on the
political horizon, but voting without setting the rules
could fuel tensions. For all these reasons, we call on
Libyans to support the political process and to seize
the opportunity offered by Mr. Salame's plan. The
Libyans must build upon it with a spirit of openness
and compromise.

Next month is the second anniversary of the
Skhirat Political Agreement. This anniversary is not a
deadline. Instead, it should be used to redouble efforts
for political compromise and to promote reconciliation.
The parties and the international community cannot
allow a dangerous vacuum in the Libyan institutions.
The Libyan Political Agreement remains the only
framework for the transition. While the Libyans are
negotiating, we need institutional interlocutors to
define and implement programmes for the sake of the
Libyan people. In order to improve security, Libya
needs unified security forces under the control of the
Presidency Council.

Libya cannot afford to fall victim to new armed
conflicts. Italy has condemned the brutal bombings
near Derna and the horrific killings discovered near
Benghazi. We join the Libyan people, the Libyan
institutions and the United Nations in calling for an
impartial investigation on the latest tragic episodes.
At the same time, full humanitarian access must be
granted where basic needs and human rights are at
risk. For example, we welcome the news that the World
Health Organization managed to enter Derna to deliver
medical aid.

Italy is very close to the civilian population. We have
provided humanitarian and development assistance to
fragile sectors of society, including women, children,
refugees and migrants. The decline of migration flows
is encouraging, but it cannot be at the expense of
human rights. Italy has devoted many resources to the
Libyan Coast Guard and local municipalities. We want
to improve the appalling conditions of refugee and
migrant centres. We are now launching new calls for
projects of non-governmental organizations. Already,
we are working together with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the
International Organization for Migration.

A crucial component of Libya's stabilization is the
relaunch of its economy. Libya would also benefit from
a long-term vision 4 a kind of Libya 2030 Agenda 4 as
a framework for action.

Allow me a final word on the international
community's presence in Libya. Italy was the first
western country to reopen its embassy in Tripoli. We
welcome the gradual increase of the United Nations
presence and we encourage other countries to consider
their return. Together, we shall rebuild those political,
economic and cultural ties that can help our Libyan
friends on the path to peace, security and stability.

I resume my functions as President of the Council.

I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.

