The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Italy.

I thank the High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin Inzko, for his briefing and
his work.

Italy also aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.

Today, the Security Council unanimously renewed
not only its support for the European Union-led
peacekeeping force (EUFOR) Althea, but also its
appeal to Bosnia and Herzegovina to speed up the
pace of reforms, in line with European integration
perspective. Italy firmly supports the European
Union (EU) path chosen by Bosnia and Herzegovina
and will continue to assist the country in achieving
that goal. Important progress has been made thus far,
demonstrating the commitment of all parties to reach
that common goal. Authorities at all institutional levels
have been working on the European Union Commission
opinion questionnaire this year, which is the first step
towards achieving the status of candidate member of the
European Union. We encourage them to redouble their
efforts so as to ensure coordinated and harmonized
answers to the questionnaire.

We regret that the pace of social and economic
reforms has been slowing down rather than accelerating
over the past several months. The demands of all citizens
for a better future deserve to be met, and urgently. The
leaders of the country have already showed their ability
to deliver when working together in the best interest of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Devisive actions and rhetoric
rooted in the past are not serving that interest. On the
countrary, they are stalling a reform process that had an
encouraging start.

Regaining momentum in the implementation of the

reform agenda is needed now more than ever to unblock
the assistance of the International Monetary Fund and
the European Union, which remains crucial to shoring
up the process and to substantially improving the lives
of all the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina. That
being the main priority, we call on all parties to discuss
seriously and in a spirit of dialogue and consensus the
measures needed to improve the electoral framework
pursuant to the ruling issued by the Constitutional
Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina in December
2016. It is paramount that next next year's election
be conducted smoothly and allow the formation of
renewed democratic bodies able to resume the reform
process effectively and immediately and to steadily
move towards the European Union.

Many challenges still lie ahead - strengthening
the rule of law justice, the fight against corruption and
the prevention of radicalization being some of the most
significant - but through political will and unity of
intent, they can be addressed successfully. Citizens'
trust in institutions must be restored by offering,
especially to young people, real opportunities to build
a future in their home country. We commend recent
efforts aimed at consolidating regional relations, and
welcome Bosnia and Herzegovina's decision to sign
the Transport Community Treaty - an important step
towards regional integration achieved at the summit on
the Western Balkans, which Italy hosted in Trieste last
July. All Western Balkans countries should continue
working in that direction, which we deem to be essential
as they move closer to the European Union.

I will conclude by recalling that our support for
Bosnia and Herzegovina is grounded on the respect for
its sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity enshrined
in the Dayton Peace Agreement. We urge the country
to take forward the 5+2 agenda established by the Peace
Implementation Council for the closure of the Office of
the High Representative. We reiterate our full support
for EUFOR Althea and look forward to it strategic
review. We stand ready to discuss, in the appropriate
forum, a possible reconfiguration of the international
presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina as its stability
continues to be consolidated and the country moves
forward in its European Union integration process.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

