Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I too
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey
Feltman for his briefing.

We are very concerned by the serious deterioration
in the situation in the areas controlled by the separatists
in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions resulting from
increased fighting in those regions. We are also very
concerned by reports of renewed fighting in the south-
east of Ukraine near the city of Mariupol, during which
the separatists took control of the city of Novoazovsk.

For several days, there have been increasing
numbers of reports of incursions by Russian regular
troops and military vehicles into Ukrainian territory.
We are also concerned by reports of bombings of
Ukrainian territory from Russia and violations of
Ukrainian air space. All unilateral military action
by the Russian Federation in Ukraine, whatever the
pretext, including humanitarian, would constitute a
serious violation of international law and would be
viewed as such by the international community. We
cannot allow the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Ukraine to be violated.

The presence of Russian fighters among the
separatists, including among their leaders, is quite
unacceptable and must be condemned in the strongest
terms. That presence has been reported primarily in
various reports of the United Nations Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights on the situation
in Ukraine. It has also been recently recognized by
a separatist leader in Donetsk, who explained in a
Russian television interview that the latest success of
the separatists would not have been possible without
the help of Russian servicemen.

Today we are witnessing a new, dangerous stage
in the escalation of violence in Ukraine despite
official Russian proclamations calling for dialogue
and de-escalation. We urge the Russian Federation to
immediately cease all forms of hostile activity along
the border, in particular the inflow ofweapons, military
advisers and military staff into the conflict zone, and to
withdraw its forces from the border.
Given the ongoing deterioration on the ground, we
need to find a lasting political solution to the crisis.
That is becoming ever more urgent. In that regard,
we welcome the efforts undertaken by the Secretary-
General to promote dialogue between Ukraine and the
Russian Federation, in particular through the missions
of Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman to the
region.

The dialogue between Ukraine and Russia,
initiated in Geneva and Berlin, must be pursued in
order to restore the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Ukraine. We welcome the meeting held the day
before yesterday in Minsk between the Presidents
of the Russian Federation and Ukraine, in particular
in the presence of the European Union. We hope that
those talks will lead to concrete results, and especially
to the establishment of a road map based on President
Poroshenko's peace plan. We hope that consultations
between Russia and Ukraine to ensure better control
of the borders will be held soon and that the parties'
discussions will lead to the release of prisoners held by
illegal armed groups.

The trilateral talks initiated by the Chairperson in
Office ofthe Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) are key in that regard, as is the
deployment of OSCE observers to the two border posts,
Gukovo and Donetsk, along the Russian-Ukrainian
border. We hope that the mandate of the mission will
be expanded so that it can contribute to the effective,
comprehensive and bilateral control of the Russian-
Ukrainian border. Securing the border is key for the
restoration of peace, as it will put an end to the flow of
arms and weaponry to the separatists.

The solution to the Ukrainian crisis can only be
political. The Russian Federation must be an integral
part of the effort to find a political solution, rather than
continue to fuel the crisis, which dates back to another
era.

