Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I should like to express France's gratitude to
the Chairs of the Committee established pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540
(2004) - Ambassadors Mayr-Harting, Apakan and
Heller, respectively. Their dynamism and ongoing
commitment enables the Security Council to play a
growing role in the fight against terrorism.

1 also associate myself with the statement to be
made by the representative of the European Union.

Since our last meeting on this subject in
November (see S/PV.6217), new acts of terrorism have
demonstrated to all the extent to which the threat,
including to the United Nations itself, remains real. We
have just heard the briefings of the Chairs of the three
Committees highlighting not only the progress that has
been made, but also the challenges ahead. From our
perspective, the three Committees that we created
between 1999 and 2004 are not only most important
politically, but also of operational utility. We must
continue to improve their functionality.

I should like to comment on each of the three
Committees in turn. With respect to the 1267
Committee, in 2006, at the initiative of France, we
created a focal point allowing individuals and entities
on the list to request to be removed therefrom. The
adoption of resolution 1904 (2009) went even further
by permitting them a facilitated exchange with the
Committee and full clarification by a high-ranking
official with regard to communications received. That
is a useful tool for the Committee in its decision-
making process. We welcome the forthcoming
appointment of an ombudsman.

The Committee has also done a great deal of
work in revising the entire list in order to ensure that it
remains commensurate with the threat. Such highly
technical revision may seem fastidious. Why would
one bother looking for information on a terrorist if one
has lost track of him? However, there is no doubt that
many terrorists have been prevented from carrying out
plots because their financing has been cut off or they
have been unable to travel. In this way, many lives
have been saved. It is, unfortunately, easier to quantify
the victims of terrorist acts than the absence of victims
of acts that have not taken place. Our meticulous work
thus touches every Member State, and it is therefore
essential that all States affected by the revision assist
the Committee.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) has
done essential work and demonstrated that we all have
responsibilities to live up to. Like all other States,
France is subject to the Committee's consideration.
This is a way for all States Members of the United
Nations to ascertain that our national measures are as
optimal as possible. This is not only our common duty,
but also in everyone's interest. We welcome the
Committee's work under the leadership of Turkey. It
not only analyzes and gives accounts, but above all
makes recommendations to all Member States. The
CTC is called on to play a more strategic role within
the United Nations system by developing measures
already adopted by the international community to take
the terrorist threat better into account, in particular
through its regular focus on certain geographical areas,
while also ensuring respect for human rights. We
therefore believe it to be very useful to open the
thematic debates to all States Members of the United
Nations. In the most sensitive areas, we hope that the
Organization will be able to provide practical guidance
to all.

With respect to the 1540 Committee, nuclear,
biological and chemical terrorism remains a principal
threat. In that regard, we welcome the summit held in
Washington, DC, and the commitments undertaken
there, as well as the possible convening of another such
summit in Korea. A great deal remains to be done.
More than 30 States have yet to report, and we thank
the Mexican presidency for its efforts. On thing is
clear - we must all feel involved in the
implementation of the resolution and respond to
requests for reports. There is no sanctuary and no one
is immune to nuclear, bacteriological and chemical
terrorism. One particular area susceptible to progress is
that of assistance.

There is another area in which States must help
the Committee to improve its own work. I appeal to all
those that offer or receive help in implementing
resolution 1540 (2004) to so inform the Committee.
Only thus will it be able to play its full role.

The creation of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force was an essential
contribution to the system. It brought together various
actors, including the three Committees, and helped us
to share best experiences. We should continue to
support the Task Force, and we have no doubt that the
review of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy to
take place in September will enable us to gauge the
usefulness of that tool.

In conclusion, I wish to express once again the
thanks of my delegation for the work accomplished by
Ambassadors Mayr-Harting, Apakan and Heller and
their teams, and by the groups of experts that assist
them. They have done sterling work. France will
continue to play an active role in the Committees and
do its utmost to ensure that the United Nations is
strengthened to fight terrorism in all its forms.

