Mr. Wittig (Germany): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his briefing.

Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the representative of the European
Union.

Members of the Council, whenever they were
meeting on the situation in the Middle East in recent
months, were entirely in agreement on the urgency of
making progress in the Middle East peace process.
With little more than four months to go until
September, this sense of urgency is growing
considerably. Every day that passes without the
re-establishment of a credible political process is a lost
day. We must not allow this to continue; risks are
growing, and chances are dwindling. We must
overcome the deadlock and re-establish a credible
political process, well in advance of the September
deadlines.
We want to see the State of Israel and a
sovereign, independent, democratic, contiguous and
viable State of Palestine living side by side in peace
and security. There is no alternative to the two-State
solution. Making decisive progress by September is
possible, and the window of opportunity is still open.

Negotiations are the only viable way forward.
The international community must set a framework.
We remain convinced that clear parameters are a
prerequisite if negotiations are to be successful.
Germany set out its view on parameters along with the
United Kingdom and France on 18 February in the
Council (see S/PV.6484), supported by EU member
States and many others. We call on the Quartet to work
in this direction and to bring about the progress
required prior to the September deadline it has itself
endorsed. Within this context, we look forward to the
speech President Obama will deliver on the region.
Strong United States leadership is required.

The parties must commit unequivocally to
returning to meaningful direct negotiations on this
basis as soon as possible and without setting additional
conditions. We call on President Abbas and Prime
Minister Netanyahu to show flexibility and, within this
context, on the Prime Minister to open a forward-
looking perspective in his address to Congress.

Germany remains strongly opposed to unilateral
action impacting on final status issues, whether from
the Palestinian or from the Israeli side. Seeking
statehood through unilateral steps will not bring
sustainable peace. Israeli settlement activity should
cease immediately. It is illegal under international law,
constitutes an obstacle to peace and threatens to make a
two-State solution impossible. New construction plans
should be abandoned. All members of the Council are
in agreement that continued settlement activity
seriously threatens the prospects for peace.

Gaza remains a serious concern. Developments
over the past two weeks have demonstrated once again
the fragility of the current situation. A ceasefire agreed
on 14 April held for only three days. Germany strongly
condemns the continued firing of rockets and mortars
into Israeli territory, in particular the targeting of a
school bus with an anti-tank missile. This type of
action is utterly unacceptable. Germany recognizes
Israel's right to protect its citizens against attacks. At
the same time, we look to Israel to exercise this right
judiciously. The loss of civilian lives in Gaza is deeply
regrettable. Further escalation must be prevented.

We continue to call for the immediate and
unconditional release of Staff Sergeant Gilad Shalit,
who has been held hostage for almost five years now.

We would like to express our concern with regard
to a possible second Gaza flotilla. The planned
activities bear considerable potential for escalation. In
line with what was said by Lynn Pascoe earlier, we call
on the organizations involved to find other ways to
deliver aid to the people of Gaza. The appropriate way
ahead is the full implementation of resolution 1860
(2009) calling for the immediate, sustained and
unconditional opening of crossings for goods and
people to and from Gaza, and for the prevention of the
illicit trafficking of arms and ammunition. In this
context, we call on all international supporters to make
use of the existing land crossings to channel their
support to Gaza, and to abstain from provocations.

Despite the concerns to which I have referred,
there is some positive news as well. On 13 April, the
Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
International Assistance to Palestinians met and
acknowledged the Palestinian Authority's State-
building efforts, stating that the Authority is above the
threshold for a functioning State in the key sectors.
Germany has been a major donor to the Palestinian
Authority, nationally and through the EU. We have
made a major political and financial investment in
Palestinian State-building. This investment has been
made to achieve a two-State solution and sustainable
peace for Israelis and Palestinians.

For too long, the people of the Middle East have
suffered from conflict and confrontation. It is time to
reach a final and comprehensive settlement that will
resolve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and end the
occupation that began in 1967. The status quo is not
sustainable. Our goal remains a framework agreement
on all final status issues by September. Germany will
contribute to achieving this goal.

The deteriorating situation in Syria, violence
across that country and the rising death toll remain of
serious concern. We condemn the use of force by
security forces against peaceful demonstrators, and call
on Syria to address the legitimate demands of the
Syrian people by urgently implementing a credible
programme of political reforms as a path to long-term
stability. We acknowledge the Syrian Government's
announcements of reforms, including the lifting of the
state of emergency today through decree No. 161. If
fully and swiftly implemented, it could be a first step
in a wider programme of necessary reforms.

In Yemen, the protests against the Government of
President Saleh have risen sharply in number and
strength since their onset in January 2011. The security
situation, in particular, and continued news of violence
coming from many Yemeni cities continue to give rise
to great concern. Despite a wide range of efforts, also
by members of the international community, we are
facing an intractable political impasse that has put the
country at the brink of a political and economic
tragedy. We call on the Government of Yemen to abide
by its responsibility to respect and protect the human
rights and fundamental freedoms of all persons,
including their freedom of expression, to ensure safety
and to prevent further bloodshed. Likewise, the
opposition should show restraint and its determination
to engage in a peaceful dialogue about Yemen's future.

It must be clear to all parties concerned that
Yemen's problems cannot be solved with violence. The
future of the country has to be laid out by a
comprehensive and inclusive dialogue and courageous
reforms. We fully support the mediation efforts of the
Gulf Cooperation Council in this regard. All Yemeni
actors are called upon to engage in these negotiations
towards a peaceful future for the Yemeni people.

