Mr. Yaacobi (Israel): At the outset, I would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on the able manner in
which you have conducted the affairs of the Security
Council this month. I would also like to congratulate your
predecessor, Mr. Emilio Cardenas, on his skilled conduct
of the Council's affairs.

I would like to begin with some comments regarding
the issue of settlements. Here I wish to emphasize that the
PLO's initiative to debate this issue in the Security
Council is incompatible with its signed commitments
vis-a-vis Israel. In the first place, the PLO has committed
itself repeatedly in its agreements with Israel to resolve
all outstanding permanent-status issues, such as

 

settlements and Jerusalem, in direct and bilateral
negotiations. Secondly, in these same agreements the PLO
committed itself to settling these issues at a specific
time - namely, in the negotiations on permanent status, at
the final stage of the process. It was agreed not to address
these issues at the present time.

These commitments were made numerous times
throughout the agreements. I will spare the Council a
detailed account of every specific instance. However, I wish
to call its attention to article V, paragraph 3, of the
Declaration of Principles, whereby Israel and the PLO
agreed that the issue of settlements would be dealt with in
the permanent-status negotiations, not at the present time.
I would also draw the Council's attention to the fourth
paragraph of Chairman Arafat's letter to Prime Minister
Rabin dated 9 September 1993 and to the preambles to the
Declaration of Principles and the Gaza-Jericho Agreement.
In these documents the PLO committed itself to resolving
outstanding issues through negotiations, not through the
intervention of outside parties.

Furthermore, we find it difficult to understand why the
PLO seeks to address its concerns in the Security Council
rather than through the agreed mechanisms for settling
differences and disputes that were specified in article XV
of the Declaration of Principles, as well as in article XVII
of the Gaza-Jericho Agreement.

For all these reasons, Israel considers it highly
inappropriate for the PLO to have initiated a debate on this
matter in the Security Council, in contradiction of the
agreements it signed with Israel.

For the record, I wish to explain the basic elements of
Israel's settlement policy. Immediately after the present
Government of Israel was formed in July 1992, it
substantially changed Israel's settlement policy. This was
not done because of any external pressure or legal claims.
The new policy was adopted long before the agreements
with the PLO. Rather, it stems from our deep conviction
about the kind of Israel we want to have and from our
profound belief that the best alternative is peace based on
security, understanding and cooperation. Therefore, no new
settlements have been established in the territories since
then, nor will they be. The Government stopped allocating
public resources to support the extension of existing
settlements. No land has been or will be confiscated to
establish new settlements.

 

Yes, we continue to build in Jerusalem, as the Arabs
do. They have not stopped building, and this is their right.
We have not stopped building, and this is our right.
The peace process has faced challenges and
difficulties ever since Israel and PLO signed the
Declaration of Principles in September 1993. But the
significance of this and subsequent agreements must not
be ignored: Israel regards the agreements with the PLO as
a historic breakthrough. We firmly believe that there is no
better alternative than peace, freely and directly negotiated
by the parties themselves. In the past year and a half
alone, more progress has been made towards
comprehensive peace in the region than in the entire half
century preceding it. For the first time in their history, the
Palestinians are taking responsibility for their own affairs.
The Israel Defence Forces have already withdrawn from
the Gaza Strip and the Jericho area, and the Palestinian
Authority has been established there.

Israel and Jordan signed three agreements: one
outlining peace, one ending the state of war and one that
was a full-fledged peace treaty. This is the second peace
treaty between Israel and an Arab State following the
ground-breaking peace with Egypt 16 years ago. In
addition, Israel has established formal relations with
Morocco and Tunisia through the exchange of liaison
offices.

These developments are part of a growing
recognition that direct dialogue is the only way to solve
the issues that divide us. Military conflict and solutions
imposed from the outside have not solved the Arab-Israeli
conflict. As we turn our gazes from the past to the future,
we also find new problems that do not distinguish
between Arab and Israeli: economic, environmental,
humanitarian and so on. We can solve them only by
working together. October's economic summit, in
Casablanca, Morocco, brought Arab, Israeli and other
businessmen and government leaders together to promote
regional cooperation. Another conference is expected to
take place in Amman, Jordan, next October.

These significant developments - which have all
taken place since the signing of the agreement between
Israel and the PLO - bring us closer to a comprehensive
peace, yet, at the same time, opposition to the peace
process has become more and more Violent. Terrorism is
now the major obstacle to peace. Radical fundamentalists
with ties to Iran and leading the campaign. Their goal is
to derail the peace process. Their strategy is to provoke
a cycle of Violence and sow anger, hatred and resentment

 

towards further progress. Their method is to kill Israeli
men, women and children going about their daily lives.
Israel has already paid a high price: 116 killed since
the signing of the Declaration of Principles and 634 injured.
On 6 April 1994, Hamas terrorists detonated a car bomb
next to a bus in downtown Afula, in the north of Israel.
They killed eight people, including three teenage students
and two teachers. A week later, on 13 April, Hamas
bombed another bus, this time in the coastal town of
Hadera. Five people died in the attack. In October 1994,
Hamas terrorists kidnapped 20-year-old Corporal Nachshon
Waxman. They held him, tortured him and shot him to
death. Hamas also claimed responsibility for the 19 October
bombing of the Number 5 bus on Dizengoff Street, in the
heart of Tel Aviv. Twenty-one Israelis and one Dutch
national were killed. And just last month, on 22 January,
Islamic Jihad exploded two consecutive bombs at the Beit
Lid bus stop near Netanya. Twenty-one Israelis were killed.
After the first bomb was detonated, the terrorists attacked
the people who had rushed to help the first Victims. Twenty
of those killed were young men and women ranging in age
from 18 to 24. After the attack, we were shocked to see
thousands celebrating at the terrorists' homes in the Gaza
Strip.

Israel cannot View these attacks with indifference. We
cannot sit idly by and allow our people to be slaughtered.
Morally and humanly, we are obligated to protect our
people's lives. We are a democratic country rooted in our
Jewish heritage. Both teach sensitivity to the value of
human life. Our sages teach us: Kol adam hu olam
umlo'o - "In every person is an entire world." We believe
that the Palestinians understand the value we ascribe to
each life. Certainly, Hamas and Islamic Jihad try to exploit
this. But for the sake of its own people as well as ours, the
Palestinian Authority must fulfil its obligation to combat
terrorism.

As we all know, in Israel, as in all other democracies,
the people ultimately decide. Therefore, the most important
task before all supporters of peace is credibly to address the
growing sense in Israeli public opinion that the Palestinians
are unable to meet their commitments to fighting terrorism.
Israel believes that the Palestinian Authority too does not
want terrorism to hold the peace process hostage. The
Palestinian Authority can and should do more to respect its
commitment, as set out in article XVIII of the Gaza-Jericho
Agreement,

"to prevent acts of terrorism, crime and hostilities".
(A/49/180, p. 19), 5/1994/727.

 

The means are there. The Gaza-Jericho Agreement
provides for 9,000 Palestinian police. A recent study by
the donor countries identified 15,000 policemen on the
rolls, and 2,000 more will be added, in accordance with
the agreement between Israel and the PLO in early
February. Clearly, the means are there. We expect the
Palestinian Authority to disarm all those who are
forbidden to possess arms. We expect it to do all in its
power to combat terrorism and to bring to justice all those
involved in murderous activities.

Here, I believe it is appropriate to address the issue
of closing off the territories that was mentioned earlier.
Closure is neither a policy nor an act of collective
punishment. Rather, it is an act of self-defence in the face
of repeated terrorist attacks from the West Bank and Gaza
Strip. The Israeli people expect that they will be
protected. As the elected leadership, it is the
Government's responsibility to ensure the personal
security of all citizens. Two weeks ago, Prime Minister
Rabin informed Chairman Arafat of certain measures to
ease the closure. These are under way, and we hope that
the security situation will enable us to continue with the
normalization. This is our policy.

Allow me to address our Palestinian partners: let us
not lose sight of our shared hope. We have made great
progress; irreversible progress, I believe. These are not
easy times. They demand wisdom and leadership. The
role of leadership is to pursue the best path for the people
in the long run and not to lose from view for even one
minute the long-term perspective. Yes, we have
differences; but we also have an overriding common
interest that has to come first: to create a better future for
our peoples and for the people of the Middle East. The
opponents of peace want nothing more than to see us fail
in achieving our vision. We must not give up; we have to
pursue our shared goal and our commitment to a
comprehensive peace.

Yes, we have differences. We have to address them.
The place to do it is at the negotiating table, as we agreed
and as we hope to agree now.

 

