The President: I thank the representative of the
United Republic of Tanzania for her kind words
addressed to me.

I would now like to make a few remarks in my
national capacity.

I would like at the outset to express Pakistan's
thanks and gratitude to all members of the Council,
non-Council members and other speakers for their
participation in today's meetings. I am especially
grateful to Mr. Ibrahim Gambari, Special Adviser to
the Secretary-General, for his enlightening statement. I
would also like to thank Ambassador De La Sabliere
and Ambassador Greenstock for their statements and
for agreeing to lead the two Security Council missions
to Central Africa and West Africa, respectively.
Pakistan wishes those two important missions every
success.

The remarks that have been made in our
discussion by representatives from Africa have
enhanced our understanding of the situation on the
continent. Clearly, Africa faces imposing challenges
posed by hunger, disease and poverty, as well as by the
conflicts that are continuing in various parts of the
continent, with grave consequences in terms of human
suffering, instability and pervasive underdevelopment.

The causes of the conflicts are complex: ethnic
and national rivalries, the illegal exploitation of natural
resources, foreign intervention, the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons, the use of mercenaries
and child soldiers, human rights violations, refugee
movements and internal displacement, as well as the
spread of communicable diseases such as HIV/AIDS.
The root cause of many of the conflicts is, above all,
pervasive poverty and hunger, and the representative of
Tanzania provided a timely reminder to the Council of
the importance of the implementation of the
Millennium Development Goals and the Monterrey
Consensus.

The illegal exploitation of the natural resources of
African countries fuels these conflicts. The control of
resource-rich areas appears to be a major military
objective of most of the warring groups, rebel
movements and Governments alike. We have had
conflict diamonds in the case of West Africa and, now,
conflict timber in the case of Liberia. Next, we may
perhaps be dealing with conflict gold or platinum, and
the list could be endless.

The Security Council must adopt an active
approach designed to create peace in Africa. The
approach of the Council should be comprehensive and
it should aim at durable solutions. Clearly, such durable
solutions would need to encompass several aspects.

First, they must generate ownership of the
solutions by the parties concerned. Secondly, they must
be accompanied by the political will of those who
support peace at the domestic, national, regional and
international levels. Thirdly, these solutions must be
accompanied by the provision of adequate resources
and financial assistance for the purposes of peace-
building and peace sustenance. In the long term, the
best solutions for conflicts would be the integration of
these nations and regions into the world system of
trade and finance on an equitable and sustainable basis.
Fourthly, such solutions must encompass humanitarian
action and respect for humanitarian law. Fifthly, they
should be accompanied by disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration actions, which have
been successful in many cases in the recent past. They
must encourage regional approaches, since many of the
conflicts are interlinked and interdependent. Lastly,
such solutions must be based on the determination of
the Security Council to implement its decisions and to
ensure that agreements that are concluded are adhered
to by the parties concerned. The Council's sanctions
can be targeted and can be made more effective to
ensure such results.

The Council could also consider enhancing the
effectiveness of the mechanisms which it deploys for
the resolution of conflicts. First, the mechanism of the
special representatives of the Secretary-General have
proved to be valuable not only in Africa, but elsewhere
as well, and these must receive full support from the
Security Council. Secondly, the Security Council's
missions, such as the two which are going to West and
Central Africa, are also increasingly useful in bringing
home to the Council the realities of the conflicts and in
bringing home to those parties concerned the attention
and focus of the Security Council on these conflicts.
Thirdly, peacekeeping operations, in Africa as
elsewhere, must be accompanied by a robust mandate
and adequate resources.
Pakistan, which has participated actively in
peacekeeping operations in Sierra Leone, Africa and
elsewhere, supports the strengthening of the mandate
and the size of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
effectively achieve its objectives. We welcome the
adoption of the resolution on the Democratic Republic
of the Congo this morning for the deployment of the
Interim Emergency Multinational Force, to which
Pakistan will positively consider contributing a
contingent with a robust force to achieve the objectives
for which the Multinational Force has been established.

We would suggest consideration of two new
possible mechanisms by the Security Council. First, the
Council could create enquiry bodies to establish the
facts in the case of certain crises. These enquiry bodies
could work along the lines of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee in order to trace the resources and to chase
the money trail back to those who finance and fuel
various conflicts in various parts of Africa. Secondly,
we would suggest that, since the security, political,
economic and social dimensions of conflicts are
interlinked, it is crucial for the United Nations to
enhance coordination and complementarity in the work
of its three principal organs in order to create durable
solutions.

A way to do this could be to build on the existing
cooperation between the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council and to establish ad hoc
composite committees, with membership drawn from
the Security Council, the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council. Such composite
committees could generate a coherent and mutually
supportive response to the internecine conflicts and
complex crises in Africa and, perhaps, elsewhere. Such
composite committees could look at complex
emergencies from different perspectives and thus
generate coherent solutions. This approach would also
reduce the burden on the Security Council, which is
increasingly finding itself preoccupied with internal
political, economic and development issues in various
conflict situations. The involvement of the larger
number of States Members of the United Nations in the
composite committees would also promote greater
participation and greater transparency in the work
involved in the prevention of conflicts, the
management of conflicts and the solution of conflicts.
In this context, the role of the Council would remain
that of an executive branch in promoting the
implementation of comprehensive, coherent and
proactive approaches. This could also prove to be an
effective complement for the realization of the
objectives of the New Partnership for Africa's
Development.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I request Mr. Gambari, if he has any additional
comments, to take the floor.

