Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this
meeting. My thanks also should go to Ambassador
Tanin, Permanent Representative of Afghanistan,
for his statement. I should also thank Mr. Jan Kubis,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, for his briefing and hard work. We continue
to support him and his team in the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for the
dedicated work that they are doing in Afghanistan.

The role of UNAMA, in our view, is definitely
very important and needs more support. UNAMA
should continue playing its active role in the post-
2014 period. It should expand its cooperation with the
neighbouring countries in order to enhance stability in
Afghanistan and promote its sustainable socioeconomic
development. Basically, the United Nations support
for Afghanistan is crucial, especially in the post-2014
period.

We are glad to hear that significant progress has
been made in the political and socioeconomic areas
in Afghanistan. It is also promising that the United
Nations and the international community of States, in
particular in the region, are resolute in their strong long-
term commitment to a secure, stable and prosperous
Afghanistan. Those are essential, especially on the eve
ofthe year 2014, when two significant events - namely,
the presidential election and the withdrawal of foreign
forces - will take place in Afghanistan, with their large
impact in shaping the country's future. We hope that the
active participation of Afghans will ensure the holding
of successful elections, which is indeed essential to
enhancing the political stability and national unity of
Afghanistan and its advancement in all other areas.

Likewise, the peace and national reconciliation
efforts ofthe Government ofAfghanistan, leading to an
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned reconciliation process,
need to be continued. In such a process, Afghanistan's
Constitution should be observed and any external
pressure or interference or rewarding of the extremist
and terrorist groups should be avoided.

In line with those developments, enhancing the
security of Afghanistan should continue to be the
highest priority, as it is a prerequisite for the success
of efforts in all other areas. Accordingly, we believe
that the complete withdrawal of foreign forces should
be followed by the strong support of the international
community in equipping Afghan forces commensurate
with the existing security threats, in particular those
posed by terrorists, illegal armed groups and organized
criminals.

For the Islamic Republic of Iran, as an immediate
neighbour of Afghanistan, the security and stability of
Afghanistan are a vital element for its neighbours and
the region. During all these years, the Islamic Republic
of Iran, in cooperation with Afghan Government, has
been trying to assist Afghanistan in various areas.
We believe that special attention should be paid to
combating the interlinked sources of insecurity and
instability in Afghanistan, in particular the production
of and trade in narcotic drugs as the financial source of
terrorist, extremist and illegal armed groups.
In that regard, continued international support for

the Triangular Initiative on cooperation on countering
narcotics among Afghanistan, Iran and Pakistan is
essential not only to strengthening the security and
stability of Afghanistan, but also to alleviating the
serious concerns of neighbouring States and transit and
destination countries of drug trafficking.

Unfortunately, millions of Afghan refugees still
continue to live in host countries and an alarming
drop in their voluntary repatriation in 2013 underlines
the importance of meeting the reasonable needs of
repatriated refugees in Afghanistan in order to reverse
that trend, and underscores the necessity for rendering
more international support to the host countries of
Afghan refugees pending their repatriation.

In conclusion, the Islamic Republic of Iran
will continue its full support for the promotion of
security, stability and comprehensive and sustainable
development in Afghanistan. In his recent visit to
Tehran, President Karzai held fruitful negotiations with
his counterpart, the President of the Islamic Republic
of Iran, and with other Iranian officials, and he was
assured ofthe continued cooperation and support of my
country.

