Mr. Fernandez-Zincke (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank the Council for organizing today's
timely debate.

(spoke in English)

I have the honour to speak on behalf ofthe European
Union (EU) and its member States. The candidate
countries the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine
and the Republic of Moldova, align themselves with
this statement.

I would like to thank Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres, the Vice-President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), Christine Beerli,
and the Deputy Executive Director for Advocacy of
Human Rights Watch, Bruno Stagno Ugarte, for their
contributions to this debate.

The protection of civilians and health care in armed
conflict continues to be of profound concern. We
welcome the focus of today's debate on the topic and
the opportunity to take stock of the implementation of
resolution 2286 (2016) one year after its adoption. The
European Union has been from the outset and continues
to be a strong supporter of that landmark resolution. We
welcome the strong message it sends that any violation
of international humanitarian law committed against
medical personnel and facilities in conflict situations is
completely unacceptable.

We are, however, concerned by the troubling
developments on the ground. Attacks on medical
facilities and personnel in conflicts, such as in Syria,
Yemen, Afghanistan and South Sudan, continue. In
some instances, those are carried out in full knowledge
of the exclusively medical or humanitarian nature of
the facilities being attacked and in most cases without
any action being taken to investigate and counter
those attacks. We continue to be equally concerned
by the lack of safe and unimpeded passage of medical
personnel, assets and supplies in numerous instances,
whose compounded consequences on the health of
civilians, including children, are devastating.

We must strengthen our resolve to implement
the commitments we have made and to stop medical
facilities and personnel from being targeted, in clear
breach of international humanitarian law. It is a war
crime to intentionally attack hospitals and places where
the sick and wounded are collected.

The EU is committed to ensuring the full
implementation of resolution 2286 (2016). At the
World Humanitarian Summit last year, the EU made
the commitment to promoting and enhancing efforts
to respect and protect medical personnel, transports
and facilities, as well as humanitarian relief personnel
and assets against attacks, threats or other violent acts.
The EU also acknowledges the Secretary-General's
recommendations made in 2016, pursuant to resolution
2286 (2016), and concurs with the recent report of
the Secretary-General (S/2017/414) in that respect,
including on the need to share best practices and
lessons learned and ensure rapid, complete, safe and
unimpeded humanitarian access.

The blatant disregard and refusal in many cases
of the parties to armed conflict to comply with their
obligations under international humanitarian law and
international human rights law continue to be one of the
most critical challenges for the protection of medical
care in conflicts, as well as globally for the protection
of civilians. That problem is further exacerbated by
the escalation of urban warfare in recent years, and the
use of weapons with wide-area impacts is destroying
critical infrastructure and killing civilians, including
medical and humanitarian personnel, in virtually all
conflicts. The EU strongly condemns such violations
and is committed to consistently speaking out for
global respect and compliance with international
humanitarian law and ensuring safe, rapid, full and
unimpeded humanitarian access to those who are most
in need of assistance.

The EU is a major advocate for international
humanitarian law, humanitarian principles and human
rights, and continues to implement the EU guidelines
on international humanitarian law. The EU fosters
global respect for and compliance with international
humanitarian law through a variety of means, including
political dialogue, demarches or public statements
about specific conflicts, restrictive measures, sanctions
and cooperation with the United Nations and relevant
regional organizations.

However, compliance with international
humanitarian law and human rights law needs to
be further strengthened and enhanced. The EU and
its member States remain committed to the Swiss/
ICRC initiative on strengthening compliance with
international humanitarian law and calls on all Member
States to participate constructively in that process. The
EU's long-standing involvement in ending impunity and
strengthening accountability includes the EU's support
to the International Criminal Court. The new EU
global strategy explicitly commits the EU to promoting
international criminal law and the universality of the
Rome Statute.

The EU and its member States are also committed
to continuing their efforts to promote the dissemination
of and training in international humanitarian law and
human rights, both inside and outside the European
Union, as well as supporting relevant States and
non-State actors in implementing or reinforcing
context-specific measures to enhance physical safety
of medical personnel and infrastructure.

The EU will also continue to place protection of
civilians at the core of its humanitarian response and
to support the international humanitarian system in
ensuring the centrality of protection in humanitarian
action. Having recognized that a disproportionate
number of internally displaced persons and those
in conflict zones are women, we will apply a gender
perspective to ensure that both women's and men's
needs are taken into consideration to enable a targeted
humanitarian response.

States bear the primary responsibility for providing
protection for their citizens. However, the protection
of civilians is also a main task of United Nations
peacekeeping and is often decisive for its success and
legitimacy. Today, 10 of 16 peacekeeping missions have
mandates encompassing the protection of civilians.

To conclude, the European Union and its member
States remain committed to the full implementation
of resolution 2286 (2016). All States may count on our
support for reinforcing the protection of the wounded
and sick, as well as medical personnel, facilities and
equipment. We will also continue our global support for
promoting compliance with international humanitarian
law and the protection of civilians. And we call on all
States to join us in that effort.

