Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Madam President, for organizing this debate, the
first on this topic since the adoption of resolution 1738
(2006). I thank the Deputy Secretary-General for his
statement and the journalists for their testimony, which
allows us to better understand the challenges they face
on the ground.

All are aware of the importance France attaches
to the issue of protecting journalists. Given the
resurgence of attacks on information professionals,
especially in conflict zones, over six years ago France
and Greece together submitted a draft resolution to the
Security Council. Through resolution 1738 (2006) the
international community committed itself to paying
increased attention to the issue of protecting journalists
in armed conflict. The Security Council spoke with one

voice at that time. It was a decisive step.

Today, we note that, unfortunately, that step was
insufficient. Quite to the contrary, it was far from
being sufficient because 2012 was perhaps the most
murderous year. More than 120 journalists were killed
in the exercise of their profession, which was double
the figure for 2011. Several hundred others were
imprisoned and sometimes tortured. Many were subject
to intimidation, kidnappings, forced disappearances
and arbitrary detentions. Women journalists are
often the deliberately targeted victims of harassment
and sexual violence. Bloggers, be they professional
journalists or simply citizens, are also being targeted in
an increasingly systematic manner.

Yesterday in Libya and today in Syria, journalists
are subject to persecution by regimes seeking to
muzzle them. Some 100 journalists, including four
French nationals, have been killed in Syria since the
beginning of the conflict. They paid with their lives
for their resolve to show the world the reality of the
indiscriminate repression of the Syrian people. I have
special thoughts for Didier Francois and Edouard Elias,
French journalists who were kidnapped in Syria a
month ago and who are still being held.

In all conflict areas, it is local journalists who pay
the heaviest price for practicing their profession. That
is the case in Somalia, where journalists are regularly
targeted by armed groups. Five have been killed since
the beginning of this year. These figures clearly
show international that the challenge of protecting
journalists is one that we still have to meet. Given the
worrisome situation, I would recall that it is primarily
the responsibility of Governments to protect journalists
and to allow them to accomplish their work without
impediment and in an independent manner. That
requires, among other things, fighting impunity against
the offenders of such violence. That issue has been
mentioned both by the journalists here and by some of
my colleagues. States must systematically investigate,
apprehend and try those responsible. Currently, 90 per
cent of the killings ofjournalists go unpunished. It is
also up to the international community, especially the
Security Council, to consider the matter and take action
to protect journalists. Some courses of action have
already been pointed out.

We must recall and recognize the vulnerability
of journalists in conflict situations and do what
is necessary in a more systematic manner so that
peacekeeping operations provide protection for
journalists as civilians who are under threat. Violence
against journalists is not limited just to armed conflict
situations, however. The majority of persecutions take
place in countries at peace, very often where journalists
are reporting on cases of corruption or organized crime.

In a resolution adopted in September 2012
(A/HRC/RES/21/l2), the Human Rights Council
denounced that reality and proposed several courses of
action. Moreover, the work done by UNESCO should
also be commended. The Plan of Action on the Safety
of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity, developed by
UNESCO last year, is an excellent initiative to fight
impunity for the authors of violence againstjournalists.
We call for its full and immediate implementation.

As we are all ware, freedom of information is at
the heart of any democracy, whether when it comes
to journalists, bloggers or war correspondents and
associated personnel. They are the people who help us
to understand our world and how it is evolving. It is clear
for all to see that the knee-jerk reaction of the enemies
of freedom is to gag the press, and that independent
media are the first allies of democracy. Freedom of
expression should be respected by everyone. It is our
collective responsibility, and especially that of the
Security Council, to work to ensure that this freedom
be fully enjoyed.

