Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
appreciate the convening of this meeting and thank the
speakers for their enlightening briefings.

We would like to begin by underscoring the
importance of the topic that brings us together today,
in particular the high levels of human suffering, the
economic impact and the breakdown of the society that
lead to the detention and disappearance of persons in
conflict situations, which is especially dire in the case
of Syria.

We must remember that international humanitarian
law provides us with a mandatory minimum basis for
limiting unacceptable practices that violate the dignity
of individuals and, therefore, of the international
community as a whole. Consequently, Peru regrets
and condemns any kind of excess and abuse of that
international norm, as such practices only hinder and
undermine peace in Syria.

Making progress in that area would therefore
represent a gesture of humanity that has the courage to
attend to the open wounds and ease tensions, both of the
families concerned and of Syrian society. That would
also help to create a better climate of understanding
in order to advance the process of political dialogue,
accountability and reconciliation. Peru commends the
work done in that regard by the Astana group, which
is achieving auspicious results, including the release of
dozens of detainees since November 2018.

The severity and scale of the problem, however,
require even greater efforts. As Special Envoy Geir
Pedersen noted in April,

"there is considerable room for improvement in
terms of the procedures to be followed during
future release operations" (S/PV8520, p.3).
In that vein, we welcome the ongoing engagement
and proactive role of the United Nations and the
International Committee of the Red Cross in the
sessions of the Astana group and in the implementation
of release operations on the ground.

We also believe that it is crucial to have more
accurate records of information on the situation of
detained or disappeared persons, which will require
the implementation of more efficient data collection,
management and protection systems, and a more fluid
exchange among the parties. That also entails the
development and adoption of national laws to ensure
the protection of detainees before, during and after
their release, as well as the minimum coverage of the
material, psychological and legal needs of the families
of the disappeared.

In that regard, we highlight the main role that the
international community can play in those matters,
whether through the adoption of a set of best practices
and technical standards, the provision of financial
resources or the positive influence that some States can
exert on the parties to the conflict. Particular attention
should be given to the cases of missing Syrian children,
given the extreme situation of vulnerability to which
they are exposed.

As noted, it is crucial that the Syrian Government
and the opposition focus on broader solutions that
transcend the current schemes of the individual and
reciprocal exchange of prisoners and consider the
simultaneous release of groups of people, based on the
necessary political will.

I conclude by underscoring the importance of
resolution 2474 (2019) for those purposes, as well as
the renewed sense of urgency that we must accord the
settlement of the drastic situation in Syria, the victims
of which include numerous innocent families.

