Mr. Schori (Sweden): I would like to extend my
thanks for the statements made by Deputy Secretary-
General Louise Frechette, High Commissioner for
Human Rights Mary Robinson and Under-Secretary-
General Oshima.

The countries enumerated in the full European
Union statement, which is now being distributed, align
themselves with that version.

The European Union welcomes the Secretary-
General's report on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, but regrets that, so far, only a few of the
recommendations in the first report have been
implemented.

The European Union strongly agrees that
internationally recognized standards of protection can
be upheld only when they are given the force of law
and when violators are regularly and reliably brought
to justice. National jurisdictions have a primary
responsibility in this regard, and in some circumstances
criminal proceedings can be effectively complemented
by truth and reconciliation efforts. Nevertheless,
crucial work is carried out by the ad hoc Tribunals for
Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia; and the proposed
special court for Sierra Leone and the serious-crimes
panel in East Timor deserve our continuous attention.
The European Union also calls on all States to sign and
ratify the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court.

Under international law, displaced persons and
other victims of conflict are entitled to international
protection and assistance where this is not available
from national authorities. Where Governments are
prevented from reaching civilians, impartial actors
must be allowed to carry out their humanitarian tasks.

The European Union supports the
recommendation that the Security Council should
conduct more frequent fact-finding missions to conflict
areas. Such missions also serve an important
preventive function.

The European Union would welcome a set of
common ground rules that would facilitate access.
When negotiating for access in a conflict situation of a
non-international character it is vital not only to have
direct negotiations with the Government concerned, but
also to engage in a dialogue with armed groups
involved in the armed conflict. That dialogue should
aim at ensuring access, guaranteeing the security of
humanitarian operations in a conflict area and
disseminating information on international
humanitarian law and human rights law to armed
groups.

Governments as well as armed groups have
responsibilities under international humanitarian law.
All parties to a conflict of a non-international character
are bound to comply with the customary rules in this
field of law. The direct responsibility of armed groups
under international humanitarian law should be
emphasized by the Security Council. The European
Union will further continue to support efforts to
disseminate information on international humanitarian
law and human rights law to armed groups.

Women and children are disproportionately
represented among civilians affected by conflict. The
European Union would like to emphasize the
importance of the participation of women in peace
operations and during negotiations of peace
agreements.

The European Union fully supports the
recommendation that the Security Council make
provision for the regular integration in mission
mandates of media-monitoring mechanisms. The
European Union considers effective public information
in peacekeeping operations and humanitarian
operations important for their success.

The rising number of casualties among United
Nations personnel and humanitarian personnel, both
local and international, is a cause for profound concern.
Attacks against United Nations civilian and military
personnel cannot be tolerated.

In conclusion, the European Union believes that
the Secretary-General has identified a comprehensive
set of measures that, if implemented, could have a
positive impact on civilians affected by armed conflict.

