Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): I thank the Secretary-General for his presence among us and, above all, for his tireless commitment. I thank Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing. The Council met yesterday on the humanitarian situation in Syria, in particular in Idlib (see S/PV.8734). Today is our sixth meeting on Syria this month. The situation is serious. The escalation is happening. It is urgent to put an end to the offensive of the regime, supported by Russia, in Idlib. France is extremely concerned about the recent developments that took place in Idlib yesterday. The French Minister for Foreign Affairs today conveyed his condolences to his Turkish counterpart, Mr. Cavusoglu. He reaffirmed France's solidarity with Turkey following the attack carried out against Turkish forces in north-western Syria. On behalf of France, this afternoon I wish to reiterate those condolences and that solidarity. Mr. Le Drian also condemned the repeated violations committed by the Syrian regime and Russia of international humanitarian law, and the undermining of the commitments made in autumn 2018 concerning de-escalation in Idlib province. The fight against terrorist groups cannot justify the massive violations of international law that we are witnessing at Idlib. We therefore call for an immediate de-escalation, echoing the appeal of the Secretary-General. A new escalation would be in no one's interest and would further threaten international peace and security. That would exacerbate an already dire humanitarian situation, even on the scale of the Syrian conflict. Nearly a million people have been displaced since December in Idlib province. This would increase the risk of dispersal of terrorist fighters. In recent days, France has made a commitment, together with Germany, to contribute to a de-escalation of the violence. The President of the Republic and the Chancellor discussed it with President Erdogan and President Putin last week. France will spare no effort, in conjunction with its partners, to achieve de-escalation. Our priority must be to work collectively to put in place an immediate cessation of hostilities in Idlib. We call on the Syrian regime and Russia to end the military offensive in the north-west of Syria, to fully respect their obligations under international humanitarian law and to return to the ceasefire arrangements of the fall of 2018 so as to put an immediate and sustainable end to hostilities. The commitments made must be kept by everyone, especially by Russia. Efforts to achieve a ceasefire must be collective. Russia must pursue negotiations with Turkey in order to achieve a de-escalation in Idlib and allow the revival of the political process. The Astana framework has shown its limits and it cannot in any case encompass all the dimensions of the settlement of the crisis or replace a process led by the United Nations, which enjoys full international legitimacy in that respect. This is why it is essential that the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy continue to work to achieve an immediate, lasting and verified ceasefire, in accordance with the provisions of resolution 2254 (2015). They must also devote themselves to the resumption of the inter-Syrian process, which alone can lead to a settlement of the Syrian crisis, and which must now tackle the question of elections, refugees and detainees. Finally, I recall the urgent need to respond to the humanitarian crisis and to work towards a political solution. France will continue to mobilize at the humanitarian level, on a national basis and with the European Union and its Member States. Everything must be done to guarantee humanitarian access, including through cross-border assistance. I welcome the Secretary-General's initiative to deploy an emergency mission to Idlib in the days ahead. We also welcome the efforts made by Syria's neighbours to assist the Syrian refugees. Finally, the political process cannot be reduced to constitutional discussions, which today serve as a screen for the regime to pursue its strategy limited to military reconquest. The Special Envoy of the United Nations must take note of this and address head-on the most pressing political questions, starting with the de-escalation in Idlib and the conditions for the organization of the elections to be held this year and next.
