Mr. Kusljugic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Thank
you, Mr. President, for giving me the opportunity to
comment on the report of the Secretary-General
regarding the achievements of the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) during
the past six months. The Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina welcomes the report, and I would
personally like to thank Mr. Annabi for his
comprehensive update and comments.

We consider the achievements presented in the
report to be part of the overall improvements recently
recorded both in the country and in the region as a
whole. Over the past year, the general situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina has substantially improved, as
a result of both the international community's
achievements and the new political reality in the
country and the region.

Let me remind the Council that, after the general
elections of November 2000, for the first time in its
lO-year history, a multi-ethnic Government was
established in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which is
committed to working in partnership with the
international community to build a functioning,
democratic, multi-ethnic State. That fact decisively
triggered the progress which is evident from the report
before the Council today. However, we consider the
progress achieved to be only a first step in the long-
term process of necessary, fundamental reform, which
is basically aimed at bringing the country closer to the
rest of Europe. In this process, the current priorities of
the Government are institutional development;
ensuring the rule of law; improving the judicial system;
and implementing economic reforms.

We therefore see this report as a good opportunity
to emphasize once more the most important issues for
our country, not only with regard to the full
implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement, but
also with regard to the long-term process of political
and economic transition - a process related to the role
of the institutions of the United Nations system, given
their current mandates.

Restructuring the police and the judicial system is
of paramount importance for government priorities in
the area of institutional development and the
establishment of the rule of law. The contribution of
UNMIBH to that goal is substantial, and we appreciate
all the efforts made in that regard. Not only are better
and more responsible police visible nationwide on the
ground, but mutual inter-entity and regional police
cooperation is very much improved and the work of the
State Border Service is more effective. A significant
decrease in illegal border crossings and human
trafficking has been reported as well as the first results
relating to anti-criminal activities.

At the same time, there has been a visible
improvement in the implementation of annex 7 of the
Dayton Peace Agreement concerning refugee return,
and we recognize the efforts of UNMIBH and other
United Nations system agencies in that regard. We
anticipate that insistence on the presence of
professional police officers from all ethnic groups, as
well as on the presence of the so-called minority cadets
in the police academies in both entities, will further
contribute to inter-ethnic reconciliation and, finally, to
a further improvement in refugee return. The first
encouraging results have already been reported.
According to the data from the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, 66,856 so-
called minority returns have been registered in the first
10 months of 2001 - almost 40 per cent more than
during the same period in 2000. Between 1999 and
now, some 175,300 returns have been registered in
areas where returnees now represent the minority. The
substantial contribution of UNMIBH and other United
Nations agencies is obvious in this field.

However, according to the estimates of the Office
of the High Representative, a further five years will be
necessary for the full completion of the return process
and thus for a full implementation of annex 7.
Therefore, even with the progress recorded over the
past year, we are far from the final target. Moreover,
the progress of the return of refugees and internally
displaced persons has not be implemented equally in
the two entities, especially in some areas 4 the so-
called black spots - which are well known to the
representatives of international organizations. That is
discouraging. Hence, success can be achieved only if
the international community and the institutions of
Bosnia and Herzegovina focus their future activities on
those weak spots that have already been identified.

We especially welcome the help and very
constructive role of UNMIBH in implementing the
measures concerning actions to combat terrorism,
initiated by the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina after the terrorist attacks on 11 September.
For the first time, the central and entity institutions
have fully cooperated in joint anti-terrorist activities,
expanding cooperation to neighbouring countries and
their institutions.

We clearly recognize UNMIBH's activities as an
integral part of the international community's
assistance to Bosnia and Herzegovina's institutions in
their efforts to build a politically and economically
sustainable European country. In this context, we see
the reported achievements especially as establishing
conditions on the ground allowing the people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina to be free to decide to return to their
pre-war homes or to choose to live elsewhere, and as
developing a modern, independent and effective
judiciary system as well as responsible and non-
political police structures.

These are indispensable preconditions for the
successful implementation of necessary economic
reforms aimed at creating an enabling environment for
economic regeneration based on foreign direct
investments. Hence, we expect UNMIBH to make an
additional effort until the end of its mandate to
complete the work on these issues. We also emphasize
that the activities begun during the UNMBIH mandate
are part of a long-term recovery process, both in the
country and in the region. Some of these are far from
being completed. Therefore, it is of the utmost
importance that a clear and smooth transition of the
core responsibilities set out in UNMIBH's current
mandate be made to other international structures
already present in the country in order to ensure future
continuing support to Bosnia and Herzegovina's
institutions. In this respect, we fully support the
process under way to streamline the activities of the
international organizations in the country aimed at
achieving closer coordination with and more coherent
international assistance to Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
expect that this process, which is on the agenda of the
Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council,
which is meeting today and tomorrow, will also take
into consideration the necessity for a regional
approach, since many issues - above all security,
refugee return, inter-ethnic reconciliation and
economic recovery - are regional problems.

