Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): As
this is Mrs. Ogata's last briefing to the Security
Council, I would like to begin by paying tribute to her
for her leadership and commitment during the turbulent
and difficult years of the 1990s. She so ably led her
organization through the turmoil of northern Iraq, the
Balkans, Rwanda, Timor and other crises. For her
efforts she has earned our gratitude and for her
commitment and her successes she has earned our deep
respect.

In recent years, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) has been
called on as never before to take on enormous
responsibilities in responding to the needs of so many
refugees and others, including internal refugees, caught
up in conflicts. We appreciate, as always, her
thoughtful comments today on the huge challenges that
continue to confront UNHCR, the Security Council and
the United Nations as a whole.

We salute Mrs. Ogata for her courage in daring to
challenge those who have sown conflict and are
reluctant to make peace, those who continue to make it
difficult for their citizens to go home, those who abuse
the human rights of refugees or of their own people.
She has taken a tough stance and has not been afraid to
speak up on behalf of peace and reconciliation. She
leaves a high standard, an example of courage,
commitment and determination that paves the way for
the future.

Mrs. Ogata has also tackled the issue of the
internally displaced. UNHCR has defined its
willingness to step up to the plate and respond where
asked to do so, as in the Balkans, Angola and Eritrea. I
commend her for her efforts to try to redress the
inequities that the internally displaced face in the
international system.

UNHCR has indeed galvanized the international
community to respond to the humanitarian imperatives
of our time. But it is not an independent actor - it is
an organization in which all Member States of the
United Nations are stakeholders, and it is our collective
task to ensure that UNHCR fulfils its mandate
responsibilities to protect and provide durable solutions
for refugees. To do this, UNHCR must prioritize and
maximize the use of its resources. But it is the
obligation of Member States to adequately fund
UNHCR so that refugees may receive the standard of
care and protection they deserve. We cannot hold
UNHCR accountable if donors do not increase their
generosity.

Perhaps most importantly, we need to move
forward on addressing the security of both refugees and
humanitarian personnel. It is not acceptable that
humanitarian workers have become targets of
conflicting parties seeking to politicize or disrupt
humanitarian assistance. It is not acceptable that we do
not have better mechanisms to reduce their
vulnerability to attacks and intimidation, and it is not
acceptable that humanitarian aid has been directed by
warlords and corrupt Governments.

We have read the Secretary-General's report of 18
October on the security of United Nations personnel
with interest, and welcome the upcoming debate on the
recommendations. The recent loss of four UNHCR
staff members in West Timor and in Guinea reminds us
all that States are responsible for safeguarding the
physical security and property of humanitarian
workers. When any attack occurs, States must
investigate and bring to justice those responsible.

The enormous contribution of refugee-hosting
countries, the majority of which are in the developing
world, is not sufficiently recognized and appreciated.
The impact on their countries, their communities, their
homes and their environment is immeasurable. It is
time we collectively identified how we can better help
them.

A final point: the United States remains
concerned about the protection of vulnerable groups
among refugees. In particular, the physical and sexual
abuse of refugee women and children remains a
widespread problem, especially when they have been
forced to flee their homes without their husbands and
fathers. During last month's Security Council meeting
on women and peace and security, Secretary-General
Kofi Annan urged the Security Council to do
everything in its power to give women an equal voice
with men on questions of peace and security. This
includes protection as an important component in
obtaining a broader humanitarian commitment to those
who are most vulnerable in times of conflict. The
Security Council reflected this concern last week, when
it adopted its first resolution on women and peace and
security.

I would like to conclude by saying that my
Government warmly welcomes the choice of Ruud
Lubbers as the new High Commissioner. His
experience, his reputation and his commitment to
global issues make him an excellent choice to carry
forward the remarkable leadership of Mrs. Ogata.

