Mr. Arancibia Fernandez (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like
to welcome Foreign Minister Klimkin today and thank
the delegation of Ukraine for having put this item on
the Security Council's agenda. I would like to express
my thanks and appreciation to all of the speakers who
have taken the floor before me.
The Plurinational State of Bolivia reiterates its
firm commitment to the fight against terrorism and its
categorical rejection ofterrorist acts, regardless of why,
where or by whom committed, if they are deliberately
carried out against international peace and security and
in flagrant violations international law. At the same
time, Bolivia reiterates that this scourge should not
be linked to any religion, nationality, civilization or
ethnic group.

The objective of this debate is to encourage
Member States to assess their vulnerabilities and
interdependence, the impact of terrorist attacks on
critical infrastructure and their ripple effects. We are
also invited to consider possible preventive measures in
the development of national policies and strategies. My
delegation participated in negotiations on resolution
2341 (2017), on the protection of critical infrastructure
against terrorist attacks, which was adopted today, and
wishes to highlight several aspects of the resolution.

We recall the Security Council's resolutions in
response to the serious global threat of terrorism,
beginning with resolution 1373 (2001), reaffirming the
Council's respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity
and political independence of all States pursuant to the
Charter of the United Nations. We stress the importance
of implementing the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy, established by General Assembly
resolution 60/288 of 8 September 2006, wherein we
reiterated the need to adopt measures to prevent and
combat terrorism, and in particular pillar II of the
Strategy, which includes the need to strengthen efforts
to improve the security and protection of vulnerable
targets such as public infrastructure and spaces.

We also recognize that every State identifies that
which constitutes its own critical infrastructure and
how to protect it effectively against terrorist attacks. We
further believe that it is principally the responsibility of
Member States to respond to terrorist attacks on what
they consider to be their critical infrastructure, be it
private or public, and always under national legislation.
We support the efforts of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), with the support of its Executive
Directorate, in pursuit of their relevant work in the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), including
support for Member States and the protection of critical
infrastructure against terrorist attacks with a view to
identifying good practices, gaps and vulnerabilities
in that area. In that regard, we encourage the CTC
to continue to work, with the support of the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force, to facilitate the
provision of technical assistance and capacity-building
and to raise awareness of the need to protect critical
infrastructure against terrorist attacks, in particular by
strengthening dialogue with competent regional and
subregional organizations that work closely with one
another, especially through the exchange of information.

The legal architecture relating to terrorism has
grown with the proliferation of terrorist incidents
throughout the world. It is important to acknowledge
the efforts of Government and peoples to counter
this scourge.

Lastly, we believe that it is important for States
to assume their responsibilities in the fight against
terrorism, including the protection of critical
infrastructure, through full compliance with the
provisions of international instruments and the relevant
resolutions of this multilateral forum, as well as the
effective implementation of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy.

