Ms. Goolab (South Africa): Let me begin by
thanking Ms. Ursula Mueller for her informative
briefing on the humanitarian situation in Syria and
Ms. Nujeen Mustapha for telling us the story of her
personal journey and for providing us with an insight
into the reality those with disabilities are facing in
the country. I would also like to take this opportunity
to express our gratitude to the United Nations and its
various implementing agencies that provide essential,
life-saving humanitarian assistance to the thousands of
people who require it.

Nine years into the conflict in Syria, the
humanitarian situation in the country remains dire.
The escalation of violence in some parts of Syria is of
serious concern, particularly where such violence has
resulted in the injury or death of innocent civilians.
We are particularly concerned at the large numbers of
civilians that were reportedly killed during the recent
reporting period in Idlib and eastern Deir ez-Zor. In
addition to the increased violence, severe weather
conditions, such as flooding and extreme cold, have
added to the burden of suffering of the Syrian people.
In this regard, we call on all parties to uphold their
commitments and obligations under international law.

My delegation has noted reports of people leaving
Rukban to return to their homes or to their destinations
of choice. This is a welcome development. However, it
must be emphasized that all parties must ensure that
the necessary conditions for their return are met and
that these returns must be voluntary, safe, dignified
and well informed. Humanitarian aid to Rukban is still
necessary while people remain at the camp. While a
long-term solution needs to be found, humanitarian
aid, including medical assistance, is still necessary. We
therefore call for the necessary access for the provision
of the essential humanitarian assistance to Rukban,
particularly with Ramadan fast approaching.

Additionally, South Africa reiterates its previous
call for the full implementation of resolution 2449
(2018), which renews the authorization for cross-border
and cross-line humanitarian access to Syria, allowing
for the delivery of aid to the places that most need it.

Millions of children remain at risk of
undernourishment, dehydration, infectious diseases
and injury. In this regard, South Africa is deeply
concerned at the attacks that have struck, in particular,
health-care facilities and schools. In order to ensure a
peaceful future for the people of Syria, the international
community must support every effort towards a Syrian-
led and Syrian-owned settlement.

