Mr. Fulci (Italy): Italy, as a sponsor, will vote in
favour of the draft resolution, which concludes a long
process that began in 1991 with resolution 687 (1991),
followed in the same year by resolution 715 (1991), which
was implemented by the Iraqis in November 1993.

First of all, I wish to thank the Chairman of the
sanctions Committee, Ambassador Tono Eitel of
Germany, for his letter of 7 December 1995 and for
preparing the draft resolution in collaboration with the
Special Commission for Iraq (UNSCOM) and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).

When Iraq has complied with the pertinent
resolutions and has reinserted itself into the international
trading system, the export/import mechanism will also
serve Iraq's best interests by encouraging other States and
companies to trade with it. After the adoption of the draft
resolution, Iraq should no longer be able to produce
weapons of mass destruction or continue programmes
begun in the past. In fact, these procedures for monitoring
future sales or supplies to Iraq by other countries
supplement the monitoring and verification system for
dual-use equipment that already exists in Iraq. These
procedures, as a whole, will constitute a highly
sophisticated system whose application, with the active
cooperation of the Government concerned, represents an
unprecedented technological innovation.

May I also take this opportunity to congratulate
UNSCOM. and the IAEA on the excellent work they are
doing in Iraq, often in difficult conditions, in favour of
peace and international security. The Italian Government
fully appreciates and supports their meritorious efforts.

The contents of the draft resolution that we are about
to adopt are primarily technical, but the cooperation that
Iraq can offer towards its proper implementation will have
a positive impact on its image in international public
opinion.

Italy joins all the members of the Council in
appealing to the Government of Iraq to cooperate fully in
implementing the draft resolution once it is adopted and
to proceed rapidly in fulfilling its other obligations,
pursuant to the pertinent resolutions of the Security
Council.

