Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish): It is a pleasure for me to welcome you,
Mr. President, a brother representative of the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, a country that is a friend of
Nicaragua, and to see you leading this debate. Without
a doubt, your experience and knowledge will
contribute to the success of this debate. I would also
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for the
report he gave us this morning.

As stated by Dr. Kevin Cahill, Chief Adviser for
Humanitarian Affairs of the President of the General
Assembly and his special envoy on the situation in
Gaza,

"Seeing Gaza in February 2009, shortly after the
Israeli invasion, reminds me of engravings of
Dante's Inferno. The level of destruction recalled
images from Dresden or Hiroshima at the end of
the Second World War. There were areas in the
northern Gaza Strip in which not a single
structure was left standing."

The primary responsibility for resolving the
Palestinian problem lies with the United Nations, and
specifically with the Security Council, which has
simply not acted in conformity with its mandate under
the Charter of the United Nations. Why was the
Security Council unable to act and call for a ceasefire
in the course of 22 days of aggression, knowing that
this was not a mere skirmish but rather a total massacre
against the Palestinian people? Is there any other
example in today's world of an invading occupying
country being able to settle more than half a million
colonists on the territory of the occupied country
without being sanctioned even once by society, as
represented in the United Nations? We want to
condemn and to emphasize the illegality of these
actions, which are tantamount to a de facto annexation
that undermines the integrity, contiguity, viability and
unity of the Palestinian territory, thereby jeopardizing
the very establishment of a State.

What is worse, however, is that the situation
continues to be the same as when Dr. Cahill witnessed
it. Rebuilding has not yet begun, because Israel will
not allow the import of steel, cement or glass, among
other building materials. The people of Gaza have
lived under hostile occupation for more than four
decades. In recent years, there has been a continuous
reduction in all imports and exports, which has served
to slowly strangle the economy. That has led to one of
the highest rates of unemployment and among the
lowest levels of nutrition in the developing world.
Even the import of lentils, pasta and tomato juice has
been restricted, based on the incomprehensible logic
that such items could pose a threat to the security of
Israel.

Military controls have been imposed through
grinding force and a level of disregard that clearly
illustrates the intention to crush the human dignity of
the proud and heroic Palestinian people. The daily
humiliation at border crossings and in the course of

constant incursions by Israeli soldiers, as well as the
herding together of people, reveal a consistent and
generalized pattern on the part of the occupation. The
Council must demand that all crossing points be
opened and that people and goods be allowed free
access. In particular, the Council must demand
humanitarian access to the Palestinian population,
which has yet to recover at all from the latest
aggression.

In his report to the Human Rights Council,
Mr. Richard Falk, United Nations Special Rapporteur
on the situation of human rights in the occupied
Palestinian territories, indicated that the number of
dead Palestinian civilians in the Gaza Strip was six
times as high as the number of heroic combatants
killed. That illustrates that no distinction was made
between civilian and military targets. He also
underscored the fact that Israel also used all sorts of
weapons against densely populated areas, including
aeroplanes, heavy weaponry and even prohibited
weapons. The forced confinement of Gaza's civilian
population to the zone of conflict during the operation
denied them the option of finding sanctuary. Such a
policy must be viewed as a new type of crime against
humanity. The Rapporteur also stated that people in
Gaza holding foreign passports were allowed to leave
the territory, while Palestinians - including the sick,
disabled, orphaned, elderly and injured - were denied
that option. The Special Rapporteur requested an
in-depth investigation into the abuses committed,
emphasizing the need to draw on the relevant
experiences and rulings of the principal international
courts.

We wish to take this opportunity to request that
the Secretary-General distribute the report containing
the conclusions and recommendations of the Board of
Inquiry be dispatched to Gaza. We have no doubt that
that new report will further inform the international
community about the Israeli aggression against the
Palestinian people and that its recommendations will
be of great importance for future action by the Security
Council and the General Assembly. We also wish to
emphasize the importance of the immediate dispatch of
the Human Rights Council fact-finding mission.

My Government supports the adoption of the
measures necessary to ensure that Israel withdraws
totally and unconditionally from the occupied
territories, that those responsible for Israel's war
crimes and crimes against humanity against the
Palestinian people - including genocide and ethnic
cleansing - are prosecuted, that the peace process is
intensified and that the Palestinian people can exercise
their inalienable right to self-determination on the basis
of the borders prior to 4 June 1967, with East
Jerusalem as their capital.

My Government supports negotiations to achieve
reconciliation among all Palestinian forces and to form
a government of unity and reconciliation whose
representatives can sit down, united and strong, at the
negotiating table with the occupying Power and its
allies. The entire Non-Aligned Movement will stand
with them.

Nicaragua expresses its solidarity with the
Government and the people of Lebanon and calls on
Israel to end the occupation of northern Ghajar and the
adjacent area north of the Blue Line and to avoid any
violation of the sovereignty and independence of
Lebanese territory. We also demand a swift resolution
of the issue of the Shaba'a farms with full respect for
the territorial integrity of Lebanon, in accordance with
resolution 1701 (2006). In addition, we join with others
in demanding, as a matter of humanitarian concern,
that Israel provide maps of the mines that it planted
during its attacks on Lebanon. Thus, we could prevent
many deaths.

My Government also expresses its solidarity with
the people and the Government of Syria and condemns
Israel's illegal occupation of the Golan Heights. It
should be recalled that any change intended to alter the
physical, legal, demographic or institutional character
of the Golan Heights or any measure to impose Israeli
jurisdiction and administration there is contrary to
international law and null and void.

Accordingly, Nicaragua will continue to support
all measures, based on the relevant United Nations
resolutions, that will help us to achieve a just and
lasting peace in the Middle East and, in particular, to
ultimately establish a free, sovereign and independent
State of Palestine.

