Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): In
supporting resolution 2003 (2011), extending the
mandate of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) for 12 months, the
United Kingdom is conscious that Darfur is entering a
critical period in which its people need the support of
both the United Nations and the African Union more
than ever.

We therefore welcome the essential work that
UNAMID is doing to protect civilians and to provide
security for humanitarian access in Darfur. Given the
deterioration in the security situation and its impact on
civilians, we encourage the Mission to maintain and
enhance its robust approach to the delivery of these
core tasks.

We also recognize the vital importance of
working towards a comprehensive peace for Darfur.
We welcome the signature on 14 July by the
Government of the Sudan and the Liberation and
Justice Movement of the agreement on the adoption of
the Doha document for peace in Darfur. We urge the
Government of the Sudan and all the armed movements
to engage immediately and without preconditions to
make every effort to reach a permanent ceasefire and a
comprehensive peace settlement on the basis of the
Doha document.

Further, we recognize the potential
complementary role of a Darfur-based political process
in engaging all Darfur stakeholders in constructive and
open dialogue. However, we note that the elements of
the necessary enabling environment for such a Darfur
process, as identified by the United Nations Security
Council and the African Union Peace and Security
Council in their joint communique of 21 May, are not
yet in place. We note that the Secretary-General made
clear in his report (S/2011/422) that this enabling
environment was paramount.

As resolution 2003 (2011) makes clear, the
Secretary-General and the Security Council will
monitor developments very closely so that the proper
assessments can be made and so that the Security
Council can take the necessary decisions regarding the
Darfur political process and UNAMID's participation
in it.
We thank Joint Special Representative Ibrahim

Gambari and the personnel of UNAMID for their work
in support of peace and security in Darfur.
6
