Mr. Wali (Nigeria): First of all, I want to thank
you, Sir, and members of the Security Council for
giving me the opportunity to address the Council on
peace consolidation in West Africa. This is an issue
that is of critical importance, not only to my country
and the subregion, but also to the entire African
continent.
I also wish to congratulate Ghana, a close and
brotherly country from our subregion, for presiding
over the affairs of the Council during the month of
August, and on a day when the issue of peace
consolidation in West Africa is being discussed. I feel
particularly happy to observe that you, Honourable
Minister, are personally chairing this meeting and wish
you a pleasant visit in New York.

I seize this opportunity, too, to express Nigeria's
gratitude to the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, for
his continuing interest and tireless efforts towards the
resolution of conflicts and consolidation of peace in
our subregion.

Until recently, West Africa had the unenviable
record of being an unstable subregion in Africa. It was
threatened by a series of conflicts, the longest being
the conflict in Liberia. I am happy to note that the
record is gradually being reversed with the recent
election of democratic Governments in Sierra Leone,
Liberia and Guinea Bissau. Those gains were possible
through the efforts of our leaders, who had resolved
that the subregion could no longer continue to be the
theatre of unending fratricidal wars. In that connection,
the role of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) has been exemplary and highly
commendable. In addition, the understanding and
cooperation of the leaders of the African Union and of
this body contributed in no small measure to the
growing peace in our subregion.

I must also point out that the handing over of
former President Charles Taylor to the Special Court in
Sierra Leone greatly contributed to the easing of
tension and opened a new chapter for the consolidation
of peace and security in our subregion. Mr. Taylor's
arrest and subsequent transfer to the International
Criminal Court in The Hague served as a strong
message to both present and future actors on the West
African scene that it is no longer business as usual. It
further encouraged our partners that hope is not lost for
transforming the subregion into a region of peace,
progress and economic prosperity.

In spite of those gains, however, the challenges of
peace consolidation in our subregion are enormous.
The situation in Cote d'Ivoire remains of serious
concern to us. The possible spillover effects of the
Ivorian conflict cannot be overstated. Furthermore,
peace in Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea-Bissau
remains fragile. The Governments of those countries
have to contend daily with the threat of relapsing into
crisis because of the daunting challenges they have to
contend with.

We cannot, therefore, consolidate peace in West
Africa without addressing some urgent issues. First, the
issue of the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons deserves greater and urgent attention. The
unrestrained access to those weapons by individuals
and groups is, without doubt, a major threat to peace.
Those weapons have proved to be a great disincentive
to non-State actors to follow the path of peace through
negotiations. On our own, we are constrained as
members of ECOWAS and the African Union from
effectively countering the consequences of the
proliferation of those weapons.

Secondly, the opportunities for economic growth
and development need to be enhanced. Like most
developing countries, the countries of our subregion
are saddled not only with the visible consequences of
conflicts, human rights abuses and poor governance,
but also with the state of our economies. That has
worsened the level of poverty and unemployment
among our youth. The spectre of youth unemployment
and its potential negative impact on our social fabric,
peace, stability and security are indicative of the scope
of the challenges facing the subregion.

Finally, the question of capacity-building and
institutional support requires no less urgent attention.
The countries of our region, particularly those
emerging from conflict, require urgent support to build
and strengthen their institutions of governance,
dispensation of justice, protection of human rights, and
promotion of health and educational services. It is in
that regard that we consider the establishment of the
Peacebuilding Commission and its ongoing work as a
genuine contribution to peace consolidation in our
subregion and look forward to the early translation of
the Commission's work into concrete action in Sierra
Leone.

It is therefore our hope that this debate will
strengthen the resolve of the international community,
including that of this body, to take concrete steps
towards further assisting the countries of our subregion
and removing the obstacles to a durable and
sustainable peace in West Africa.

