Mr. Quarrey (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland): I join others in thanking Special
Representative of Secretary-General Victor Angelo for
his briefing today. We are very grateful to him and all
the contributors to the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT) for
its work to date.

MINURCAT is clearly starting to have an effect
on the ground, but the situation in eastern Chad
remains of serious concern. I will not repeat the point
that others have made, but it is clear that there has been
a very difficult security situation there, especially since
May.

I would like to focus on three points. First of all,
peace in Chad remains inextricably linked to peace in
Darfur. We need more cooperation between N'Djamena
and Khartoum and less trading of accusations. Chadian
aerial bombing of Darfur is of deep concern to us. We
very much agree with the Secretary-General on the
importance of a political process between Chad and the
Sudan in delivering a lasting solution, and reiterate his
call for a meeting of the Dakar Contact Group. That
should be a very high priority now.

Secondly, we welcome development by the
United Nations of a strategic workplan and the
benchmarks therein. These provide a clearer picture of
the progress of the Mission towards fulfilling its
mandate and of the effect of the wider context on the
progress being made by MINURCAT.

But one area the Secretary-General's report
(S/2009/3 59) does not tackle is the issue of recruitment
to rebel movements from refugee and internally
displaced persons camps. It would be interesting to
hear the views of MINURCAT and Mr. Angelo, either
today or in a later report, as to the scale of that problem
and, indeed, how it might be addressed.

Thirdly, we welcome the full deployment of the
Detachement integre de securite (DIS) and the
evidence of its improving effectiveness. DIS has
provided us, the Secretary-General's report notes, with
exceptional humanitarian escorts as MINURCAT has
developed its operational capacity. Going forward,
however, it will be important that DIS ensure that its
escort services are not delivered to the detriment of its
work within the refugee camps and thus do not
undermine the civil status of those camps. So it will be
important that MINURCAT take responsibility for
those escort duties as soon as possible.

