Mr. Amin (Bangladesh): It is a distinct honour
and a privilege for us to have you preside over the
Council meeting this morning. We give you our warm
congratulations on the successful conclusion of the
Colombian presidency of the Security Council, and we
pay special tribute to Ambassador Valdivieso and his
admirable team.

I am making this statement on behalf of
Ambassador Chowdhury, who is unable to participate
in this meeting.

This month's programme demonstrated much
diligence. Under your leadership, we have addressed
all issues regarding Security Council action or review
in August. It is good that we have this wrap-up session
today. It is good that we are holding this meeting in
public, so that the United Nations membership and the
public know how the Council members assess their
own work over the month, consider follow-up and
reflect on the future course of action.

Mr. President, you have invited us to focus on
two themes: first, our experience in relation to the
political relevance of the work of the Council, and
secondly, the continuity of and follow-up to our work. I
will remain within this framework in our intervention.

First, I will comment on our experience in
relation to the political relevance of the work of the
Council. Bangladesh has always stressed the need to
make the Council more proactive. This is essential to
assert Council's primary responsibility in the
maintenance of international peace and security. In this
context, I would like to say that the Council debate on
small arms, which was followed by the presidential
statement issued this morning, was the right initiative.

In our last wrap-up meeting, on 29 June, we
underlined that the Council should reflect on how to
remain seized of the issues before it in a proactive
manner, as a conscious policy decision, and not only as
routine calendar events determined by the publication
of a report, a briefing by the Secretariat or the renewal
of a peacekeeping mandate.

It was in this spirit that we took up the situation
in Burundi early in the month of June, although the
Secretariat was not ready to provide everything, in
order to respond to the situation as reported back to us
by the Council mission to the Great Lakes region. We
believe that the consideration of issues should be
determined by the exigencies of the situation on the
ground.

We do not intend to go through the substantive
content of this month's programme, but I want to
mention one more thing: the adoption yesterday of
resolution 1366 (2001) was a landmark event. This is
the first time that the Council has committed itself in a
resolution to specific preventive actions. The process
that was initiated in November 1999 under the
presidency of Ambassador Danilo Turk of Slovenia,
was followed up- and happily so- in July 2000
under the Jamaican presidency. A concrete result was
achieved on the basis of the report by the Secretary-
General (S/2001/574), a report on which Bangladesh
was privileged to initiate action in June. We must pay
attention to the implementation of resolution 1366
(2001). Several delegations, including those of
Singapore, Jamaica and Ukraine, spoke eloquently on
the significance of the resolution.

You also asked us to comment, Sir, on the
usefulness of our participation in such intellectual
forums as the Princeton Club meeting. We found the
seminar to be immensely instructive. I believe we
should have similar brainstorming - and, if I may say,
soul-searching- sessions on some of the other
complex issues before the Council, on which the
Council has difficulty taking action. Encounters
between academia and the bureaucratic world will
certainly contribute to a better understanding of issues
and to better decision-making by the Security Council.

The second point for our discussion concerns
continuity and follow-up of the Council's work. The
usefulness of the monthly wrap-up meeting lies largely
in ensuring continuity and in reflecting on the follow-
up of our discussions and decisions. We know that
Council decisions are not self-implementable. The
Secretariat is in charge of overseeing the
implementation and execution of those decisions, but
there are matters that have to be followed up by the
Council itself - matters to be pursued by the Council
as a body collectively and by individual Council
members.

At the last wrap-up meeting, we stressed two
points in that regard. The Council should
systematically follow up its decisions and see that
necessary support is secured to implement those
decisions. The Council should also ensure that the
Secretary-General is given the human, material and
financial resources to implement its decisions.

Continuity is particularly important for the
initiatives taken by the elected members. We have
mentioned the case of conflict prevention, where the
hand-off from an outgoing to an incoming member has
worked well. Our discussion yesterday in the informal
consultations, the points being raised here today, the
ideas floated in other discussions, such as the Council
retreat and the "lS-plus-lS" luncheon, should not be
left in the air - or in the summary of discussions that
is circulated.

There are a number of issues already on the
table - the report of the Security Council to the
General Assembly, the reports of the Secretary-General
to the Security Council, the Council's relations with the
press and the media and so on. All these issues need to
be studied and transformed into operational decisions.

We believe, as we stated earlier, that the
Council's informal working group on documentation
and other procedural questions was established with
that imperative in view. We have therefore been
recommending that the working group should meet
regularly to review the implementation of relevant
decisions and to follow up the ideas discussed, and also
to explore improvement of the working methods and
documentation of the Council.

The Council should be responsive to the concerns
of the United Nations membership at large on its
working methods. One way would be to have its
working group look into the documents of the General
Assembly's Open-ended Working Group on the
Question of Equitable Representation on and Increase
in the Membership of the Security Council and Other
Matters related to the Security Council and report to
the Council, so that when Council representatives
participate in future meetings of the Open-ended
Working Group they can provide specific briefings. We
are happy to have heard support expressed for that
proposal at today's meeting.

Finally, I wish to express our gratitude for the
appreciation expressed by several delegations for the
efforts made by the delegation of Bangladesh, and, in
particular, by Ambassador Chowdhury, in various
areas, especially, as Chairman of the working group on
sanctions.

