Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): Equatorial Guinea welcomes the convening
of this meeting and would like to take this opportunity
to congratulate Ambassador Nebenzia and his entire
team on the success of the Russian presidency of the
Security Council during the month of September. I
would also like to thank Special Envoy Pedersen for
the pertinent information he has provided us and for his
admirable commitment to lasting peace in Syria.

Today's meeting should be considered historic
following the long-awaited announcement of the
establishment of the Constitutional Committee. After
eight years of conflict and despite numerous obstacles
and several rounds of difficult consultations and
negotiations among all the key actors in the Syrian
political process, the establishment of the Constitutional
Committee is undoubtedly good news that restores hope
to all the Syrian people. The Government of Equatorial
Guinea welcomes the fact that a credible, impartial and
inclusive Constitutional Committee has been set up,
which should finally open up the way for an end to the
Syrian crisis in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015)
and in line with the statement of the small group on
Syria. We must be aware that this positive step requires
serious dedication and a firm commitment to achieving
positive and tangible results. We very much look
forward to the first meeting of the Committee, to be
held in Geneva as soon as possible, so that the parties
can begin to discuss the substance of the Committee's
mandate as well as all other dimensions of the Syrian
political process.

In this new scenario, brought about with the
diplomatic support of the Astana guarantors, namely,
Russia, Turkey and Iran, we must be aware that the
Committee's establishment and action must go hand
in hand with tangible confidence-building measures
that facilitate progress in the political process. We
must also ensure the approval of the Committee's rules
of procedure so as to guarantee that its members act
independently and are not subject to external pressure.

At the same time, we agree that it is unacceptable
to partition Syria into zones of influences, which
would only heighten tensions, particularly in Idlib. The
presence of five different armies in Syria is cause for
concern to the Government of Equatorial Guinea, since,
as the Special Envoy just underscored, it not only poses
an obvious threat to the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Syria, but also heightens the risk
of the conflict escalating dangerously and spilling over
into the region and beyond.

I wish to reiterate my Government's full support to
the Special Envoy in pursuing the successful conclusion
of the process, which inevitably requires a concerted
diplomatic solution to the Syrian and not undue use of
force. There is no military solution to the war or alternative
to a political solution. It is therefore imperative that we
continue to make progress towards a political solution in
accordance with resolution 2254 (2015).

I should like to break with protocol for a moment.
In Spanish we say that "gratitude is the sign of noble
souls". I cannot conclude my statement without
first expressing my gratitude to the interpreters and
translators for their work, as today is International
Translation Day. Without them, I believe that our work
would be much more difficult.

