Mrs. Juul (Norway): Norway shares the views
expressed in the statement to be made on behalf of the
European Union (EU) and others. I would like to take
this opportunity to draw the attention of the Council to
one of the important issues referred to in that statement
concerning the Security Council's role in humanitarian
crises, namely humanitarian space in integrated missions.

In his report to the Economic and Social Council
last year, the Secretary-General referred to the
shrinking space of humanitarian action and pointed out
the need to review and establish clearer guidance on
civil-military cooperation and coordination. Since that
has a particular bearing on United Nations integrated
missions, Norway decided to co-finance a study by
independent experts, which was followed by a well-
attended conference on integrated missions that took
place in Oslo at the end of May. We have great
expectations that the United Nations will benefit from
the existing momentum and develop practical solutions
to the opportunities and dilemmas that integrated
missions present. The Security Council should be
active in this respect.

On the humanitarian side, there is still some
reluctance with regard to integrated missions because
of humanitarian space concerns and a feeling that
integration has too often been synonymous with
subordination. This perception is particularly strong in
non-United Nations humanitarian organizations, but it
is present in United Nations humanitarian bodies as
well. The role of the humanitarian coordination
structures in relation to the mission is a major issue.
While strong integration may increase cohesion within
the United Nations, it risks undermining the United
Nations position on wider humanitarian coordination,
as has been the case in Liberia. There seems to be
growing awareness that the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs should be located outside the
mission structure in situations of high tension or active
conflict.

One should not aim for a blueprint model for all
missions. The concept of integration gives a sense of
direction, but no clear organizational solutions. As
each field operation must meet different challenges,
mission mandates, planning and design must also be
flexible. As the integrated missions study found, form
should follow function. Key factors for success are
continuity and complementarity between different parts
of a United Nations operation and relevant external
actors. This must be built in from the early stages of
planning and be reflected in the mandates of the
missions. In particular, transition and development
issues should also be included from the very beginning
of the planning process.

Thus, the planning processes of an integrated
mission should be as inclusive as possible from the
start, and the field level should be involved. The needs
and expectations of the local population must be taken
into account in all phases. Moreover, coherent planning
requires coherent financing. It is crucial that funding
be made available for all mission components at the
same time. From our point of view, it is logical that all
activities included in the mission's mandate should be
financed by assessed contributions. The urgent need for
better financing of humanitarian action is evident.

In closing, I would like to add my voice to those,
like the EU, that have welcomed the introduction of
regular briefings to the Security Council by the
Emergency Relief Coordinator. The humanitarian
dimension is essential if the Council is to ensure a
coherent and effective United Nations crisis response
that takes fully into account the impact of its action or
inaction on individual human beings in conflict areas.
Humanitarian issues must therefore continue to be an
integral part of the Security Council's agenda.

