Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Since
the 1990s, the world has witnessed many geostrategic
transformations that have fuelled conflicts throughout
Europe. Despite the enormous efforts undertaken, the
desired progress has not been achieved in reaching
lasting solutions to the conflicts with regard to Nagorno
Karabakh, Azkhazia, South Ossetia and Transnistria,
as well as to the situations in Ukraine, the Balkans and
Cyprus.

It is important to note that the current situation and
the relative calm engulfing several of those conflicts
do not indicate in any way that the regional parties
concerned have reached sustainable solutions, given
the continued polarization and failure to address the
root causes of tension between the warring parties.
That could lead to further fuelling of the situation in
the future. In that vein, we commend the efforts by
the OSCE and other existing mechanisms to bring
stability to a number of hotspots in Europe through
preventive diplomacy, mediation, good offices and
peacebuilding measures.

Egypt calls for the redoubling of efforts and
urges all parties to shoulder their responsibilities and
demonstrate the necessary political will to settle those
conflicts peacefully. We also see the need for full
complementarity between the roles of the OSCE and
the United Nations. We appreciate the contributions of
the Organization in consolidating international efforts
to reach a political solution in Ukraine in accordance
with the Minsk agreements, which are seen as the
ideal framework to achieve a durable and sustainable
settlement of the ongoing conflict. We call for the
full implementation of resolution 2202 (2015), which
calls upon all parties to fully implement the Minsk
agreements, in particular the commitment to the
ceasefire and the withdrawal of heavy weapons, as well
as undertaking the necessary constitutional reforms
and organizing local elections the Donbas region. The
agreements also call for addressing the humanitarian
repercussions of the conflict in coordination with all
parties concerned, without exception.

In the same vein, we call for the implementation
of the arrangements of the Minsk Group to settle
the Nagorno Karabakh conflict - for its peaceful
settlement, dialogue and avoiding the interference
in the internal affairs of the country. Such solutions
should be based on the norms of international law and
the Charter of the United Nations.

With regard to the issue of Cyprus, we call for a
durable solution to that situation in line with the United
Nations Charter and the relevant Security Council
resolutions. It is vital that we move beyond the current
security arrangements, which are obsolete and fail to
reflect the current political reality.

In conclusion, I would like to note that Egypt
nutures friendly and cooperative relations with all
European States. Given those friendly relations that tie
the Egyptian people to the peoples of the region, we
reaffirm the need to develop the approach adopted to
address conflicts in Europe to move from their mere
management and satisfaction with the avoidance of an
all-out, violent conflict to achieving sustainable and
durable peace. Egypt therefore calls for more concerted
regional and international efforts. We are confident that
the broad spectrum of cooperation and complementarity
among the European countries will enable them to
overcome those conflicts through reliance on logic and
a sense of urgency.

