Mr. Shin Boonam (Republic of Korea): I thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this meeting today
and for giving my delegation the opportunity to
participate in the debate. I would also like to express
my appreciation to all members of the Security Council
for their efforts in seeking constructive ideas to combat

piracy.

The Republic of Korea is deeply concerned about
piracy threatening maritime security, given the fact that
it is heavily dependent upon international sea lanes of
communication as an important route for trade. As one
of the world's largest flag States, the Republic of
Korea has been one of the most ardent members of the
international coalition in the fight against Somali
pirates. We recognize that it is impossible to combat
piracy without well-orchestrated joint efforts among
interested States.

However, the situation is worsening. The number
of acts of piracy and armed robbery at sea off the coast
of Somalia has risen sharply for the past couple of
years. In addition, Somali pirates using mother ships
have been expanding their range of attack. In fact, in
the past five years, seven Korean ships have been
hijacked by pirates off the coast of Somalia. Even now,
five innocent Korean seamen are being held hostage,
after their oil tanker was hijacked last April.

My delegation would like to take this opportunity
to express our appreciation to the Secretary-General
and his staff for the comprehensive and informative
report dated 26 July 2010 (S/2010/394), which was
requested by the Security Council in resolution 1918
(2010).

My delegation is of the view that capacity-
building for Somalia's judicial system, from mid- and
long-term perspectives, is critical to prosecute and
imprison persons responsible for acts of piracy and
armed robbery at sea off the coast of Somalia, given
the fact that difficulties mainly come from the
instability and the lack of governance in Somalia. The
international community needs to come up with the
best ways to combat piracy by carefully reviewing the
seven options identified in the report of the Secretary-
General. In that regard, continued discussions in the
Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia
should also be noted.

Various and concerted efforts by the international
community are required to combat Somali piracy,
which is by its nature a transnational issue. My
delegation highly commends the international
community's tireless efforts in combating piracy and
thereby ensuring the safety of sea lanes of
communication. The Republic of Korea has actively
joined in the international coordinated efforts to
combat Somali piracy. The Republic of Korea had the
honour of taking over command of Combined Task
Force 151 last April. It is presently coordinating the
Force's counter-piracy operations to deter and disrupt
piracy in the Gulf of Aden onboard Kang Gam Chan,
the 4,500 ton class Korean destroyer of the Cheonghae
unit, which was deployed in March 2009.

With regard to capacity-building in Somalia and
its neighbouring countries, the Republic of Korea has
financially supported both Somalia and those countries,
especially through the International Maritime
Organization (IMO) and other United Nations
programmes. We will continue to make a contribution
to the IMO Djibouti Code Trust Fund this year. In
November, the Republic of Korea will chair the
seventh plenary meeting of the Contact Group on
Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, at which we hope
many interested States will participate to strengthen
international cooperation in combating piracy.

Although piracy is a very complicated and
multifaceted issue, we believe that we can together
address it by rallying the firm and resolute
commitment of the international community.

