Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We thank the Peruvian
presidency for taking the initiative to organize today's
first open debate on the follow-up to the implementation
of resolution 2250 (2015). We thank the briefers for
their respective remarks. I would also like to commend
Mr. Simpson on the independent progress study on
youth and peace and security (see S/2018/86) and note
with appreciation the extensive consultations he has
undertaken in the process leading to the preparation of
the study.

It should indeed be a matter of great concern
to note from the study that in 2016 an estimated
408 million young people between the ages of 15
and 29 resided in areas affected by armed conflict or
organized violence, meaning that at least one in four is
affected by it. With regard to the protection dimension,
we continue to note with great concern the precarious
situation in which young people find themselves in
conflict and post-conflict situations in different parts
of the world. They are at a heightened risk of violence,
threats to their physical safety or exposure to various
human rights violations. As they are part of the civilian
population, ensuring their protection from the impact
of conflicts, consistent with international humanitarian
law, is critical. In our view, such protection should also
extend to young people who have participated in an
armed conflict.

As the study points out, it is also worrying to see
that young people are excluded from various policy
frameworks as agents for change, particularly with
regard to the prevention of conflict and post-conflict
situations, besides the fact that the engagement
and integration of their concerns into development
efforts can be limited. In our view, the broader
findings of the independent progress study, as well
as its recommendations, could serve as the basis
for a comprehensive response in the context of the
three pillars of the United Nations - peace and
security, human rights and development at national,
regional and international levels. In that regard,
we should envisage comprehensive implementation
of the recommendations primarily at the national
level, including through enhanced and meaningful
engagement with young people.
High levels of youth unemployment and poverty
continue to be among the root causes of many conflicts
and outbreaks of violence, and are increasingly
providing opportunities for extremist groups to expand
their activities. Progress in our national development
efforts, particularly by creating jobs and decent work
opportunities for young people, are therefore vital
to promoting peace, preventing crises arising from
conflicts as well as lapses and relapses into conflict,
enabling recovery and building resilience. In that regard,
ensuring sustainable development for all at the national
level in the context of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development should be the primary focus of our efforts
to prevent conflict and achieve sustaining peace. For
that, it is critical to provide access to education, basic
services and decent work opportunities for young
people. That means recognizing that young people can
be active agents for sustainable development, peace and
security. It also means ensuring that they are consulted
and encouraged to participate actively in planning,
implementing and following up various measures at
the national level. It is our considered opinion that such
a policy shift would enable us to ensure that young
people are less likely to be drawn into violent extremist
or other armed groups. And beyond the immediate
essential humanitarian responses in post-conflict
situations, finding durable solutions for young people
who have been affected by armed conflict is crucial.

In that regard, in addition to measures that the
study identifies in the area of disengagement from
violent groups and reintegration, it is critical to provide
support for sustainably integrating young people into
their societies, including by ensuring access to services
and to opportunities to generate income and earn a
livelihood. The problem of the large numbers of young
people who are now refugees in various parts of the
world without prospects for the future, and the search
for solutions to that problem, should also form part of
the discussion. Work in this area at the national level
could be complemented by efforts at the regional and
international levels as well. In that regard, the role of
regional organizations such as the African Union will
be critical. Internationally, the United Nations and
its various agencies and programmes, as well as the
Security Council, can be instrumental in advancing the
youth, peace and security agenda within their mandate
and ensuring follow-up to resolution 2250 (2015). For
instance, the Council could follow up, as appropriate,
on relevant recommendations in the independent
progress study in the context of existing thematic issues
or country-specific situations on its agenda, including
in the context of existing reporting frameworks,
and taking into account the particular concerns of
youth populations - including those who have been
forcibly displaced - that conflict situations have left
particularly vulnerable.

I would like to conclude by affirming our
commitment to advancing the youth and peace and
security agenda within the existing frameworks,
the Council and the broader United Nations system,
including by negotiating a possible Council decision
following the independent progress report in the next
few weeks.

