Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): I think I am
the last to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency, Sir. It has been a very effective presidency
so far, and we look for even more golden eggs being
laid in the coming two weeks.

Before offering further remarks on Somalia, I
would like to comment on the relevance of this latest
mission to the work of the Security Council. We, as a
Council, devote over half of our time to Africa and we
continue to make some of the most impressive
advances there, but we also suffer ongoing and often
serious setbacks to out work.

We have approximately 60,000 United Nations
peacekeepers deployed in Africa. The Council has tried
to chart a course on the various conflicts there. We
have also made efforts to build peace, take forward
post-conflict reconstruction and address the
humanitarian situation. I believe that more than half of
3
our resolutions and presidential statements so far this
year have been devoted to Africa. So it is absolutely
right that the Council should make a point of deploying
missions to Africa so we can see, first hand, the
situations with which we are dealing.

My good friend and colleague Ambassador
Kumalo has given a thorough report on our discussions
on Somalia. Let me just add a few comments to what
he said. When we were in Djibouti, the second round
of talks had just begun between the Transitional
Federal Government and the Alliance for the
Re-Liberation of Somalia (ARS), under the excellent
auspices of Mr. Ould Abdallah, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. Like
Ambassador Kumalo, I think we are all encouraged by
the agreement initialled by the two parties on 9 June,
committing them to a cessation of hostilities and the
promotion of a peaceful environment in Somalia. We
congratulate the parties on what we hope will be a
significant step towards re-establishing stability and
law and order in their country.

It is hard to ignore the long list of peace
agreements in Somalia that have foundered, but we, as
a Council, must do what we can to prevent this
agreement from joining that list.

The mission was also encouraged to hear both
President Ahmed's and Sheikh Sharif's personal
commitment to peace, reconciliation and democracy in
Somalia and their commitment to upholding human
rights and humanitarian law and facilitating
humanitarian relief to the millions of Somali people
who need it. Such commitments are crucial given the
increasing incidence of internal displacement in
Somalia, ongoing conflict, social unrest and food
crisis. Council members flagged in particular the need
to prevent all and any gender-based violence.

I think the Council now needs to focus on three
main issues: first, how best we can continue to support
Mr. Ould Abdallah in his efforts to provide practical
assistance and make further political progress;
secondly, how best we can lend our support to the
agreement initialled between the Transitional Federal
Government and the Alliance for the Re-Liberation of
Somalia; and thirdly, perhaps the most difficult, how
we as a Council can enhance the international security
presence on the ground in Somalia subject to continued
progress in the political process and improvement of
the security situation on the ground.
Like my colleague Ambassador Kumalo, I would
like to pay tribute to all those who are working for the
United Nations on the ground and to the Government
of Djibouti for hosting these pivotal talks as well as
our own visit.

Following our meetings in Djibouti, the Council
travelled to Sudan. I would like to give an initial report
on that; I think Ambassador Kumalo would like to add
a few comments after I have spoken. We were
co-leaders in both countries, and it was a very fruitful
partnership. I very much enjoyed it and benefited from
his wisdom and experience.

In the Sudan, we went first to Djuba to talk with
Vice-President Salva Kiir, and then to Khartoum to
meet with President Al-Bashir and representatives from
both main parties in the coalition, the Sudan People's
Liberation Movement (SPLM) and the National
Congress Party (NCP). Finally, we went to Darfur
itself. The discussions focused on the two crucial
issues of the United Nations engagement, that is, the
North-South agreement - The Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA) - and Darfur.

The Comprehensive Peace Agreement remains
the bedrock of peace in Sudan. The Council arrived in
Djuba shortly after the flattening of the city of Abyei,
which had led to the entire population of the town
fleeing. The Council was reassured by both Vice-
President Salva Kiir and President Al-Bashir that they
both remain committed to peace. It seemed to us that
neither wishes to go back to war, although war is not
always the result of planning and intention.

The Comprehensive Peace Agreement is fragile,
and the Council came away convinced that we have to
do all that we can to support the parties in
implementing it. Council members welcomed the
assurance by all parties that the United Nations
Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) will be given
uninhibited access to Abyei and that Sudanese troops
would withdraw from the town.

As we left, discussions were under way between
the parties about a new joint integrated unit to take
responsibility for security, and shortly after we left, we
learned that the NCP and the SPLM. had agreed to take
the matter to an independent international tribunal.
That is a welcomed development.

We came away believing that UNMIS needed to
do more to support the Comprehensive Peace
08-38934
Agreement, in particular to put in place practical
support for the elections in 2009 and the referendums
in 2011, and to improve security arrangements between
the two parties. And, most immediately, in Abyei it was
shown that UNMIS could do more and that it should
interpret its mandate more robustly than it has done so
far if it is to contribute to stability and to protect
civilians.

On Darfur, the Council's discussions focused on
the four tracks where progress is needed to solve the
crisis. First, on peacekeeping, President Al-Bashir
assured the Council that Sudan would take the
necessary steps to facilitate the full deployment of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID), including by improving logistical
arrangements such as customs and visa procedures.
That was urgently needed and was welcome.

President Al-Bashir also agreed to improvements
to Darfur's road and air infrastructure, including
allowing the United Nations to help upgrade airport
capacity and enabling the United Nations to use the
airports 24 hours a day. It was also agreed to better
facilitate the transit of goods, materials and equipment
across Sudan to Darfur, including providing security
for all such transits. Those are points that we hope the
Secretariat will now urgently take forward.

The Council provided the presidential adviser,
Nafi Ali Nafi, with a list of areas in which UNAMID
needs assistance. Council members welcomed
President Al-Bashir's agreement to receive troops from
Nepal and Thailand as soon as Egyptian and Ethiopian
troops had arrived, and I hope the Secretariat will be
able to provide the Council with a specific date for that
before long.

The second track is the political one, and no
matter how well resourced UNAMID is, it will never
be successful as a peacekeeping operation if there is
not first a peace to keep. A chief mediator needs to be
appointed rapidly, as President Al-Bashir himself
called for. We hope that such a figure will be able to
spearhead the United Nations and African Union
efforts on Darfur. President Al-Bashir rightly
highlighted the failure of a number of rebel groups to
engage in a new political process, and we call on all
groups to do so.

President Al-Bashir alleged the support of the
Government of Chad for certain groups. The Council
underlined with President Al-Bashir its statement of
08-38934
13 May (S/PRST/2008/15) and its condemnation of the
Justice and Equality Movement attack on Omdurman.
However, peace in Darfur will not be possible without
peace and understanding between Sudan and Chad. It is
essential that the leaders of both countries implement
the Dakar accord.

The third track is humanitarian. Members of the
Council observed first-hand the conditions in one of
the camps for internally displaced persons (IDPs), the
Zam Zam camp, and we met with humanitarian
organizations. The IDPs detailed attacks by Janjaweed
rebels and Sudanese armed forces. They also
complained that security in the camp was poor, owing
to militia activity. Food access was also so poor that
the World Food Programme has halved rations to the
IDPs and may have to halve them again. President
Al-Bashir said the Government remained committed to
the March 2007 humanitarian communique with the
United Nations, but Sudanese officials were, according
to accounts we heard on the ground, still placing
obstacles to humanitarian relief. The Council urged
President Al-Bashir to ensure that Sudan implements
the communique in full, and that the mechanisms for
resolving practical problems are efficient and effective.

The final track is tackling impunity. Council
members stressed their expectation that the
Government of Sudan would cooperate with the
International Criminal Court (ICC) in line with
resolution 1593 (2005), including through the arrest
and handover of the two indictees. Regrettably,
President Al-Bashir told the Council that Sudan would
not cooperate with the ICC. The Council has since
reaffirmed, through its statement earlier this week
(S/PRST/2008/21), the importance of Sudan
reconsidering its whole approach to the ICC and
establishing a pattern of cooperation, which hitherto
has been completely absent.

In summary, I can say that some progress has
been made on UNAMID, but much more needs to be
done. The political process is badly in need of new
energy. The humanitarian and security situations
continue to worsen. Next month, UNAMID's mandate
expires, and the Council will need to adopt a new
resolution on Darfur. The Council will need to give this
very careful consideration. The mission of the Council
members brought home that we have not seen the
progress we expected when we adopted resolution
1769 (2007) last July.
5
The situation in Sudan remains one of the
toughest and most complex challenges for the Council.
The progress we make both on the CPA and in Darfur
will impact on the lives of the people of Sudan, and we
bear a heavy responsibility.

