Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): I
want to thank the Under-Secretary-General for the
briefing. It is good to have an update and to check on
the progress being made since our trip to Kosovo last
month. Indeed, it is clear that while there is still much
work to be done, there is progress being made, and we
are gratified to hear that.

When we went to Kosovo, the most important
message that the Council wanted to send was of the
importance of the full implementation of resolution
1244 (1999). That is still the most important message,
and I think we can see that progress is being made in
all areas.

We also talked a lot during our trip about
measures to reduce violence, including getting the new
pillar I off the ground, the new security regulations and
urging local leaders to publicly condemn the use of
violence. I think we can see from Mr. Guehenno's
briefing that progress is being made in this regard, and
we welcome that.

I also want to stress my Government's strong
support for the recent decision by the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
to extend the executive hold on the three suspects
captured in relation to the Nis Express bus bombing.
This is a topic that President Bush raised with Special
Representative Haekkerup, and we urge UNMIK to
form a special panel of international judges to review
the available evidence - if that is the legally correct
way to ensure that those suspected of such a shameful
act do not walk free.

The Council mission also supported the political
process, autonomous self-government, the legal
framework, elections and, most specifically, Serb
participation in that process and in those elections. I
think we all understood and stressed that a multi-ethnic
Kosovo will be possible only if all communities can
and do participate in the process. So we are particularly
gratified to have word that four Kosovo Serb political
parties have registered for the elections. That is an
important positive step, and we hope that other
elements of the Serb community will take that step as
well, and that they will participate.

Another major focus is how to support the rights
of minorities in a multi-ethnic Kosovo, which includes
the questions of Serb returns, adequate security,
infrastructure and minority communities. We also
wanted to promote the development of good working
relationships with the Yugoslav authorities by UNMIK
and the Kosovo Force (KFOR), which is an important
element in realizing those goals. That cooperation is
important. I think this is yet another area where we can
see progress and commend the efforts of UNMIK and
the Yugoslav authorities to continue a dialogue on how
to move forward.

As Jean-Marie Guehenno did, I cannot finish my
statement without moving slightly off-theme to
mention the situation in the neighbouring former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. Recent violence
there is of great concern to my country. The ceasefire is
an open-ended commitment and is crucial to providing
the atmosphere for a political dialogue. The use by
armed extremists of the ceasefire to improve their
military positions is reprehensible and unacceptable.
We applaud efforts by UNMIK and KFOR to improve
control of movement across the border between
Kosovo and Macedonia. At this crucial juncture, all
sides, including the Government of Macedonia, must
exercise restraint and respect the ceasefire agreements.
The only solution is a political solution. All will lose,
the region will lose, if war is the choice instead of
peace. The United States is urging the Macedonian
Government and the party leaders to continue
negotiations and to reach an agreement that addresses
the concerns of all sides, respects the rights of all the
people of Macedonia and preserves Macedonia's
territorial integrity and sovereignty. We believe that
such an agreement is possible, and it is certainly
necessary.

