Mr. Giraldo (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to express our appreciation to you, Madam,
for having honoured us by presiding over this Security
Council meeting. We would also like to thank
Mr. Olara Otunnu, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict.

In expressing gratitude to the mission of Chile for
having organized this debate, and to the Secretary-
General for his report on children and armed conflict,
my delegation would like to share the experiences of
our country and our Government in the difficult task of
protecting Colombian children, who have been
murdered, kidnapped, mutilated, displaced or recruited
by the illegal armed groups that operate in the country.

Allow me to begin with what I consider an
absolutely key priority. While it is true that all
violations against children's rights must be singled out
for repudiation, it is important to bear in mind that, in
situations of armed conflict, the worst, most systematic
and extensive violations of those rights - those with
the most profound effects - are perpetrated by illegal
armed groups that recruit child soldiers.

Child soldiers, because of their status, are in
particular danger of being killed, tortured or
mutilated - in short, mistreated in every way. Their
rights and freedoms are severely restricted, as is their
ability to develop their personalities. They are taken
away from their families and become victims of sexual
abuse.

That is why the United Nations, the Council, the
Secretary-General and all of us here should be more
explicit in condemning these practices. Drawing up
lists on an annual basis, disseminating them and
sharing them among all the Members of the United
Nations - so as to ensure that everyone bears these
facts very much in mind when having any kind of
contact with these types of groups, or when receiving
them on their territory - would be one way of exerting
moral and global pressure, so that such groups might
begin to believe it necessary to put an end to these
practices.

The Secretary-General's report indicates that
7,000 Colombian children have been recruited by
illegal armed groups - that is to say, one of every four
irregular combatants in Colombia is under 18.
According to estimates by Colombian non-
governmental organizations (NGOs), 80 per cent of the
children in question belong to the Revolutionary
Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) or to the National
Liberation Army (ELN). Thirty-five per cent of the
children recruited - most of them by force - desert
before a year is up. Many have been executed when
trying to escape by their own friends, who are also
children.

The extreme gravity of the situation is reflected
in a Human Rights Watch report which recalls the sad
and horrifying testimony of a girl child soldier talking
about the execution of her best friend when he tried to
escape:

"I cannot forget Luis; he was my friend. I
voted for his execution so the others would not
think that I had a chicken's heart."

Concerning the behaviour of these illegal armed
groups, Human Rights Watch stresses that, first, they
train the children to have no mercy; secondly, they
torture and summarily execute children for not doing
the work required of them; and, thirdly, they induce
children to take part in atrocities. One tragic example is
that of a boy, only 10 years old, used by the FARC to
deliver a bomb. He was killed on 17 April 2003, when
the bicycle he was riding exploded.

But the acts of terror perpetrated by Colombian
irregular armed groups against children in my country
is not limited to recruiting child soldiers and executing
them if they try to escape, nor to sacrificing them in the
perpetration of terrorist acts. As the Secretary-
General's report states,

"In Colombia, the Ejercito de Liberacion
Nacional (ELN) and the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC) have
kidnapped hundreds of children for ransom and as
a means of terrorizing civilian populations; 215
children were kidnapped in 2002 and another 112
during the first half of 2003." (S/2003/1053, para. 34)

According to State statistics, between 1996 and
2003, 1,819 children aged 13 to 17 were kidnapped.
According to some statistics, every 37 hours in
Colombia a child is kidnapped by an illegal armed
group. The Secretary-General also reports in paragraph
44 of his report that "in Colombia, about 40 per cent of
mine victims from 1990 to 2003 were children".

Furthermore, with reference to illegal armed
groups, the Secretary-General notes in paragraph 55
that "fear of recruitment has led many families to flee
their homes in rural areas". According to official
Colombian Government data, 58 per cent of displaced
persons are children and women. Many of those
children end up in cities as street children and are
sometimes the victims of arbitrary killings. In this
regard, we would like to know the sources consulted
that allow the Secretary-General to affirm in paragraph
25 of his report that there has been an increase in the
number of arbitrary killings of street children. Indeed,
we have statistics to the contrary, given that the combat
against these heinous crimes has been one of the
priorities of my country's national and local
authorities.

I did not come here only to comment and expand
on the denunciations in the Secretary-General's report
of all the atrocities committed against Colombian
children by the irregular armed groups operating in my
country. I am also here to inform the Council about our
commitment and the results of the democratic security
policy of our Government to protect the human rights
of all Colombians, and in particular those of our
children.

The incidence of homicide, kidnapping and
displacement has begun to decrease, and there has been
an important increase in the number of desertions by
persons linked to illegal armed groups, especially
minors. In 2003, 64 per cent of the demobilized were
between 14 and 24.

Since 1999, the Colombian State has been
complying with its international commitments not to
recruit children under the age of 18. Colombia
therefore would request institutions and entities with
the required influence - such as the Security Council,
regional organizations and States - to exert gradual
and targeted pressure on those armed groups that
continue to violate the rights of Colombian children.

Perhaps the Colombian children who, in an
environment of violence, had the courage to create the
"Children's Movement for Peace in Colombia", as well
as those children worldwide whose rights have been
violated, could serve as examples of the courage that
we all must have if we are to rescue them from the hell
they are experiencing at the hands of violent groups.

