Mr. Oshima (Japan): Allow me first to register
my Government's condolences to the Government and
the people of Bangladesh over the tragic killings of
Bangladeshi peacekeepers in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

Mr. President, my delegation appreciates your
convening of this public meeting concerning the
situation in Timor-Leste at this important juncture in
order to consider our future steps as the end of the
mandate of the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor (UNMISET) approaches in a few months'
time.

We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Timor-Leste, Mr. Hasegawa, for
his comprehensive briefing. We welcome the presence
at this meeting of Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Timor-Leste, and we thank him for
the statement he just made.

At the outset, we wish to note with satisfaction
the tangible achievements and progress made in the
overall situation in Timor-Leste, as indicated in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2005/99), especially
in the improved security situation, with respect to State
institutions and capacities, and in terms of promoting
democracy and human rights, during UNMISET's final
consolidation phase over the past year. We are pleased
with the steady, positive developments being made in
the country, since Japan, as a friend in Asia, has quite
substantially participated in assisting Timor-Leste in
the process of keeping the peace and consolidating the
gains of peace, through UNMISET and other
multilateral and bilateral frameworks. We would like to
commend Special Representative Hasegawa and his
staff, and those working on the ground, for their
valuable contributions, and we express our high
expectations that they will push on with their efforts, as
the mission's mandate approaches its end in May, to
make those achievements as solid and sustainable as
possible.

The significant improvement in bilateral relations
between Indonesia and Timor-Leste in recent months,
as demonstrated by the initiatives taken at the highest
level of Government, by President Gusmao and
President Yudhoyono, is to be welcomed. We pay a
high tribute to that encouraging development in their
bilateral relationship, and we hope that this process
will continue, because it is critically important for the
future of Timor-Leste.

On the other hand, problems remain that will
require serious attention from both countries. My
delegation is concerned, for example, at the prospect,
pointed out in the report of the Secretary-General
(5/2005/99), that the delineation of the land border is
unlikely to be finished by May due to the
postponement of bilateral meetings. Incidents continue,
including the recent incursion of an armed ex-militia
group and the ensuing gunfire, despite the reported
overall calm and stability in the country. We urge both
sides to take steps to ensure that the border
demarcation talks are brought to a successful
conclusion and that border security control is enhanced
through better bilateral cooperation. These measures
are critically important for security in Timor-Leste, and
we hope that both countries will further strengthen
their efforts for an early solution of the border issue,
including by the front-loading of the Indonesia-Timor-
Leste Technical Subcommittee on Border Demarcation
and Regulation.

Another challenge is the existence of what have
been referred to as gaps in the transition process in
Timor-Leste, as it strives towards its post-conflict and
sustainable peacebuilding phase, which the report of
the Secretary-General has identified. We take note of
those findings. Against the backdrop of the substantive
progress made so far, and as the United Nations
peacekeeping activities enter into a final stage, calling
for the redoubling of efforts for the consolidation of
peace, the fact that there are still important unmet
requirements in some key areas is cause for concern. If
left unresolved, this situation could threaten the
important gains made and could even have a potential
unravelling impact, which must be avoided. But Dili
itself is not able to address those problems alone; nor is
bilateral donor assistance likely to be forthcoming. The
Secretary-General therefore suggests, on the basis that
such gaps still exist, that a reconfigured and scaled-
down United Nations mission be maintained for
another year. We take note of that assessment.

The international community, Japan included, has
invested heavily in Timor-Leste since 1999, in helping
it to find peace, consolidate its gains and stand on its
own feet, and we all would like to ensure that the
United Nations peacekeeping operation in Timor-Leste
remains the success story that it has been. We would
not want to see a reversal in the final phases of
peacebuilding. Japan is therefore prepared to consider
sympathetically the proposal for retaining, on the
expiry of UNMISET's current mandate, some form of
United Nations activities in Timor-Leste to address
these gaps.

In that connection, we note that, in some post-
conflict situations in other regions of the world, the
termination of a United Nations peacekeeping
operation has been followed by the establishment of a
peacebuilding type of mission. Likewise, in the case of
Timor-Leste, we believe that a small United Nations
mission dedicated to peacebuilding, with the minimum
required number of personnel, and authorized for a
limited duration, could be a useful and pragmatic
solution to the remaining problems that the country
faces in its last phases of transition.

I would like to add that Japan will provide
continued and strong support in Timor-Leste's nation-
building effort through our bilateral aid as well, with
the emphasis on sectors such as capacity and human
resources development, infrastructure, agriculture and
the consolidation of peace. And we will be
participating actively in the development partners
meeting scheduled to be held in April.

We must also address issues concerning serious
crimes committed in the past in Timor-Leste, as they
have close bearing on the country's future stability and
development. We note that the Secretary-General has
decided to establish a commission of experts in order
to face squarely the issue of impunity. For the
commission to function effectively, it will need to have
good cooperation from the countries concerned. We
strongly hope that the commission will maintain a
constructive relationship with the Truth and Friendship
Commission which the Governments of Timor-Leste
and Indonesia have agreed to establish.

In conclusion, my Government expresses its
conviction that, with continued support from the
international community, particularly the United
Nations, the foundations for stability and progress in
Timor-Leste will be strengthened, and the people of
Timor-Leste will forge ahead under their wise political
leadership - particularly that of President Gusmao,
Prime Minister Alkatiri and Foreign Minister Ramos-
Horta - in their determination to effect nation-
building that is underpinned by ownership and
accountability. We must ensure that UNMISET and its
successor United Nations presence see to it that the
transition process continues on a smooth path, and we
must spare no effort in ensuring that we leave a
successful chapter in the history of United Nations
peacekeeping operations in that country.

