Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by thanking you once again, Mr. President,
for convening this important meeting devoted to the
consideration of the periodic report of the Secretary-
General (S/2019/44) on the situation in Darfur and on
the transition from peacekeeping to the peacebuilding,
recovery and reconstruction phase. That will be the
core of my statement.

We thank the Secretary-General for his report.
We also thank Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant Secretary-
General for Africa, Department of Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, as well as her team. We thank
Ms. Keita for her valuable briefing following her
recent visit to the Sudan two weeks ago. We will gladly
facilitate future visits at any time upon the submission
of the proper request.

This meeting is taking placejust as the stabilization
process is gaining momentum in Darfur. That was
recognized in Security Council resolutions 2363 (2017)
and 2429 (2018). It also reflects what was agreed by
the Sudanese Government, the African Union and the
United Nations in February 2015 through the Joint
Working Group on the importance of the gradual,
phased and smooth exit of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). We
are delighted that the position of the Council is fully
in line with the national and regional positions on
this matter.

My delegation hopes that the transition from
peacekeeping to recovery, stability, peacebuilding
and reconstruction will enjoy the same support that
was provided to UNAMID. The goal is to support the
great improvement of the security situation in Darfur
and to complement it with development efforts in
order to achieve socioeconomic and environmental
development and to address the consequences of the
conflict in Darfur. In that context, it is important to
recall that underdevelopment was the main factor that
led to the insurgency in Darfur. It is also crucial to bear
in mind the close link between peace and development.
It is impossible to have one without the other.

In that regard, my delegation hopes that all the
efforts of regional and international partners will
support the Sudanese Government in laying the
groundwork for stabilization, peacebuilding and
reconstruction in Darfur, particularly with respect to
repatriating internally displaced persons and refugees;
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration;
strengthening peaceful coexistence among various
communities; contributing to capacity-building at the
local level; and creating job opportunities for young
people, who represent more than 65 per cent of the
population of Darfur. This is a joint venture between
the international community and us.

I have the pleasure to announce that the Sudanese
Government is ready and willing to welcome the team
that will be sent by the Secretariat and the African
Union Commission in March to conduct a strategic
review of UNAMID, in accordance with resolutions
2363 (2017) and 2429 (2018). The objective of that
review is to define the parameters of the final exit of
UNAMID by June 2020. As the Council is aware, the
final exit will mark success in achieving the goal for
which the Mission was deployed in 2007. It will be a
joint national, regional and international success that
should take its due place in the annals of the peaceful
resolution of conflicts around the world.

I think we are all entitled to celebrate what has been
achieved thus far. We are all entitled to celebrate the
synergy of national, regional and international efforts
that led to the conclusion of the Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic on 6 February. Before that, those same efforts
led in September 2018 to signing the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in South
Sudan. As the Council is aware, the broad and varied
experience of the Sudan and the Sudanese was key
in both of those achievements. Those achievements
cannot be separated from the successful experience
of UNAMID, which has had a positive outcome at the
regional and international levels. I should like to touch
upon a number of important issues that were raised by
Security Council members.

First of all, it is important to understand and
recall that the topic of this meeting is the situation
in Darfur and its five states. The topic therefore does
not include the regions outside of this geographical
area. If, for whatever reason, the Council wished to
consider the situation in any other area, including the
Sudan, which exercises complete sovereignty over its
own territory, the Council would first have to agree to
address that topic in accordance its 1947 provisional
rules of procedure, based on the majority or consensus.
Members are well aware of that. If we are to consider
shared responsibilities for addressing the situation in
the Sudan in general, we must keep in the extremely
important point that our country has been suffering for
more than three decades from the effects of unilateral
sanctions that have no precedent in international
law and were neither recognized nor adopted by the
Security Council.

Those sanctions have negatively affected millions
of vulnerable people, including women, children and
the elderly. They have deprived the Sudan of its basic
needs, such as spare parts for our aircrafts, which has
led to the failure and crash of civil aircrafts. Sudan
Airways was undermined after having been the most
famous airline in Africa since 1947. In addition, the
Sudan has been deprived of its rights as a post-conflict
country suffering a huge debt burden and as one of the
least developed countries, while hosting more than
2 million refugees. Just one of the aforementioned
factors should qualify the Sudan for complete relief
from its heavy debt burden and for favourable treatment
by international financial organizations, which is
anything but the case today.
Furthermore, our peace partners have not fulfilled
their promises in the economic sphere, made following
the conclusion of the 2005 Comprehensive Peace
Agreement, and followed by the peaceful resolution
of the issue concerning the Republic of South Sudan
in 2011, based on that agreement. Unfortunately, the
peace partners, some of whom are permanent members
of the Security Council, have turned their backs on
their promises and commitments.

All members of the Council and the international
community know that the core reason behind the
conflict in Darfur is primarily related to development,
as indicated by the Permanent Representative of
the Dominican Republic. Undoubtedly, it also has
to do with the deterioration of the environment and
desertification that the west coast ofAfrica continues to
endure. I recall what the former Secretary-General said
in 2007 when he first took office. He said that the root
cause of the conflict in Africa is the deterioration of
the environment. I recall that after he said that, he was
fiercely attacked in the media, and I still recall what the
New York Times and The Washington Post wrote in that
regard. However, that having been said, some would
choose to compound this conflict by adding political
reasons. They try to use the International Criminal
Court in a way that completely distorts the facts.

Council members know that Jebel Marra is
characterized by its unique situation, as recognized
in resolution 2363 (2017). There are 2 million people
in that area, but it should be recalled that it is only a
small part of one state among five that make up greater
Darfur. Given that perspective, the situation in Jebel
Marra should not be used as the sole prism for viewing
the situation in Darfur. That situation therefore should
not be presented differently from the situation on the
ground, owing to the simple reason that the Security
Council has adopted a specific arrangement concerning
the J ebel Marra area. The appropriate course of action for
the Council to take, as viewed by us and by the majority
of Council members, is to act on the determination that
it has expressed in the relevant resolutions and to follow
up on the provisions of resolution 1591 (2005) which
was adopted under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations.

Last month, I met with the Secretary-General
and provided him with information confirming that
members of the Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid
faction, who have retreated into the difficult-to-access
mountains, were behind the protests raising legitimate
demands, as recognized by the President ofthe Republic.
They used knives and guns during those protests.

Concerning the state of emergency that has been
declared, the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights, to which the Sudan is a signatory,
provides for the declaration of a state of emergency.
We informed the Secretary-General last month of our
intention to declare a state of emergency in the states of
Kassala and North Kordofan, pursuant to the provisions
of the International Covenant and of the 2005 interim
Constitution of the Sudan. We will immediately update
the Secretary-General on our declaration of the state
of emergency in various parts of the Sudan, in line
with the provisions of the International Covenant. The
Government of the Sudan is fully committed to the
inalienable rights of individuals, as enshrined in the
Constitution of the Sudan, which are the same as those
enshrined in the International Covenant.

In conclusion, my delegation expresses once
again its gratitude to UNAMID for the work it has
accomplished since its deployment in Darfur in
2008. We also thank all peacekeepers and the troop-
contributing countries, the African Union Commission
and the Secretariat, in particular the Department of
Peace Operations, Department of Operational Support
and the Department of Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs. We once again express our commitment to
cooperating with UNAMID until its full withdrawal
from my country after having achieved success and
peace in our important region.

