Mr. Al-Sallal (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to commend you, Sir, and the
Chinese delegation on your presidency of the Security
Council this month. I would also like to congratulate
Ambassador Mehdiyev and the delegation of Azerbaijan
on their successful leadership of the Council in May.

The Council has wisely adopted today's resolution
2051 (2012), concerning my country, and the Republic of
Yemen welcomes it. I would like to reiterate what was said
in a previous presidential statement (S/PRST/20l2/8),
namely, that Yemen has made significant progress.
Nevertheless, numerous difficulties persist, as do many
challenges that must still be overcome. In order to tackle
those problems, we must underscore the importance of
the support that has been given to the efforts of President
Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi Mansour and to the national
unity Government. Those challenges are as follows.

First, the deterioration in the humanitarian situation
in our country presages a disastrous scenario that will
significantly affect food security in many regions of
Yemen. Nor should we forget the increase in the number
of refugees and internally displaced persons. In that
context, Yemeni citizens are suffering from electricity
blackouts, which are frequent, as well as from a lack
of water services, oil products, household gas supplies,
health care and hygiene.

Secondly, the security situation in Yemen remains
complicated and difficult. Further sustained efforts will
be necessary in order to restore security and stability
so as to expel the armed groups from the towns and put
an end to the divisions within the army. The national
dialogue process excludes no one and it will go forward
and make progress, thanks to the restructuring of
the armed forces, so that together we will be able to
establish a modern State of Yemen with institutions
based on liberty, justice and equality, as well as ensuring
the implementation of the rule of law and order.

Thirdly, Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula poses a
real threat to national stability. It also jeopardizes the
daily lives of citizens in their movements and efforts to
eke out their livelihoods. Yemen therefore needs support
in further strengthening its economy. As has been said,
we cannot combat Al-Qaida through military force
alone; we must also establish development and cultural
programmes, education and recovery projects as well as
other types of initiative.

We must therefore further strengthen the
Government's capacity to reinforce such programmes.
Moreover, I welcome the efforts of the brave military
and security forces who, working alongside the national
committees, are carrying out heroic feats in Abin
province. In that regard, I should like to convey my
condolences to the family members of those who have
been martyred; may they rest in peace. I also wish a
speedy recovery to those who have been injured.

F ourthly, 1 million refugees from the Horn of Africa
are also adding to the burden on our Government. The
international community must therefore coordinate its
efforts to help support our economy. We welcome the
role played by our brothers and friends in the friends of
Yemen group, which plans to hold a donor conference
from 27 to 29 June in the friendly country of Saudi
Arabia. We hope that the meeting will further support the
aspirations of the Yemeni people and that it will help to
meet their needs by establishing economic and political
stability. Furthermore, necessary financing must be
provided for those programmes in order to respond to

the needs pursuant to the document adopted by our
Government. The amount required exceeds $7 billion.

