Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, our delegation would like
to thank you, Sir, and your delegation for convening
this meeting during the October, a crucial time in
Colombia's electoral calendar. We also wish to welcome
the presence of Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo Garcia,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, with us
today at this meeting, and to wish him a pleasant stay
in New York.

We join other Council members in thanking the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia, Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, and his team for
the very clear, detailed and informative presentation.

The report before us today (S/2019/780) continues
the trend in previous reports that allows us to hold up
Colombia as a clear example of how, when a people
comes together in action, they can prevent a crisis from
escalating and save lives, thereby realizing the mandate
of the United Nations enshrined in the Preamble to the
Charter of our Organization. That political will on the
part of the Colombian parties, after more than 50 years
of conflict, has been evident at critical junctures, from
the Final Agreement for the Termination of Conflict
and the Construction of a Stable and Lasting Peace
of 2016 to the successful 2018 elections. It is now
reaffirmed by the National Pact for Political Culture and
Non-Violence during the Electoral Campaign, signed at
the end of August by the political parties, which rejects
violence and promotes dialogue and political rights in
the context of the elections to be held on 27 October.

Given those significant steps, the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea joins the call in the Secretary-
General's report and all voices to encourage the parties
and the people as a whole to follow a constructive
direction, set aside the discourse of polarization and
stigmatization and work towards extending a hand
and reaching an inclusive consensus on the aspects of
most interest to society, especially to those who have
suffered the most from the conflict.

On another note, we strongly condemn all known and
unknown attempts to reverse the achievements already
made in the long process of reconstruction. Given the
suffering of the people of Colombia, there is no reason
to justify the decision announced on 29 August by a
group of former Fuerza Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP) combatants
to take up arms again. The international community
must continue to express its condemnation to that end
and put pressure on those responsible, especially the
individuals Luciano Martin, known as Ivan Marquez,
and Seuxis Pausias Hernandez Solarte, known as Jesus

Santrich, to reconsider their decision.

In that regard, we welcome the rejection of the
political party Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del
Comun of that decision and its reaffirmed commitment
to the peace agreement. We also endorse the messages
of support from the various sectors of Colombian
society for the former leaders and combatants of the
FARC-EP who remain committed to the peace process
and who made many calls for the revitalization of the
implementation of the peace agreement as a whole.

The increase in incidents against political party
candidates overall is a matter of concern to my delegation
because it could pose a risk to this month's elections.
However, we encourage all parties to ensure that those
elections be held in a climate of peace and tranquillity,
through inclusive dialogue and in compliance with the
law. With respect to attacks by insurgent armed groups,
appropriate measures to dismantle those criminal
networks and bring their perpetrators before justice
must be urgently taken.

We call for the draft laws and constitutional reforms
submitted to the present legislature to respect the
commitments set out in the peace agreement, as those
are the cornerstone for achieving the reconstruction
of Colombia.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea believes that it
is our duty to underscore the importance of all armed
groups becoming aware of the overriding interest of the
Colombian people, namely, peace and national unity. In
that regard, we urge the Ej e'rcito de Liberacion Nacional
to consider the preconditions of the Government to
resume the stalled negotiations.

Before concluding, I would like to take this
opportunity to express our appreciation for the efforts
of President Ivan Duque Marquez and his Government
in the implementation of their "Peace with legality"
strategy, while encouraging all those concerned to
redouble their efforts to implement all parts of the peace
agreement in order to meet the commitments made to
former combatants, victims and communities affected
by the conflict.

We once again commend the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, and
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia for
the noble and commendable work they are undertaking
by playing a crucial role in supporting the Government

in its efforts to achieve a lasting and stable peace. They
have our full support.

Lastly, I would like to reiterate our appreciation to
the Colombian Government for the activities that it is
carrying out, the commitments that it is upholding and
the strides that it is making on a daily basis in pursuit
of restoring social and political peace to the Colombian
people, something for which they sorely yearn.

