Mr. Thaci (interpretation from Albanian; English text provided by delegation): The citizens of the
Republic of Kosovo deeply appreciate the efforts of the
United Nations and the Security Council in Kosovo,
which have been among the most successful United
Nations missions. As the United Nations begins to
celebrate its seventieth anniversary, it is aware of that
success in Kosovo. In the 19905, the United Nations
was intensely engaged in Kosovo and condemned
the oppression by the Slobodan Milosevic regime. In
1999, the United Nations created the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
in order to end all the illegal measures and oppression
undertaken by Serbian Kosovars in order to create the
Kosovar Provisional Institutions of Self-Government.
We declared our independence, which has been
recognized by most States Members of the United
Nations, and UNMIK has certainly helped transform
all the institutions of the Kosovo Government.

Although the Mission remains in Kosovo because
of a lack of consensus within the Council, we believe
that the Secretary-General's report (S/2015/303) during
the fifteenth year of the UNMIK presence demonstrates
success and the victory of democracy in that European
country. Today, Kosovo has 90 per cent less violence,
and the capital, according to United Nations statistics,
is one of the most secure cities in Europe and the region.

Concerning political developments in Kosovo, let
me say that the new Government, which was created
by a broad coalition that includes the two main
political parties and all minority parties, has had a
very encouraging start in socioeconomic development.
Last year, we held elections to create that coalition and
proved that the independent institutions of Kosovo,
such as the Constitutional Court and the presidency, are
highly respected by all political factions, and that the
democratic processes are respected by all.

At the beginning, we adopted an economic
programme. In the first five months we gained two
large investors, including a French consortium that
signed a €400 million contract for the development ofa
key centre in Brezovica. The centre is going to be built
in a region that is populated by Serbs and Albanians
and will create 4,000 new jobs, promote the integration
of Kosovo and help develop this poor part of Kosovo.

We also have an agreement with the World Bank,
the United States Agency for International Development
and the European Union (EU) to identify energy
investments. An American company has been selected
to invest about $1 billion, which also involves UNMIK
support. These contracts represent about 25 per cent
of all investments in Kosovo. We have increased
investments to $60 million, and we have obtained
other investors. We foresee an increase of 3 per cent
in economic development; since independence this has
been the highest economic development rate in Europe
for the past seven years.

We now have to focus on the creation of new jobs,
which is the first priority for Kosovars. That is how we
basically justify ourselves vis-a-vis the population. We
had a political crisis last year; in the past three months
there has been an influx ofmigrants from Kosovo trying
to achieve a better life in other European countries to
seek asylum.

We were deeply unhappy with our neighbour
Serbia, which in the past two months has opened its
borders with Hungary. There is a great deal of footage
in the media showing the Serbian police taking bribes
in order to assist this illegal migration. Following a
sensitization campaign, we were able to identify some
of the traffickers. A number of measures have been
taken by Germany, Austria and Hungary, and we were
therefore able to decrease the rate of migration by
95 per cent in the space of a month, earning us praise
from the European Commission.

Now we are waiting for the European Union to
liberalize the visa regime in Kosovo, which is the last
country in the Balkans to require Schengen visas.
Freedom of movement is one of the main factors
that is increasing frustration among Kosovars. The
Government of Kosovo during its first year faced a
political crisis, after the Serbian Minister was fired.
Now the Serbian parties have returned to the Assembly,
and we are working together with the Government to
develop Kosovo.

After achieving agreement in Brussels and after a
15-year boycott, today Serbs from the north participate
in all Kosovo institutions; this is an excellent result
from our joint work.

In the meantime, we held a high-level dialogue
between Kosovo and Serbia and have reached an
agreement aimed at closing all illegal structures within
the Kosovo justice system and integrating judges,
prosecutors and lawyers into the Kosovo justice system.
In every agreement and at every step of the dialogue, we
have managed to normalize dialogue between Kosovo
and Serbia. It is the goal of both Governments and of
our partners from the EU and the United States that both
countries - Kosovo and Serbia - become members of
the European Union and not face any obstacles in that
respect.

We would like Serbia to stop its destructive
propaganda, which only obstructs dialogue. I have
met with the Serbian leadership on approximately
40 occasions, and I want to believe that the time of
racist propaganda has truly passed. The continuation
of this dialogue includes a meeting with Mr. Vucie and
Mr. Mustafa. We should openly talk to one another, as
good neighbours.

A few weeks ago Kosovo organized a conference
of six countries to discuss the region's infrastructure.
One of the projects that has been approved and will
be financed by the European Union is a new highway
connecting Kosovo with Serbia, which should encourage
and promote regional cooperation.

Kosovo is dedicated to participating in youth
exchanges. Serbia and Kosovo should enable visits
by youth to one another's countries, as Germany and
France did after the Second World War.

It is important to talk today about good-
neighbourliness, as Kosovo has become a stronger
country dedicated to a European path. We have had
some unfortunate incidents in the region that could
undermine regional security. Following the deepening
of the political crisis in Skopje, there was an incident in
which police and armed men died. Some of the young
men arrested were from Kosovo. I wish here to be clear,
as we have been all along. The Government of Kosovo
strongly condemns the violence in Macedonia, which is
very destructive and disruptive, and every step should
be taken through dialogue and institutional means. We
will not support any attempt to destabilize the region.
Macedonia is a partner and ally of Kosovo on the path
to European integration and NATO, and we strongly
support the Ohrid agreement as the only solution for
the Macedonians.

We have heard accusations relating to greater
Albania, that Kosovo is working in that respect,
Albania is working in that respect, but these are
baseless accusations. We believe that in Macedonia we
need greater democracy and the full implementation of
the Ohrid agreement, as a guarantee of stability and
the functioning of multi-ethnic Macedonia and its
Euro-Atlantic perspective.

Kosovo wants an independent international
investigation into what happened in Kumanovo. Greater
Albania is talked about in Belgrade more than here in
Pristina, unfortunately. We have won the war against the
Milosevic regime, and we also gained our independence
based on the Ahtisaari plan. We will also win the battle
for the integration into the European Union and NATO.
Those who are against NATO and the European Union
would like to create a fog and insecurity in the Balkans,
but we will not allow such against NATO and the EU,
whatever they may be, to undermine the success of the
Balkans after the independence of Kosovo.

We have signed an agreement on the demarcation
of borders with Macedonia, and in a few weeks Kosovo
will end its demarcation with Montenegro as well. We
are the only country that has confirmed its borders
with most of our neighbours without using any kind
of violence or resorting international courts ofjustice.
This proves that in Kosovo no one is talking about
changing borders. We are heading towards Brussels,
where borders have no meaning. We are working
towards a new Balkans and a new Europe.

Let me speak about some of the positive
developments in Kosovo. We have adopted a law
preventing our citizens from taking part in foreign
wars, and the number of Kosovars in Syria has
decreased by 50 per cent. We have arrested about 100
people who were participating in this war, and they may
be sentenced to up to 15 years in prison based on this
new law. The Government participates in the coalition
to combat the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and
we have suggested some specific steps to strengthen
that coalition. This week we convened 150 guests to
discuss methods for using social media to fight violent
extremism. We are grateful to the Secretary-General
and UNMIK for supporting that project, which enjoyed
the participation of the entire country of Kosovo and
all religions.

Based on a British Council survey, 90 per cent
of Kosovars would like to participate in or become
members of NATO and the EU. Last week, we had
a march by members of the lesbian, gay, bisexual
and transgender community. Kosovo is one of the
few countries in South-East Europe in which that
community enjoys constitutional protection.
It is important to report on another matter, which has
been taken up by the Security Council, which concerns
the victims of the families in Kosovo. We have continued
the process of creating special chambers within the
Kosovo judicial system, which is largely connected to
the accusations of Chief Prosecutor Williamson, based
on the accusations of Dick Marty. We believe that
most of those accusations are baseless. But, in order to
clarify the history of the war and individual cases, we
will create that independent, international institution.
The Kosovo constitutional court has ruled that the
Constitution allows for the creation of such a court in
a third country. In accord with the Constitution, the
Assembly of Kosovo will vote on 29 May to create the
special chambers court.

Some 13,000 people died in the last conflict;
approximately 1,600 are still missing. Most are
Albanians, but there are also Serbs and other minorities.
That is a tragic number, but it is 150 times smaller than
the number of victims in Syria or in Iraq. We are very
grateful to the international community for providing
the means to continue to investigate Dick Marty's
accusations. Along with the verdicts by UNMIK courts
and the trials by The Hague Tribunal, the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo and domestic
courts, this represents the fifth time that members of
the Kosovo Liberation Army are being investigated.

Some in this Chamber, as well as the people of
Kosovo, ask me why we should waste €300 million to
investigate those alleged crimes. It is vital to clarify
the history of the war of Kosovo, which was supported
at the time by the progressive world. I will personally
never allow those special chambers created due to the
suspicions contained in Dick Marty's report to be used
to rewrite our history. It is therefore a waste of time
to use that instrument to change the history that was
brought about by the former Government of Serbia. No
one in the Balkans will forget the terror created by the
regime of Slobodan Milosevic. No one in the Balkans
will forget the genocide of Srebrenica. No one will
forget the verdicts against the Serbian leadership by
The Hague Tribunal, which found clear evidence that
the Government of Serbia was the main cause of the
war in Kosovo in its drive to create a greater Serbia. I
encourage members to read that verdict, which details
the extent of the past century's oppression in Kosovo.
The war in Kosovo was provoked and led by the
Government of Serbia, and the Serbian State is directly
responsible for the crimes committed in Kosovo.

I strongly believe in the reconciliation of peoples.
Last week, Antigua and Barbuda recognized Kosovo,
and Kosovo has become a member of Francophone
organizations and of the International Olymbic
Committee. We will soon be applying for membership
in other international organizations, which proves that
the independence of Kosovo is immutable and final.
The International Court of Justice has determined that
Kosovo's declaration of independence did not breach
international norms, and its status has been deemed
final with the authorization of the dialogue between
Kosovo and Serbia. That dialogue has been a historic
success. After 100 years of hate and conflict, we are
now working on reconciliation and understanding and
for full normalization of relations between Kosovo and
Serbia.

I would like now to make a few remarks about
our position as the process for normalizing relations
between Kosovo and Serbia draws towards conclusion.
This is the moment to initiate dialogue at a higher level,
namely, the demarcation phase between Kosovo and
Serbia, which will be concluded by mutual recognition
of both countries. The bilateral demarcation agreement
between Kosovo and Serbia should also be recognized
by the Security Council. That will enable Kosovo
to become a Member of the United Nations and will
allow Serbia to accelerate its integration into the EU
and NATO. Of course, Kosovo will continue on its own
path for speedy membership in the EU and NATO.

Only peace between Albanians and Serbs can
guarantee sustainable peace in the region and in the
Balkans. Reconciliation and stability will not be
achieved by forgetting the past. We will teach Kosovars,
Serbs and Albanians not to forget the past. This year,
we mark the seventieth anniversary of the end of the
Second World War, and we are still terrified by the
destruction caused by Adolf Hitler. Youth will never
forget the lessons of the Holocaust. We have built a
monument to the memory of the victims of the Holocaust
in the courtyard of the Kosovo Government in order
not to forget what happened in Auschwitz. Nor should
we in the Balkans forget the nationalism of the time of
Slobodan Milosevic: it can return. Last year, we worked
to document the crimes and the victims caused by that
regime. Kosovars will soon address the International
Court of Justice for the genocide committed by Serbia.
We will also ask for war reparations, not addressed to
the current Government but to history, in order not to
forget what has happened in Kosovo.

To conclude, I call on the Security Council to
recognize the progress that, with its help, has been
made in Kosovo. We ask the Council to end the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo,
because it has finished its executive functions in Kosovo
and has only a monitoring role. I invite members to
work to that end, because in today's world - with its
many divisions, cultures, religions and politics, with
the current developments in Africa, in Ukraine, in the
Middle East - Kosovo is ajoint success story.

We still face many challenges in Kosovo to create a
dignified State and to become a member of the EU and
NATO, but we are on the right path.

