My delegation would like to thank Germany, President of the Security Council for the month of July, and the Dominican Republic, co-Chair of the Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security, for jointly organizing this open debate on a very important issue - conflict-related sexual violence: turning commitments into compliance - as we celebrate the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the milestone resolution 1325 (2000), the twenty-fifth anniversary of the visionary Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the 75 years since the foundation of the United Nations, with its promise of gender equality enshrined in its Charter. United Nations reports reveal that 1.3 billion people worldwide, which is 35 per cent of the world population, are sexual violence survivors. This is alarming and despicable and calls for urgent and immediate actions to not only eradicate sexual violence in all circumstances - be it in times of armed conflict, in humanitarian crises or difficult contexts, such as the current one with the coronavirus disease - but also to implement a holistic approach founded on cooperation and prevention and sharing best practices. In this regard, I would like to highlight the following points. Violence is always condemnable. However, sexual violence during armed conflict and global crises is even more reprehensible. Only a few years ago, the world was brought to tears by the appalling and poignant testimonies of Ms. Nadia Murad and other victims reporting their tragic ordeals. Unfortunately, history repeated itself with shocking cases of other victims of rape, torture and unimaginable savagery and brutality, depicting a disturbing trend of using sexual violence. The Kingdom of Morocco strongly condemns these practices of another age, which unfortunately continue today. Sexual violence affects victims and plagues communities and societies in their entirety, whether it is used as a tactic of war, a weapon of terrorism or an act of coercion, intimidation, retaliation or reprisal against the family or the larger community. It aims to terrorize, harm the body, maim dignity, destroy social fabric and destroy all reconstruction efforts at their root. The Kingdom of Morocco, as a member of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security, chaired by Canada, and of the Group of Friends for Gender Parity, led by Colombia, fully subscribes to its international commitments to combat all forms of sexual violence, including in times of conflict, and considers them barbaric, brutal and inhuman methods and practices with serious consequences for the establishment of lasting peace and reconciliation. Because of the systematic and premeditated nature of acts of sexual violence, the Kingdom of Morocco believes that innovation in the approach to dealing with this scourge is urgent. In this regard, there is a need to adopt and implement a comprehensive and inclusive approach that takes into account the complexity of the root causes of sexual violence; restores the dignity of victims; addresses the stigma surrounding victims, including children born of this violence; presents firm accountability measures against the perpetrators who act against international humanitarian law, human rights and the Geneva Conventions of 1949; and invests in rebuilding and sustaining peace. Prevention is key to eradicating sexual violence, namely, through the promotion of gender equality and women's empowerment; guaranteeing victims' access to legal, medical and psychosocial services; using sanctions as a tool to dissuade sexual violence and to coerce and constrain the individuals involved; ensuring protection for victims and witnesses in order to enable men to speak out without fear or shame; strengthening existing services for women and girls and establishing complementary mechanisms for men and boys; and engaging both those advocating the elimination of sexual violence against women and girls and those addressing sexual violence against men and boys and making them work together to achieve their goals. Religious leaders have a powerful and persuasive role to play in combating the use of religion to justify sexual violence. They should be encouraged to speak out firmly against this scourge. Cooperation with local actors and community leaders is also crucial, as they can identify early warning signs of acts of sexual violence and propose appropriate prevention strategies. There is a need for more research on the range of sexual violence, its perpetrators and its victims in order to build the evidence base from both quantitative and qualitative perspectives. Whereas neither women and girls nor men and boys are spared from being victims of sexual violence, there is widespread ignorance about the shocking details of sexual violence against men and boys in conflicts. Some of the barriers that prevent the majority of male victims from reporting sexual violence to the authorities are the sense of dignity, stigmatization and a fear of being singled out and mocked. In addition, the lack of comprehensive data on the issue remains one of the biggest obstacles to address it. While a big majority of reports focus on sexual violence affecting women and girls, reports on sexual violence affecting men and boys are rare. To conclude, Morocco commends United Nations efforts to eliminate sexual violence in conflicts, namely, through the United Nations campaign against sexual violence in conflicts and the work done by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Pramila Patten. Secondly, Morocco also welcomes the efforts of Member States to implement relevant Security Council resolutions at the national level and welcomes the growing number of signed and negotiated action plans for the protection of victims of sexual violence. Last but not least, Morocco welcomes the initiatives taken in the context of peacekeeping operations aimed at combating violence and sexual violence, as well as the appointment of advisers to combat sexual violence and the adoption of codes of conduct, military action plans and zero-tolerance policies in the armed forces.
