Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this meeting.
We welcome the presence of the Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Herve
Ladsous, and the Police Commissioners of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan, the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the United Nations Mission
in Liberia. We take this opportunity to thank them on
behalf of our country for the work they are doing in
peacekeeping operations.

The tasks carried out by the United Nations police
are divided into three key areas. The first involves
providing assistance to host countries in the area of
the rule of law through police services. Secondly, in
countries with a more limited infrastructure, the police
carry out tasks on a short-term basis, including law
enforcement. And thirdly, they can have the function
of supporting reform and restructuring efforts and,
at times, creating a new national police service or
other type of service that is then responsible for law
enforcement in the country concerned.

We would like to focus in particular on the third
case, in which efforts are deployed to support the
reform, restructuring or creation of police services in
host States. I cite our experience of the work undertaken
by the police component of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) - whose
Police Commissioner I wish to commend - which
we feel is worth emulating. One of the primary tasks
of a mission is to recruit national personnel to serve
the cause of human rights and the rule of law, and to
ensure that they are not vulnerable to organized crime
and international crime. The police component of
MINUSTAH has fulfilled that task successfully, as we
saw during our visit in January.

Another critical task that has proven to be a
challenge to all police missions is establishing a corpus
of national officials of the host country capable of
effectively assuming the tasks of the police component
and of undertaking the important job of interacting with
the civilian population it is charged with protecting.
This will give it the confidence to addressing the
language, ethnic, religious and cultural barriers it needs
to overcome in order to meet these objectives.

We also feel that it is extremely important that the
competencies of the military and police components
be clearly defined. They are two completely difficult
things, in particular when it comes to ensuring
appropriate treatment for criminal matters and the
maintenance of public order, with a special emphasis
on preventive action. Another important aspect is
strengthening and establishing, alongside the host
country, an adequate legal framework for duly defining
police action, crime-fighting, respect for human rights,
accoutability and the protection of civilians.

We believe that gender equality cannot be addressed
within police missions on an exceptional basis. On
the contrary, we think that women must participate
heavily in the protection of civilians, including women
and children, accountability, the fight against sexual
abuse and the necessary interaction with the local
population. Women have a fundamental role to play in
the prevention of crime and conflicts.

Peacekeeping missions, and police missions
in particular, must, from the very conception of
their mandate, plan when and how to transfer their
competencies to the national personnel of the host
country. This is critical. We believe that a mission's
success depends on its ability to ensure the rule of law,
the protection of civilians and the transfer of capacities
to the host country itself. That is closely linked to the
sovereignty of the countries that host peacekeeping
missions, since they cannot remain in tutelage to the
United Nations forever.

Moreover, the Security Council is responsible for
providing the material and technical support necessary
to the work of police missions, as we do not believe
that any technology is beyond the needs of certain
countries. We must help to reduce trafficking in
the small arms and light weapons that cause terrible
damage and promote criminal activity, including drug
trafficking and other international organized crime.
However, we stress that in most countries that are host
to peacekeeping operations, the root problem is the
serious social and economic crises that arise in those
countries. In Haiti, although crime is a major issue,
by far the largest problems are linked to the awful
social situation of the Haitian people. We must make
every effort to overcome them. I do not believe that the
police component of our peacekeeping operations could
foresee that the source of many of the problems they
face are the social situations of host countries.

We fully endorse ongoing dialogue between the
Security Council and troop-contributing countries on
peacekeeping operations, in particular the planning
and drafting of mandates in accordance with Article
44 of the Charter of the United Nations. We echo the
desire expressed by representatives of countries that
provide troops and police to peacekeeping operations
to participate in the planning and drafting of mandates
with the respective Force Commanders.

In conclusion, we reiterate the importance of the
role of police contingents of United Nations peace
missions. Nonetheless, the Security Council must bear
in mind that the United Nations police is an integral of
peacekeeping operations and that the Council must in no
way encroach on the mandate of the General Assembly,
in particular the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations.

