Mr. Mufioz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): First, I
wish to join in the expressions of farewell to
Ambassador Greenstock through his alternate
representative present here. We wish Ambassador
Greenstock the best of luck in his tasks. We are certain
that we will have the pleasure to witness his kindness
and professionalism in the tasks that he will perform in
Iraq, which is an issue of concern to the Council.

Secondly, I welcome the presence here of Prime
Minister Diarra because we are fully aware of the
importance of his role and of the efforts that he has
made to safeguard the road to peace, which has been
constructed with patience and tenacity in Cote d'Ivoire,
overcoming the numerous obstacles encountered so far.

Despite that progress, much remains to be done.
We will need to face resolutely the obstacles and
dangers, among which is regional instability. I agree
with the various speakers preceding me who pointed to
the situation in Liberia as a special concern of the
Council that could have negative repercussions for the
stability of Cote d'Ivoire.

We reiterate our full support for strict compliance
with the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement and the Accra II
Agreement concerning the holding of free and open
elections by 2005. We agree that the necessary steps
must be taken to avoid a deterioration of the current
peaceful situation, in particular - as the Council heard
this morning - the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme, which must be carried out
without delay. We welcome the fact that the considered
and planned steps are being taken.

A subject that has always been of special
importance to my country is the need to deal with
impunity for crimes against human rights. No national
reconciliation process can neglect that vital element.
Any process of national reconstruction and
reconciliation that omits that matter is, in short, a weak
reconciliation process. We therefore hope that those
guilty of crimes against human rights will be brought
to justice - with a dose of realism but also with a
determination to see justice done. In particular, we are
concerned about the rights of children and the forced
recruitment of children as soldiers. Here, efforts need
to be made by all sectors.

Due to all the reasons I have mentioned, we
support the draft presidential statement, and we
sincerely wish the Prime Minister and his Government
every success in the tasks remaining to ensure stability
and peace in C6te d'Ivoire.

