Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand
appreciates the opportunity to contribute to this
important and timely discussion, and takes this
opportunity to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the
presidency of the Council, as well as the new members
of the Council.

We thank the Secretary-General for his latest
report (S/2009/674) and Special Representative Kai
Eide for his work, for this morning's briefing and,
above all, for the role he has played. We wish him well.

While the report is sobering and raises many
matters of real concern, we agree that the key priorities
must be a more focused and better coordinated
international effort, as well as reform of the Afghan
electoral process and Government. We affirm that the
United Nations has a critical role to play in
Afghanistan, and will continue to support that role.
Last year, New Zealand reviewed its participation
in Afghanistan and reconfirmed its commitment to the
provincial reconstruction team that has led work in
Bamyan province since 2003. We have also redeployed
our Special Forces to Afghanistan during the period
President Obama has identified as critical to defeating
the insurgency. New Zealand welcomed the
1 December statement by President Obama, given its
emphasis on a coherent and credible pathway forward
in Afghanistan. We particularly welcome his focus on
increased short-term military capacity to improve
stability and security, and enhancing the capacity of the
Afghan National Army and Police to assume primary
security responsibility.

Mindful that the Secretary-General's report calls
for a "change of mindset in the international
community as well as in the Government of
Afghanistan" (S/2009/674, para. 50), we also support
President Obama's sense of urgency about transferring
that security responsibility to local forces and on
shifting the focus of international efforts to building
civilian capacities that will put Afghanistan on a
peaceful development path. Without those
commitments, there can be no realistic way forward.

For its part, New Zealand is stepping up its
capacity-building with the Afghan National Police in
Bamyan, preparing a pathway for the civilianization of
our provincial reconstruction teams, and increasing its
official development assistance budget to underpin
those changes. We are establishing an embassy and
appointing an ambassador in Kabul to coordinate our
efforts with those of our partners including, most
importantly, the Afghans themselves, so that when
international troops are drawn down, they leave behind
a country capable of managing its own security and the
increased humanitarian assistance that nations such as
ours have signalled their readiness to provide.

All that represents a significant commitment for a
small country with limited military and other
resources. It is a commitment made for good reason to
the people of Afghanistan, but it is also a commitment
made in expectation of a meaningful effort and
response from President Karzai and his new
Administration, when it can be finally formed.

Nothing should disguise the challenge they face.
While we welcomed the fact that elections were held,
doubts about the probity of the results and the lack of
progress around institution-building, and concerns as to
the true depth of the Administration's commitment to
anti-corruption measures have sorely tested the
capacities of contributing nations to maintain or
enhance their contributions. We strongly encourage
President Karzai to move quickly to address the deep-
seated security, governance, corruption, human rights,
justice and narcotics challenges facing Afghanistan -
all identified in today's report.

It is imperative that the Government deliver
tangible improvements to the daily lives of ordinary
Afghans. In so doing, it will have the support of the
international community, but those who put their
military in harm's way in the interests of Afghanistan
and its people are entitled to see better progress on
corruption and governance.

While we strongly support efforts to build a new
and peaceful Afghanistan, we look to the Karzai
Administration to meet the obligations it has now
incurred to the international community. We therefore
welcome Britain's lead in coordinating international
support through a Conference later this month. We will
attend at the ministerial level, and hope that we quickly
reach the stage where meetings to discuss
Afghanistan's future can be held regularly in
Afghanistan itself. We therefore welcome the fact that
the second meeting is to be held in Kabul.

As the Secretary-General's report emphasizes,
there is an urgent need to improve governance and give
greater confidence to ordinary Afghans that their
Administration is working for them, not least in
stamping out corruption. The extent of corruption
outlined in the report makes it clear that the
Administration must address this in all forms and at all
levels. For all those who abuse the system, there must
be no sanctuaries, no safe havens and no impunity.

We want Afghanistan, its people and its
Administration to succeed in their endeavours. They
have our good wishes, our blessings and our active
commitment. We know they need time and space to
rebuild their country, and our contribution is to help
provide that. The people who showed their support for
democracy in the recent elections, sometimes at great
risk, are entitled to see greater probity and better
governance as a result. But the military and civilians
who risk their lives to work in Afghanistan for this
United Nations, for civil society and in provincial
reconstruction teams - all to help Afghanistan and its
people - are also entitled to see better progress on
addressing corruption and governance issues. It is for
the Government and people of Afghanistan to decide
for themselves how best they should do that, but doing
it is the nub ofthe matter as we see it.

