Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): I would like to
thank Executive Director Fedotov of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) for his briefing
to the Council today.

Transnational organized crime not only finances
and fuels conflict but also reinforces corruption and
undermines institutions, thereby destabilizing already
fragile environments. The citizens of the affected
societies are the ones paying the price for that.
Addressing the root causes of conflicts and instability
entails recognizing the severe impact of transnational
organized crime.

West Africa is a transit location for drug trafficking,
which makes the region vulnerable to organized crime.
Drug trafficking is closely linked to instability in the
region, in particular in the Sahel, where smuggling
networks are used by terrorist groups as a source of
financing.

In the Council, we often see the devastating
and potentially long-term effects of conflicts on the
public institutions of a country. Conflicts contribute
to eroded trust in societies and undermine democratic
institutions and the rule of law. In those contexts,
criminal interests can gain a strong foothold. That is
one reason why it is crucial to include the broader rule
of law and justice chain in our peacebuilding efforts.
Building effective, accountable and transparent
institutions at all levels is a fundamental cornerstone
of stable and resilient societies, as also recognized in
Sustainable Development Goal 16. Providing access
to justice, as recently highlighted in resolution 2447
(2018) on police, justice and corrections, is equally
important.

When designing and planning the United Nations
work in conflict-affected regions, the Council needs to
ensure that the role organized crime plays in conflict
dynamics is reflected. The connection between
organized crime and conflict suggests that policing
must be a strategic consideration in all peacekeeping
and peacebuilding efforts. In a context where
peacekeeping is, to a large degree, about introducing
or strengthening the rule of law, the role of police is
critical.

Throughout our tenure on the Council, we have
continuously advocated for an increased focus on
preventive efforts, in which United Nations policing
would play an important role. The Council has also
repeatedly and included in numerous resolutions
mandates or references to combating criminal flows
and networks.

To ensure a more coherent response to drugs and
crime, we need to foster cooperation and information
exchange between the different authorities of Member
States and with international and regional entities
such as INTERPOL, EUROPOL, UNODC and the
Economic Community ofWest African States. Regional
cooperation is one of the most effective operational
tools for preventing organized crime and insecurity.
The UNODC regional programme in West Africa has,
as we have heard today, also contributed significantly
to enhancing the capacity of West African States to
tackle narcotics smuggling.

Finally, it is important that the Council continue
to recognize the role that organized crime and drug
smuggling play in conflict. If we fail to consider these
issues when designing our conflict response or efforts
on peacebuilding and prevention, we will not be able
to address root causes or conflict cycles appropriately.
This is true for West Africa as well as for other regions
plagued by conflict.

