Mr. Sumaida'ie (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to take this opportunity to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month and
to commend your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of Argentina, for his efforts last month.

I would also like to thank you and the other
members of the Council for allowing me to participate
in this important meeting, which is being held to
follow up on the great achievements made by my
country in recent weeks. The Iraqi people have
demonstrated to the world their refusal to yield to
terrorists or to be driven by the ruthless designs of
those terrorists to ignite strife among them, and that
they are able and determined to take the risks necessary
for their freedom. They also proved, once again, that
they alone possess the will to determine their future
and to choose the path that meets their aspirations.

Iraq successfully passed through the first gate in
its march towards democracy and is determined to
proceed with and accomplish the remaining stages
prescribed in the Transitional Administrative Law and
adopted by the Security Council. Here, I would like to
hail the success of the Independent Electoral
Commission of Iraq and the Iraqi interim Government
for organizing the elections and to salute the courage of
all those who contributed to the success of those
elections, in particular the members of the Iraqi police
and army who provided the security necessary to carry
them out. I would also like to express our appreciation
for the active and supportive role of the multinational
force.

I also take this opportunity to commend the
United Nations for its vital contribution in supporting
the electoral process and the Independent Electoral
Commission of Iraq, and for the outstanding efforts of
the United Nations Electoral Assistance Division to
bring the process to a successful conclusion. In
addition, I would like to thank the International
Organization for Migration for its role in organizing
the elections for Iraqis living abroad and to thank the
International Mission for Iraqi Elections, which
worked to ensure that the elections were carried out in
accordance with international standards. We look
forward to the continued support of the international
community and the United Nations in the stages ahead.

We realize that - as the representative of the
Secretary-General indicated - that our electoral
venture was not perfect and that, inevitably, it was
accompanied by some minor failures. However, that
must not divert our attention from the fact that the
magnitude of what was accomplished under the current
difficult circumstances exceeded even our own
expectations. Undoubtedly, we will benefit from that
experience in the coming constitutional the elections
and those that will follow them. We regret that some
parties chose not to participate in the elections, despite
the great efforts of the interim Government to convince
them otherwise. But we are determined to overcome
those difficulties and to include in both the
constitutional and the electoral processes all
communities that opt for peace, as was recently stated
by the leaders of the main parties and coalitions that
were elected to the Transitional National Assembly by
the people. The Transnational National Assembly is on
course to select a Government that represents the Iraqi
people in all its diversity.

We look forward to the Transitional National
Assembly achieving the next important task: writing
Iraq's constitution in an inclusive manner that will
ensure the participation and involvement of the Iraqi
people, reflecting its rich mixture of cultures and
beliefs. For our part, we will do our utmost to bring
together all available Iraqi and international expertise
in that field to accomplish the task in a manner that
will strengthen our national unity and will embody the
human values and noble goals of our new Iraq.

The challenges and difficulties that will face the
Elected Iraqi Government are enormous. Among them
is rebuilding the Iraqi army and police, to protect Iraq's
internal and external security, and to deter the threats
Iraq faces. Iraq has become an arena for terrorists and
forces of darkness whose destructive objectives cut
across the most cherished aspirations and interests of
the Iraqi people. We commend, in this regard the
multinational force for its role, in accordance with its
Security Council mandate, in helping us rebuild our
army and police, and in training and supporting them
when carrying out their mission.

The Iraqi Government will face yet another
challenge, and that is the reconstruction of Iraq and
activation of its economy, in which it will need the
support and assistance of the international community.
Iraq's infrastructure is in ruins and will need enormous
efforts to be repaired. It is essential that we provide the
basic services and employment opportunities that will
make life more tolerable for its citizens, thereby
helping to bring social stability. This will largely
depend on reviving and priming the Iraqi economy.

In this respect, I would like to express our
appreciation for the generous contributions of friendly
States, and for the role of the United Nations and its
agencies in coordinating international contributions
and implementing the reconstruction projects, in
cooperation with the relevant Iraqi ministries. I would
like to take this opportunity to call upon Iraq's friends
to deliver on their pledges made in the Madrid donors
conference, and to assure them that the Iraqi people
will always bear in mind these noble initiatives.

In conclusion, I would like to assure the Council
that Iraq is living in a new era that stands for the
principles of democracy, freedom of expression,
respect for human rights, adherence to international
law and building sound relations with its neighbouring
countries, based on mutual respect and non-
interference in their internal affairs. Consistent with
this vision, we are endeavouring to restore Iraq's
natural role in the international community. We
appreciate the Council's efforts to support the
Government and people of Iraq and help Iraq to get
back on its feet and take its natural position as a
responsible member of the international community.

We hope that this effort will be consolidated
through a programmed and rapid removal of the
punitive measures and restrictions that were imposed

on Iraq because of the reckless policies of the previous In accordance with the understanding reached in
regime. the Council's prior consultations. I now invite Council

. _ members to informal consultations to cont'nue our
