Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): For the Security
Council to discuss the importance of multilateralism
in the maintenance of international peace and security
can seem like discussing a truism. After all, the
United Nations is the embodiment of the very idea
of multilateralism. But this is, indeed, an important
moment to recommit, and this is an important debate,
as we have heard this morning, so we are grateful to
you, Mr. President, for convening it.

My statement will focus on the question of the
legality of the use of force, but I also want to echo the
speakers who have spoken about the importance of
discussing the role of the veto and the effectiveness of
the work of the Council. I want to reference the code
of conduct on mass atrocity crimes in that connection.

The United Nations is the ultimate expression of
the rule of law at the international level. A key aspect
of the Charter, and therefore a fundamental task for the
Security Council, is to enforce the rules governing the
use of force. Born out of the desire to "save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war", the Charter has
made the use of force illegal, with only two exceptions:
self-defence in accordance with Article 51 and the
authorization of the use of force by the Council.

In recent years, we have witnessed a widening
interpretation by some of which actions qualify as
self-defence, without much discussion or consequence.
Unfortunately, we have also witnessed the unilateral use
of force without the prior authorization of the Council,
and the attempt to expand the rules enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations. Those discussions have
been rather opaque and limited to a small number of
States, but there was also a process aimed at codifying
the laws and norms on the use of force, a process that
was open ended, inclusive and transparent, a process in
the framework of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) aimed at developing a legally
binding definition of an act of aggression, as well as that
of a crime of aggression. Stretching over several years,
that process was open to all Member States, including
those that had not ratified the Rome Statute. The decision
to have a process open to the entire membership was
made owing to the overall significance of the effort, not
least the work of the Council. Various States, including
some assembled at this table today, contributed actively
to that effort and supported the consensual agreement
on both definitions before the Review Conference of
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court,
held in Kampala in 2010.

Grounded firmly in existing international law,
that definition has a number of important features. It
establishes a high threshold for a determination that an
act of aggression has been committed. Such an act has
to constitute a manifest violation of the Charter of the
United Nations by its character, gravity and scale. In
other words, being in violation of the rules governing
the use of force under the Charter of the United Nations
does not automatically constitute an act of aggression,
and therefore would not lead to individual criminal
responsibility. The crime of aggression, on the other
hand, is defined as a leadership crime. Only individuals
in leadership positions - military or political, for
example - can be held criminally responsible.

After the agreement on the complex definitional
issues, States parties also forged a consensus on the
conditions for the exercise of the ICC's jurisdiction
over the crime of aggression. The role of the Council
was a crucial aspect in that discussion, owing to the
Council's competence under Article 39 of the Charter
of the United Nations to make a determination that an
act of aggression has been committed. The primacy of
the Council's role in that respect was never challenged
and is fully safeguarded in the Rome Statute ofthe ICC.

After a successful ratification process and
consensual activation decision last December, the
Council has had, since 17 July, an additional tool at
its disposal to enforce the rules of the Charter of the
United Nations on the use of force through its ability to
seize the ICC with situations in which those rules have
manifestly been violated. We are aware, of course, of
the difficult political dynamic in the Council and of its
chequered relationship with the ICC in particular, but
if the Council is serious about its role as the guardian
of the Charter of the United Nations, it now has an
additional tool available to enforce a decision on the
legality of the use of force.

The importance of that development does not lie in
the likelihood ofa large number ofcases before the ICC.
It rests in the ability of every State individually and the
Council collectively to benefit from an internationally
agreed definition of an act of aggression when engaging
in complex decision-making processes on the use of
force. Recent trends indicate very clearly that armed
conflict between States, in Violation of the Charter of
the United Nations, is an ever more present threat. And,
as we heard this morning, the nature of modern warfare
is changing rapidly.

The risks of cyberwarfare cast an ever-darker
shadow, which makes it a truly burning challenge to
thoroughly discuss the international law aspects of
those trends. The definitions laid out in the Rome
Statute offer the best framework for a discussion on
regulating the threats of cyberwarfare. There is no
doubt that the global order rooted in international
law and multilateralism is under attack today. The
Organization is the ultimate expression of the belief in
the power of the law. Its continued relevance depends
on our ability to further strengthen the rules enshrined
in the Charter, to meet the challenges of tomorrow, and
to stand up for that belief.

