I should like at the outset to express my gratitude to the President of the Republic of the Niger, Mr. Issoufou, for having organized today's Security Council debate on the very topical topic of global governance after the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). The novel coronavirus pandemic has acted as a catalyst for the transformation of international relations. It is not only States and integration associations that are being tested for strength but also global governance mechanisms, primarily the United Nations. It is important to learn from current developments in a timely manner and to draw the right conclusions in order to ensure a peaceful, secure and stable future for all humankind. The most important issue that the current crisis has highlighted is the interdependence and interconnectedness of all States without exception in all spheres of public life. Russia has long drawn attention to the transboundary nature of modern threats, including international terrorism, the threat of the uncontrolled proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, cybercrime, drug trafficking and many more. Now that those threats include pandemics such as the one we are experiencing today, our calls for the development of joint responses to global challenges are becoming ever more relevant. This year's events have shown that no one can simply fence themselves off from such threats. The coronavirus disease has affected everyone, which means that it is also necessary to jointly overcome its consequences, setting aside our fleeting differences. Unfortunately, our common misfortune has not smoothed out the differences between States, but on the contrary has exacerbated many of them. The moments of crisis that we had observed in international relations have resurfaced. A number of countries are increasingly tempted to look abroad to assign responsibility for their internal problems. Obvious attempts are being made by individual States to use the current situation to promote self-serving, fleeting interests and to settle scores with unwanted Governments or geopolitical rivals. Despite all this, the practice of imposing unilateral, illegitimate sanctions persists, which undermines the authority and prerogatives of the United Nations. We have repeatedly drawn attention to the need to lift restrictions that in the context of the pandemic hit vulnerable groups especially hard and limit their access to food and health care. Secretary-General Guterres also called for the suspension of such measures given current conditions. We strongly support his initiative. The proposal by the President of the Russian Federation, Vladimir Putin, on the introduction of so-called green corridors free of sanctions and trade wars, which he advanced at the Group of 20 Summit in April, remains on the table. It is regrettable that those States that apply policies of illegal sanctions continue to turn a deaf ear to our arguments, and even more regrettable that they ignore the basic needs of ordinary people throughout the world. I am firmly convinced that international efforts to overcome the crisis must be coordinated and carried out with the United Nations playing a central coordinating role. The world Organization remains a universal and single platform for dialogue, and its importance in the global architecture amid the pandemic has only increased. In that regard, we consider the increased attacks on the United Nations system as a whole and its specialized agencies to be absolutely unjustified. This applies primarily to the World Health Organization (WHO). The overwhelming majority of countries believe that WHO acted professionally at all stages of the crisis, taking timely and effective proactive steps in close coordination with all Member States. Of course, the capacity of the international health-care system must be strengthened and taken to a new level. Russia has made a significant contribution to those efforts, as it was the first to develop and register the Sputnik V coronavirus vaccine. We reiterate our willingness to cooperate in the epidemiological field with all interested States and international organizations. The day before yesterday, President Putin, in his address to the General Assembly (A/75/PV.4, annex VIII), offered free vaccinations to United Nations personnel. That is our response to the appeals of our United Nations colleagues. Russia, as President Putin stressed, could not remain indifferent to those appeals. He also suggested convening a video- teleconference with all countries that are developing and producing a coronavirus vaccine. That proposal remains on the table. The current pandemic has turned out to be a global shift, a kind of black swan, that has presented us with a choice: to close down and blame others for our troubles or to emerge from the crisis together and deploy common efforts to ensure a prosperous future of all countries and peoples. And although the choice is obvious, the second path requires maximum political will and strategic thinking. We believe that it is worth starting with an honest and open dialogue, primarily among the permanent members of the Security Council, which, under the Charter of the United Nations, bear special responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security. In that vein, Russian launched an initiative to convene a summit with the participation of those five countries, as President Vladimir Putin noted in his statement before the General Assembly. An in-person discussion among leaders about the principles underlying interaction among States as well as ways to resolve the most pressing problems facing humankind would be an important step towards strengthening collective principles in international affairs and restoring global strategic stability during the post-pandemic period. We strongly believe that such a meeting should be held as soon as possible, the international epidemiological situation permitting. It is important to reinforce existing formats for communication on the basis of equality, cooperation and consensus, including cooperation within the Group of 20; the BRICS group, that is, Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa; and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization. We are convinced that the future of global governance lies with those organizations that can provide flexible responses to emerging challenges without prejudice to the United Nations-centred character of the international architecture. In October, the work of the Security Council will be presided over by Russia. We will make every effort to ensure that the work of this principal organ of the United Nations is coordinated and effective, involving constructive interaction among all its members, and based on international law and, above all, the purpose and principles of the Charter of the United Nations. Once again, I thank the Nigerien presidency for this very useful initiative.
