Mr. Lowcock: As Council members have heard
me say many times before, Yemen is the world's
worst humanitarian crisis and the location of the
Organization's largest relief operation. More than 250
humanitarian agencies - most of them Yemeni - are
working to deliver the United Nations response plan.
Together, we are reaching more than 12 million people
across the country every month. But as the aid operation
has expanded, the drivers of the crisis have continued
to get worse. In fact, it often feels in Yemen that the
more we achieve, the bigger and more complicated the
problem becomes.

For more than a year, we have advocated progress
on five key priorities: first, the protection of civilians;
secondly, humanitarian access; thirdly, funding for the
aid operation; fourthly, support for the economy; and
fifthly, a political solution. I would like to update the
Council on where these issues now stand.

Let me start with protection of civilians. September
was the deadliest month for civilians so far this year,
with reports of 388 having been killed or injured due
to conflict across the country. That is an average
of 13 people every day. There are many gruesome
examples. Last week, four children in Al-Hudaydah
were killed when unexploded ordnance from previous
rounds of shelling detonated nearby. All four were from
the same family. On 23 and 24 September, air strikes
killed 22 civilians in a mosque in Amran and a family
home in Al-Dhale'e. And in Sa'dah last week, air strikes
damaged a United Nations-supported water system that
serves 12,000 people. That was the fourth time that
facility had been hit since 2016.

As Mr. Griffiths will tell the Council during his
briefing, violence decreased a little in October, but
with more than 30 active front lines, we can only
hope that recent steps towards de-escalation, on which
Martin will brief the Council, will continue. I continue
to call for a nationwide ceasefire. In parallel to these
efforts, all parties must uphold their obligations under
international humanitarian law to protect civilians and
civilian infrastructure.

The second issue is humanitarian access, which
remains extremely challenging, particularly in the
north. Agencies there must still navigate more than
100 different restrictions imposed by Ansar Allah
authorities, in addition to frequent harassment and
attempts at interference. In September, Ansar Allah
authorities effectively expelled or refused entry to
several United Nations personnel, including a senior
official. Movement restrictions also remain severe. To
cite one example, local authorities recently blocked
humanitarian assessments in Haj jah and Al-Hudaydah,
where the authorities themselves tell us that more than
12,000 families have been affected by floods. We
are engaging with Ansar Allah authorities and have
underlined our expectation that they will take action to
improve the operating environment in accordance with
humanitarian principles. We have seen some progress,
with dozens of blocked projects recently cleared to
start, but many more projects remain pending.

On a separate note, we hope recent discussions
with Ansar Allah authorities will finally pave the way
for a United Nations-led assessment of the decaying
FSO SAFER oil tanker. This assessment is the first
step in preventing a major potential environmental and
humanitarian catastrophe in the Red Sea. The United
Nations remains eager to assist with the FSO SAFER. It
is entirely up to Ansar Allah whether we are able to do
so. We have, of course, been here before.

In the south, we are encouraged by reports that talks
between the Government and the Southern Transitional
Council are progressing. Mr. Griffiths will provide
further details on those reports. A renewal of hostilities
in the south would put civilians in harm's way and
impact humanitarian operations. Last month, several
humanitarian organizations suspended activities in
parts of Abyan and Shabwah as a result of clashes
there. These programmes have now mostly resumed but
continue to face difficulties near front lines.

The Government has made substantial progress in
clearing backlogs of pending humanitarian projects,
with many recently approved to begin. But several
other projects are still awaiting Government clearance,
which is delaying assistance for people who need it.

The third point is funding for the aid operation.
For much of the year, agencies have struggled to raise
enough money. Over the last few months, funding
gaps have forced key programmes to close. I therefore
welcome the generous contributions we have received
in the past several weeks. At the General Assembly
high-level week last month, the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia gave the United Nations $500 million for the
response plan, bringing its total contributions to this
year's plan to $708 million. Earlier in September, the
United Arab Emirates allocated $200 million to my
Office and the World Food Programme, bringing its
total to $380 million.

Other donors have also stepped forward. Kuwait has
just given $88 million. In the past two months, the United
States, Germany, the European Commission and others
have also given substantial additional funds on top of
their earlier contributions. With hundreds of millions
of dollars in new funding over the past six weeks, the
response plan has gone from 45 per cent funded in
early September to 65 per cent funded today. Although
substantial gaps remain, United Nations agencies have
reopened many programmes that had been suspended,
including support for health-care facilities, malnutrition
treatment centres and vaccination campaigns. Other
programmes should come back online soon.

The fourth point is the economy. Last year, economic
collapse pushed Yemen to the brink of widespread
famine. We should therefore all be concerned that
indicators are again pointing in that direction. The
exchange rate is fluctuating at between 580 and 595 rial
to the dollar. That is more than double the rate when
the conflict escalated five years ago. Because Yemen
imports almost everything, consumer prices have also
more than doubled, pushing basic goods out of reach for
millions of people. Therefore, although there may be
food in the markets, fewer people can afford it.

Five hundred and eighty rial to the dollar is of
course an improvement over the sustained 600-rial rate
that we had seen for the past six weeks, and I want to
commend the Government of Yemen for its efforts to
stabilize the exchange rate and pay more civil servant
salaries and strengthen the economy. But ultimately
those efforts cannot manoeuvre around a fundamental
obstacle - the lack of foreign exchange. I call on
Yemen's partners to provide regular injections of
foreign exchange at a scale that will keep the exchange
rate stable and help return food and other commodity
prices to more affordable levels.

I also want to repeat my concern about the
humanitarian impact of recent Government regulations
on commercial fuel imports, which have contributed to
severe fuel shortages in many areas. Fuel is essential to
transporting food to markets, pumping drinking water
and powering sanitation systems. Nearly three-quarters
of hospitals rely on fuel to provide care, and aid
organizations need fuel for their work.

Over the past several weeks, those regulations,
imposed by the Government, have blocked commercial
fuel imports from Al-Hudaydah. We understand,
however, that yesterday the Government cleared eight
vessels carrying the equivalent of more than a month's
supply of average fuel imports. Several of those
vessels have already started sailing for Al-Hudaydah.
One of them arrived this morning. That is something
I welcome.

It is important to understand the central role of
fuel in determining the humanitarian needs in Yemen
and our ability to meet them. As severe shortages have
gripped many areas in recent weeks, fuel prices have
doubled or even tripled. Very quickly, that pushed the
cost of food and drinking water, which many people
already could not afford, to even higher prices. Without
fuel, municipal water systems in three cities have simply
stopped working altogether, and others have cut back
services. Sanitation plants have reduced operations.
Large quantities of human, animal and commercial
waste have accumulated in the streets, greatly
exacerbating the risk of cholera and other diseases.

Rising fuel prices also mean families are less
likely to get help when they need it because transport
simply becomes unaffordable or unavailable. In some
areas, the number of people reporting to health-care
facilities over the past several weeks has dropped by
50 per cent because sick people could not get there. At
the same time, mobile health teams are struggling to
reach patients where they are because the teams do not
have fuel either.

Therefore, I once again welcome the step, which I
just announced, towards more flexibility, but I also call
on the Government to manage commercial imports in a
way that sustainably avoids exacerbating humanitarian
needs. I also call on Ansar Allah authorities to avoid
any steps that could worsen shortages or push price
rises higher. Everything possible has to be done to
ensure that families are able to buy what they need to
survive and that essential services can continue.

The funding we have received for the response plan
will allow humanitarian agencies to continue keeping
millions of people alive. That is cause for optimism, but
there is much more to do if our aim is not just to reduce
people's suffering, but to end it altogether. The only
way to achieve that is to stop the war, and I am sure that
Martin Griffiths will address that shortly.

