Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): First
of all, allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I wish you every success. I also would
like to thank the Permanent Representative of the Arab
Republic of Egypt, who successfully guided the work
of the Council during the month of August. Finally, I
would like to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2017/746) and, of course, Mr. Mamabolo, Joint
Special Representative for the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, both for his
briefing and his sincere cooperation.

I welcome the outcome of the twenty-first consultative
meeting between the African Union and the United
Nations, which took place last week in your country,
Mr. President. The meeting reaffirmed the central
aspect of the strategic partnership between the
African Union and the United Nations and called for
a strengthening of the partnership in order to achieve
peace and stability throughout our country, Africa. The
partnership between the two organizations through the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) is an outstanding example of the
vitality we wish to see. We hope to see a strengthened
partnership, especially with regard to African
capabilities and capacities, early warning mechanisms,
conflict prevention and resolution, rebuilding and
the necessary financing for peacekeeping missions
in Africa.

In recent months, the five states of Darfur have
seen the mobilization of all segments of society and all
institutions to lay the foundations ofpeace and stability,
thanks to the efforts of the Sudanese Government and
the United Nations - particularly UNAMID and the
African Union. That has enabled the consolidation of
security and stability throughout the entire region after
the rebel movements were neutralized and forced to
withdraw from Darfur and the Sudan, so that all can
finally focus on implementing development projects
and strengthening intercommunal reconciliation to set
Darfur back on a positive path to contribute to building
a modern Sudan - as it was once doing.

As the Council may recall, the President of the
Sudan, Mr. Omar Hassan Ahmad AI-Bashir, expressed
the intention of the Government to implement the
campaign to collect illegal arms from all Sudanese
citizens. The campaign was launched under the
supervision of the Vice-President of the Republic,
Mr. Hasabo Mohammed Abdul Rahman, following the
adoption of a staggered national plan that starts with
awareness raising about the need to surrender weapons
and then with the implementation of one of the oldest
laws in the Sudan, on weapons and ammunitions, for
those who continue to violate it. Preliminary reports
indicate that the plan is thus far progressing well,
but the collection, marking, seizure and elimination
of weapons is a very costly operation that requires
significant technical capabilities. That is why we called
upon the international community to lend its assistance
to ensure that this crucially important plan to sustain
peace and security is implemented. As the Council is
aware, the proliferation of weaons among civilians is
one of the drivers of conflict. That is why we again call
upon the international community to help implement
the plan. Its positive impact will not be limited to
Darfur alone, but to all of the Sudan.

Furthermore, the measures that the Government
of the Sudan intends to undertake in cooperation with
its brotherly and neighbouring States are significant,
especially in terms of limiting the flow of weapons.
That is an important question that also requires the
assistance and attention of the international community.

Following the Council's adoption of resolution
2363 (2017), which enshrines the Secretary-General's
proposals and those ofthe African Union's Commission
aimed at reconfiguring UNAMID and reducing its size,
the Sudanese Government reaffirmed its commitment
to cooperating and coordinating with UNAMID to
implement the resolution.

The first stage saw the closure of three positions,
and we intend to close 11 more towards the end of the
year. The withdrawal and closure of various UNAMID
positions sends a positive signal that international
community confirms that the situation has returned
to normal and that security is being maintained. That
has been demonstrated through the massive return of
displaced persons to their villages, as well as the addition
of a great many heads and chiefs of rebel movements
to the peace process. Consultations are still under way
and are taking place at various levels. They are aimed at
convincing the other chiefs and heads of armed groups
to join the peace process under the auspices of the
African Union High-level Implementation Panel.

At a logical and political level, the changes that
we are witnessing in Darfur force us to reconsider
the sanctions that have been imposed on the Sudan
since 2005 pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005). Those
sanctions must be reviewed. We are open to listen to
and consider any ideas, including those presented by
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations.

As we have stated on numerous occasions, the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur remains the only
way to achieve lasting peace in Darfur. It is one of the
more comprehensive solutions among those aimed at
eliminating the crisis. Despite the mild refusal ofcertain
heads of rebel groups to support the Document, over
85 per cent of its provisions have been implemented.
There is therefore a need to continue along that course
in order to ensure that peace returns to Darfur and all
of the Sudan.

Efforts made by Qatar, the sponsor of the Doha
Document for Peace, to rehabilitate Darfur and rebuild
villages in order to facilitate the voluntary return
of citizens to the region, as well as its support for
development projects. have contributed significantly to
the current situation in Darfur. We would also like to
thank many other brotherly States, such as China, Japan
and Turkey, as well as the League of Arab States. The
Government of the Sudan wishes to see the international
community continue to lend its support to ensure that
we are able to implement the remaining aspects of the
Doha Document and to convince non-signatory parties
to accede to it as soon as possible. Thus, we could put
an end to fighting, which would enable us to implement
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes, the return of refugees and reconciliation
among communities.

In conclusion, we would like to convey our gratitude
to UNAMID for its many contributions. We would like
to pay tribute to the peacekeepers who have laid down
their lives for the Sudan. Finally, we would like to
express our gratitude to troop- and police-contributing
countries. We would like to reiterate our readiness
to cooperate with regional and international partners
until all components of UNAMID have left our
country - thereby demonstrating and proving the
success of this huge peacekeeping operation.

