Mr. Corr (Ireland): May I first express
appreciation to Special Representative Sharma for his
briefing on the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor (UNMISET) and, as other colleagues have
already done this morning, to thank Ambassador
Sharma and the men and women of UNMISET for their
work, which is being carried out in the highest
traditions of the United Nations.

I would also like to extend a warm welcome to
the Permanent Representative of Timor-Leste,
Ambassador Guterres, for the first time since his
country joined the United Nations on 27 September.
Membership of the United Nations is a recognition of
nationhood and of having a place among the peoples of
the world - a moment of arrival, as for any new
Member State, for the people of Timor-Leste.
Ireland associates itself fully with the statement
that will be delivered shortly by the representative of
Denmark, on behalf of the European Union.

The report of the Secretary-General highlights
that remarkable progress has been made in a number of
important areas and that the benchmarks set out in the
plan for UNMISET are being met. The work of nation-
building is proceeding well. At the same time, the
report also highlights the considerable challenges
facing the new State and rightly points out that the
continued engagement of the international community
is essential to ensure that Timor-Leste has the chance it
deserves to seize the opportunity history has given it.

The Government and the people of Timor-Leste
are to be congratulated for the way in which they have
set about building their future. The Government's
National Development Plan, in our View, reflects a
balanced course for the country's medium-term
economic and social needs. Ireland admires the
judgement of the authorities in Timor-Leste for giving
priority to the protection of human rights. The rejection
of the death penalty is an admirable example of the
direction in which the country intends to go. Timor-
Leste is meeting, as Ambassador Sharma said, the
highest standards expected of a democratic State.

We applaud the manner in which President
Gusmao and his Government are approaching foreign
policy, particularly Timor-Leste's crucial relationship
with Indonesia. Ireland welcomes the establishment by
the two countries of the Joint Ministerial Commission
and the fact that they are jointly addressing issues such
as border demarcation and access to Timor-Leste from
Oecussi. The test of the Commission and, more
broadly, of the resolve of the two countries will be in
the implementation of equitable solutions to these
issues. Additionally, a just outcome for those who
committed serious crimes in 1999 will be important for
the positive development of relations between the two
countries. Such an outcome would also be good for
both societies.

It is right to focus on the many positive
developments of the sort I have mentioned, but it is
right for the Council not to ignore the very real
challenges remaining in Timor-Leste in addressing
which the Council can still play a role, through
UNMISET.

Timor-Leste is unquestionably a very poor
country. The fact that only 23 per cent of its modest
budgeted revenue is locally generated puts into stark
focus the challenge Timor-Leste faces in creating a
sustainable economic environment. As many have
remarked this morning, it is clear the donor community
will have an essential role to play well after the current
phase of immediate post-independence engagement.

It is no particular surprise that the justice sector is
struggling. We cannot expect a country with a long
colonial history, which suffered much Violence before
independence, to produce overnight a functioning
justice sector. The justice sector is a highly important
face of authority, however, and has a particularly
critical role to play in maintaining the confidence of
the people in their institutions. In view of the ongoing
difficulties, Ireland would encourage the widest
possible cooperation between the Government and the
international community to address the most urgent
needs. A situation in which a majority of the prison
population is being held for long periods without trial
because the court system does not function properly
needs to be addressed with the utmost urgency.

The significant progress in training and
developing the Police Service is encouraging. So too is
the news that an UNMISET-led mission is to assess the
longer-term policing needs. This is the sort of work the
Security Council should promote. The Secretary-
General's report also confirms that UNMISET is on
target with the development of Timor-Leste's defence
forces, although it stresses that continued donor and
bilateral support will be necessary for this progress to
continue.

It is natural that UNMISET has concentrated on
the central institutions of government, as mandated in
resolution 1410 (2002). We all agree on the need to
strengthen the capacity of the central Government,
something essential to the functioning of the new State.
At the same time, however, we should not overlook the
fact that 80 per cent of the population is rural-based.
This has implications for local institution-building and,
by extension, for the consolidation of the legitimacy of
authority. Those involved in the sub-national governing
structure should receive support and guidance on
operational matters. In this respect Ireland's
development cooperation programme, Ireland Aid, has
undertaken to help the Government develop terms of
reference for a study on decentralization options.

Ireland is closely involved in a range of
development cooperation programmes in Timor-Leste.
We have been so since 1999, and last year we opened a
representative office in Dili. Our experience there has
shown us that bilateral aid is crucial to the future
development of Timor-Leste. That country had already
been identified by Ireland's Development Aid
programme as a priority for reconstruction and
rehabilitation activity. The work we are doing strongly
supports and complements the priorities set by the
Security Council in resolution 1410 (2002) and the
work of UNMISET.

The way in which the Council has handled the
situation in Timor-Leste since the tragic and chaotic
days of August 1999 has demonstrated that the United
Nations, in this as in other areas, is fully capable of
successfully handling very complex tasks. For more
than three years, the Council and the international
community have been adroit and generous in their
handling of the situation. During that period, the
situation in Timor-Leste has greatly improved. The
United Nations mission there has evolved from
peacekeeping to peace-building.

The current mission shows that peace-building is
very much part of the Council's work, and not merely
something to be contracted out to other parts of the
United Nations system. Only a few years ago, it was
very difficult to convince the United Nations
membership that the Council should be engaging in
peace-building work. Now, that debate appears to have
been put to rest, to the benefit of Timor-Leste and the
United Nations. It is now appropriate that in the period
ahead the Council should maintain its Vigorous
involvement with Timor-Leste. Ireland strongly urges
that it do just that.

