Mr. van Walsum (Netherlands) (spoke in French): I wish at the outset, Sir, to congratulate you
and to say how pleased I am to see you presiding over
the work of the Security Council for the month of June.
I assure you and your delegation of the full cooperation
of my delegation. I wish also to thank your

predecessor, Ambassador Wang Yingfan of China, for
the considerate and effective manner in which he
conducted the Council's business during the month of
May.

(spoke in English)

We join other delegations in expressing our
satisfaction at having Ms. Del Ponte in the Security
Council for a second time. The first time we had that
pleasure was just less than six months ago, and my
delegation considers this an ideal frequency: a brief
calculation shows that Ms. Del Ponte's third briefing
will take place under the Dutch presidency, and we are
looking forward to that.

During our meeting in November, my delegation
expressed its concern at Croatia's failure to comply
with the Prosecutor's request to hand over documents
on Operations Flash and Storm. We now note with
satisfaction that the new Croatian Government has
adopted a totally different attitude and accepts the
Tribunal's jurisdiction in this matter. We especially
appreciate the openness and transparency with which
the new Croatian Government approaches this matter,
as witnessed by the excellent symposium which took
place in Opatija on 8 and 9 May and which was
attended by, among others, Judge Jorda and several
other members of the International Criminal Tribunal.
We understand that there are still some problems to be
resolved and that the Prosecutor does not have the
access to all sensitive witnesses and information that
she needs. We hope that this will be resolved, because,
obviously, it would not be very helpful if the
Government of Croatia accepted the principle of
jurisdiction but then still withheld the essential
documents on technical grounds. But we have taken
note of the optimism that the Prosecutor has expressed
in that regard.

This, of course, means that all our focus shifts to
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, if it was not there
already. We must condemn Belgrade's lack of
cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal.

Last time Ms. Del Ponte visited us, she had not
yet been to Rwanda, and she has now spent nine weeks
in Arusha and in Rwanda. It is very gratifying to learn
that relations between her office and Rwanda have so
improved. We were pleased to learn of the conviction
of Mr. Georges Ruggiu, especially since he had played
an important role in the broadcasts of Radio Television
Libre des Mille Collines, because during our recent
visit to Africa, the mission that visited the Democratic
Republic of the Congo learned that poisonous hate
broadcasts are certainly not a thing of the past. We
think it is important that there be special focus on the
role of Radio Television Libre des Mille Collines in
this matter.

I have a technical question which is of interest to
my delegation: perhaps the prosecutor can inform us
where Mr. Ruggiu will serve his 12 years.

I would like next to comment on what the
Prosecutor told us about gachacha. Ambassador
Holbrooke too has commented on this. IfI understood
Ms. Del Ponte correctly, she described gachacha as an
ideal solution in view of the impossibility of
eliminating the backlog through normal court
procedures. We would be inclined to come to the same
conclusion: that it is the only way of solving the
backlog problem. But I am not yet quite sure that we
would describe it as an ideal solution. I would be very
grateful if the Prosecutor could elaborate on this
further. Obviously, it is an ideal solution if there is no
other way to solve the backlog problem, but I would be
grateful for further comments, because for us it is a
very unfamiliar concept and we would like to have
more information on it.

Finally, I would like to repeat what I said in
November: in our view, the tribunals play an important
role in that they serve as a trial ground where we are
learning important lessons for later use in the
establishment of the International Criminal Court. For
that reason, I would like to say that I wholeheartedly
agree with Ambassador Holbrooke, who referred to the
situation in Sierra Leone. The most important lesson
that the Security Council is learning these days is that
impunity is not the right solution to any problem. That
is also why my delegation sincerely hopes that the
United States will overcome its hesitations with regard
to the International Criminal Court.

