Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to begin by thanking your delegation,
Mr. President, for organizing a series of public
meetings, which, we believe, is very welcome to the
Council and to the Organization as a whole. I also wish
to welcome the presence of the Secretary-General and
to thank Mr. Pascoe for his report and the Permanent
Observer of Palestine and the Permanent
Representative of Israel for their statements. I believe
both have provided important insights, and I welcome
the opportunity they were given to address the Council.
I believe they have further enriched today's discussion.

The Security Council has become part of the
problems of the Middle East. That was seen clearly
during the last few weeks when this organ - one of
the fundamental bodies of the multilateral system -
was unable to condemn the blocking of the Gaza
crossings, which resulted in a desperate humanitarian
situation. Nor was it able to condemn the killings that
took place at a Jewish seminary in West Jerusalem. The
Security Council cannot remain part of the problems of
the Middle East. It should become part of the solution
to the crisis in that region.

It is normal for the parties to the conflict to
accuse each other, and it is equally normal for each to
justify its actions as a response to the actions of the
other. What does not seem normal, nor acceptable, is
for this Council to serve as an echo chamber for either
of the parties. That road will not lead us to the peace
that everyone claims to want.

We insist that this Council withstand the logic of
causation that the parties have invoked. We cannot
continue to approve the actions of either, believing,
like them, that those actions are only justified
responses to an earlier grievance. If we continue along
that track the Security Council will remain part of the
problems of the Middle East. However, if we find the
necessary determination to condemn every act of
Violence, whatever its origin, the Council will have
started to become a means to resolve the problems of
the region.

In turn, we must also change the ways the United
Nations system considers and approaches the
humanitarian situation of the Palestinian people. Their
humanitarian crisis, the gravest since 1967, is not just
the obvious result of war and displacement. While the
Palestinian territory has been reduced to 22 per cent of
the territory set out in General Assembly resolution
181 (II), the number of families assisted by the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees (UNRWA) has multiplied by ten over the last
ten years. The Palestinian population have not been
well served, and now we must adopt a Vision that
replaces the palliative care provided the international
community. Only an approach that envisages the
normalization of their lives can prevent catastrophe, an
approach that offers them productive labour and that
promotes their economic, social and cultural
development - an approach, finally, that would
prevent the great catastrophe that appears to be taking
shape there.

What should be equally clear is the great
responsibility that the Palestinian leadership holds in
shaping an environment conducive to development.
There will be no development without peace. Building
peace in the Middle East obliges the Palestinian
leadership to put an end to terrorist attacks, to convince
the most radical elements and to integrate them into
their political life, to ensure that those radical elements
learn to live in keeping with the maxim of the Mexican
national hero who recalled that among individuals, as
among nations, respect for the rights of others is peace.

Moreover, countries that have supported either
one of the parties to the conflict also bear great
responsibility. We believe it is neither just nor
acceptable for Palestinians and Israelis to spill their
blood using the resources and arms provided by others.
That must end.

The Middle East must cease being the stage for
the waging of a war that is supported from outside, a
stop in the middle of an election campaign, or an
obligatory visit for the leaders of the main Western
countries. The international community must make
decided efforts to forge peace in the Middle East. It
must make a serious commitment, one that is met. One
cannot live off promises such as those made at the
Paris conference, many of which have not and never
will become a reality.

Costa Rica is convinced that the international
community has lost its way in the search for solutions
to the situation affecting the Middle East. We have
been unable to resolve the only crisis that has occupied
this Organization for more than 60 years, and we are
now divided between those who take one side to the
conflict and those who take the other. Many nations
that do not have a direct interest in the conflict are
following the drama with anguish and are caught up in
the destructive dynamic. Now, together, we must find
the conditions that will make coexistence possible.

We said in earlier debates, and we feel obliged to
repeat today, that it takes greater courage to agree than
to disagree, that it is easier to raise walls that separate
than to build bridges that unite. We consider
constructive Yemen's efforts in opening a space for
Palestinian dialogue, and we support the resolve of the
Palestinians and Israelis to continue to negotiate in a
highly difficult environment.

That is the only way. Costa Rica repeats its belief
that we must leave behind, once and for all, the models
of successive phases whereby one phase must be
completed before moving on to the next. We call on the
Israelis and Palestinians to address, as soon as
possible, the final issues - negotiation of the borders
and settlements, and the issue of refugees and their
right to return and compensation, as well as the status
of the city of Jerusalem. We do not seek to impose
anything, as was agreed on in Annapolis by Mr. Olmert
and Mr. Abbas in expressing their resolve to launch
bilateral negotiations to reach a peace agreement that
resolves all pending issues, including essential
questions without any exception.

A few days ago we sent important signals
concerning Lebanon. Now we must make clear our
belief that once we find the road towards peace for
Israel and the Palestinian State, it will be much easier
to resolve the problems of Lebanon.

I would be remiss if I were to conclude without
reiterating Costa Rica's belief that the membership of
this Organization should be regularly informed in
detail of the Quartet's activities. Since the Quartet
involves some of the most important international
protagonists and, for reasons that we do not
understand, the Secretary-General participates in it on
an equal footing with the other actors, we believe that
our actions and decisions require the comprehensive
and timely information I am calling for.

