Mr. Hamdoon (Iraq)(interpretation from Arabic): I
speak to you now while rockets and bombs are falling on
the cities and the villages of Iraq, Iraq that is steadfast
and patient. I am not speaking in symbolic language or
about a fireworks display in the Baghdad sky which is
being enjoyed by CNN viewers. Indeed, I am speaking
about bombs that are falling at this very moment to rip
out the hearts of elderly men and women and extinguish
smiles from the faces of children and scatter their limbs
everywhere. These are instruments of destruction that are
reaping the lives of Iraqi civilians who have been
suffering for the past eight years from one of the most
comprehensive and horrendous sanctions known in human
history.

The aggression launched by the United States and
Britain today is the most glaring evidence of the absence
of principles in international relations and of the
submission of the world to the authority of brute power.
Indeed, this is a very grim and sad day in the history of
the United Nations and the Security Council. At a time
when the Security Council, with the participation of the
Secretary-General, was discussing reports submitted by
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and the
United Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM) on the
status of compliance by Iraq, and before the Council
reached any conclusion on this subject, the United States
and Britain launched their attack against Iraq. The two
Powers requested a suspension of the informal meeting of
the Security Council and their pretext for aggression was
that one of the two reports - the UNSCOM. report -
emphasized the lack of full cooperation by Iraq with
UNSCOM. Thus, the United States has once again
arrogated to itself the Security Council's authority and
flouted international law and the United Nations Charter.
Indeed, it has disregarded the prestige of the members of
the Council, who were in session and were not allowed to
even complete their discussion, in keeping with their

 

responsibilities for maintaining international peace and
security.

Time and again we have warned against the partiality
and lack of objectivity of the United Nations Special
Commission. The conduct of the UNSCOM. Executive
Chairman yesterday and today provided additional evidence
that his partiality, lack of integrity and lack of objectivity
as an international civil servant could indeed lead the world
to disasters, the first victims of which would be the United
Nations and its prestige. The UNSCOM. Executive
Chairman singled out in his report yesterday five incidents
out of a total of 300 inspection operations; I repeat, five
incidents of 300 inspection operations that have been
undertaken since UNSCOM. resumed its operations in Iraq
on 18 November. He considered those incidents as
categorical evidence of lack of cooperation on Iraq's part.
What are these incidents? One is that the Iraqi side
requested UNSCOM. to respect the Muslim religious
holiday on Fridays. Another was that the Iraqi side took
inspectors to the headquarters of a non-Iraqi organization
and the officers of that organization denied the inspectors
access to their headquarters. A third incident was that
UNSCOM. inspectors entered a site where they were
expecting to find what was presumed to be documents and
they failed to find such documents because those documents
were not there.

Another incident relates to the "air force" document,
which we invited him to discuss jointly, in the presence of
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General. He refused to
do so. Yet another incident relates to a visit to the party
headquarters, in which a party representative requested a
written request - just a few lines - to inspect the party
headquarters. They refused to do so. And to complete his
non-objective conclusions with regard to cooperation by
Iraq, the Executive Chairman of the Special Commission
today, without the knowledge or approval of the Security
Council - without its knowledge or approval - withdrew
his inspectors from Iraq in order to pave the way
completely for the military aggression against Iraq by the
United States and the United Kingdom.

The exaggerated uproar about Iraqi weapons of mass
destruction is nothing but a great lie; the other lie is the
allegation that Iraq poses a threat to its neighbours. With
regard to weapons of mass destruction, UNSCOM. and the
International Atomic Energy Agency have been operating
since April 1991, with cooperation from the Iraqi side, and
have completed their essential work in the area of
disarmament. The International Atomic Energy Agency
announced recently that the disarmament phase has virtually
been completed, and UNSCOM. declared that it was about
to complete that phase with regard to missiles and
chemical weapons, a month being set by the Chairman of
UNSCOM. to do so.

The question that arises is, where are the prohibited
weapons which they allege that Iraq still has? If
UNSCOM. has any evidence that Iraq possesses a
prohibited weapon or its components, then we challenge
them, as we have done in the past, to provide physical
evidence to the Security Council. Indeed, some members
of the Security Council have requested, time and again,
that such evidence be submitted, but UNSCOM. has failed
to do so.

With regard to the threat posed by Iraq to its
neighbours - and there is a well-known exception in this
context - we ask the Security Council to tell us which
of Iraq's neighbouring States claims that Iraq is
threatening its peace and security. Indeed, we would pose
another question: what has the Security Council done in
the face of the threats to the peace and security of Iraq
made every day by some permanent members of the
Security Council, and of other threats posed by another
neighbouring country?

In closing, I invite the Security Council to fulfil its
responsibilities as set forth in the United Nations Charter
and request an immediate and unconditional cessation of
the aggression that is under way against Iraq.
Furthermore, I remind the Council of the content of the
statement issued by the national leadership of my country
today: that we are confident that the people of Iraq will
prove once again that this aggression is futile and a
failure, as they have done in the past with regard to every
prior instance of aggression.

Finally, I wish a holy Ramadan to the steadfast
Iraqis and to Arabs and Muslims everywhere in the
world.

