Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation is carefully and with
great concern following the developments with regard
to the civilian ship Al-Marwa, which had a cargo of
humanitarian assistance destined for the Palestinian
population of the Gaza Strip. We are convinced that the
tension that has arisen as a result of the unwillingness
of Israeli authorities to allow the ship into its port of
call is a consequence of the drawn-out crisis caused by
Israel's blockade of the Gaza Strip and the lack of any
clarity as to how and when it will be lifted. We believe
that ending the economic isolation of Gaza is an urgent
task.

As a result of the truce between Hamas and
Israel, the situation in the area has recently improved
somewhat; however, it remains a far cry from normal.
Achieving more or less sustained stability on the
perimeter of Gaza can be achieved only by ensuring
broad and unhindered access to Gaza for humanitarian
deliveries - including food, medicine and fuel - and
the resumption of full and normal operations at border
crossings into the area.

The blockade of the Gaza Strip is among the
major factors provoking the radicals' disruption of the
truce, which has essentially undermined the efforts of
Mahmoud Abbas and the entire international
community to strengthen the institutions of the
Palestinian Authority. That has reduced the Authority's
leverage in the negotiations with the Israeli side. In
that regard, we would like to draw attention to what
was said in November in the course of the latest
ministerial meeting of the Middle East Quartet at
Sharm el-Sheikh, namely, the readiness to continue to
work with Israel and the Palestinian Authority to
facilitate access and movement and an improvement in
conditions on the ground in order to address urgent
humanitarian needs, foster economic activity and
improve the atmosphere for the negotiations.

In providing substantial material assistance to the
Palestinian territories, Russia is reaffirming its
intention to further cooperate to improve the
humanitarian situation and establish a healthy
atmosphere and normal living conditions for the
population.

Of course, in the process of resolving these
issues, we cannot forget security guarantees for Israel.
We reaffirm the need for a complete end to terrorist
attacks on that country, first and foremost the firing of
rockets from Palestinian territories. At the same time,
ensuring Israel's legitimate security interests should
not be done to the detriment of the no-less legitimate
interests and needs of the civilian population of Gaza
and the West Bank. The relevant obligations under
international humanitarian law should be scrupulously
observed by all countries.

