Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): We wish to
congratulate you and your country, Mr. President, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council this
month. We welcome the opportunity to participate in
this debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question.

South Africa aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the Permanent Representative of Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. We thank
Mr. Lynn Pascoe for his briefing to the Council this
morning; we also wish to express our appreciation for
the presence of the Palestinian Foreign Minister and to
thank him for his statement.

The current situation in the Middle East should
be understood in the context of the ongoing Israeli
military occupation of the Palestinian territory and
other Arab territories, which dates back to 1967, and
the associated denial of the right to self-determination
of the Palestinian people. Israel's track record of
disregarding international law and the failure of the
Security Council to take any meaningful action in
response are the key factors contributing to the lack of
progress in the peace process. It is essential to the
maintenance of international peace and security that all
parties fully respect and meet their obligations under
international law, including international humanitarian
and human rights law, and that the Security Council
discharge its mandate under the United Nations Charter
without selectivity or double standards.

South Africa condemns the continuing Israeli
blockade of Gaza and the ongoing construction and
expansion of illegal settlements in the West Bank and
East Jerusalem. The continuing construction of the
separation wall and intensified home demolition
programmes that we are currently witnessing in East
Jerusalem constitute serious violations of international
law, as definitively clarified in the Advisory Opinion of
the International Court of Justice of 9 July 2004. My
delegation is also concerned about the recent Israeli
provocations in East Jerusalem. These activities
undermine all efforts to achieve peace between the
Palestinian and Israeli peoples.
14

The South African Government has condemned
the acts of aggression, as well as the gross and
systematic violations of human rights, in the occupied
Gaza Strip during the incursion by the Israeli Defense
Forces there in the latter part of December and earlier
this year, leading to massive loss of innocent lives and
the displacement of thousands of Palestinians. In an act
of disregard for its obligations under international
humanitarian and human rights law and towards the
international community, the Israeli Defense Forces
attacked the school facilities of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East and destroyed Palestinian infrastructure. We
welcomed the decision of the Secretary-General to
establish and dispatch a Board of Inquiry to Gaza.
However, we regret that its findings and
recommendations have yet to be implemented.

The South African Government has studied the
report (A/HRC/12/48) of the United Nations Fact-
Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict in detail. My
delegation wishes to acknowledge with appreciation
the outstanding manner in which Justice Richard
Goldstone and other members of the Mission
discharged their mandate under difficult circumstances.
South Africa unequivocally endorses the findings and
recommendations contained in the report. We reiterate
our full confidence in Justice Goldstone, recalling the
prominent role he played in our country's transition to
democracy and his work on many other international
issues, including the International Criminal Tribunals
for the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda.

As Justice Goldstone has said, "a culture of
impunity in the region has existed for too long. The
lack of accountability for war crimes and possible
crimes against humanity has reached a crisis point".
We therefore call upon the Security Council to
discharge its Charter-mandated responsibilities with
respect to this crisis, which has gone on for far too
long.

This year marks the sixtieth year anniversary of
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). We
commend UNRWA for its invaluable humanitarian and
development assistance to the Palestinian refugees over
the past six decades. South Africa remains committed
to contributing to the UNRWA General Fund on an
annual basis in recognition of the Agency's invaluable
assistance to the most vulnerable Palestinians.
09-55901
South Africa has consistently demonstrated our
unwavering support for the right of the Palestinian
people to a viable State of their own. We believe that a
vision of peaceful coexistence between Israelis and
Palestinians, based on the creation of a Palestinian
State coexisting peacefully alongside Israel on the
basis of the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, is the only sustainable solution to this conflict.
We remain convinced that negotiations are the only
way to end the conflict and the occupation of the
Palestinian and other Arab territories.

South Africa continues to support a negotiated
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, in line with
international resolutions and initiatives such as Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002) and
1515 (2003), General Assembly resolution 194 (III)
and the Arab Peace Initiative. We look forward to a day
when the bloodshed ends and two States, Palestine and
Israel, are able to coexist in peace and security, within
internationally recognized borders.

