Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): I should like to start by
thanking the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Jessen-Petersen, for all the work he has
done over the past two years of his service as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). We thank him also for his
comprehensive briefing today.

We welcome the presence of Her Excellency Ms.
Sanda Raskovic-Ivic, President of the Coordination
Centre of the Republic of Serbia for Kosovo and
Metohija.

We also welcome the presence of the UNMIK
delegation, with Kosovo's Prime Minister, Agim Ceku.

Greece associates itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the Permanent Representative of
Austria on behalf of the European Union.
Three months on from the previous report of the
Secretary-General to the Council, we are pleased to
note that the Provisional Institutions of Self-

Government, especially under the leadership of the
new Prime Minister, have taken careful note of
criticism with respect to progress in standards
implementation and have responded with renewed
efforts. Progress in the implementation of certain
standards is now clearly discernible, as the Secretary-
General concludes. We believe that the Provisional
Institutions have fully realized the inescapable link
between progress on standards implementation and
progress in the political process to determine Kosovo's
future. Functioning democratic institutions are
continuously improving and growing stronger.
Legislative measures are being adopted, and all the
right structures across the board of a new civil service
are being created. Further transfer of competencies in
the area of rule of law has been implemented
successfully.

Important legislative and other measures,
however, still remain to be adopted. These should not
be treated as secondary details to be dealt with at some
later point. They are reflected in the 13 priorities that
the Contact Group identified and communicated to the
Provisional Institutions recently. They include, to name
but a few: the adoption of laws on languages, cultural
heritage and religious freedom; completing
reconstruction and the provision of compensation with
regard to properties damaged as a result of the March
2004 riots; adopting a public transportation strategy for
minorities; and establishing an independent media
commission.

Additional positive developments that are worth
noting are the recent signature between Pristina and
Belgrade of the Protocol on Returns and the progress
reported in the preservation of cultural and religious
heritage, and especially in the programme of
reconstruction of church property damaged during the
March 2004 violence.

At this point, though, what is sorely needed -
but is only just limping along - is sustainable progress
on substance that would give flesh and meaning to all
those reforms. Also needed is progress that would
translate a decision or measure taken in Pristina into
fact and reality in Prizren, anilane and Strpce, for
example. Surely, complete progress in building a
functioning democratic system cannot be considered to
have been achieved so long as a part of the society that
the system is supposed to represent refuses to
participate. We cannot stress enough the value, above
all to themselves, of the Kosovo Serbs rejoining the
Provisional Institutions and engaging in them.

Surely also, progress in reconciliation and in
promoting the new democratic and multi-ethnic
Kosovo will be impossible as long as the prevailing
atmosphere for minorities is one of insecurity and
severely restrained freedom of movement. The increase
in security-related and violent incidents over the past
month, especially in the north and with victims coming
mainly from the Serb minority, is real and should not
be ignored or downplayed. Some of the violent attacks
that have occurred may not be ethnically motivated. It
is therefore all the more essential that the facts be
established and that people be given all the extra
reassurance they need that their concerns and fears are
being taken seriously into consideration and are being
dealt with effectively.

As talks on political progress for the future status
are under way, security on the ground - perceived,
felt, monitored and achieved - acquires greater
importance and should become an absolute priority for
both the international presence in Kosovo and the
Provisional Institutions.

As all of us here are aware, we cannot look at the
picture on the ground in Kosovo independently of what
is happening in Vienna in the political process for
determining future status. Talks in Vienna have so far
touched upon all the basic aspects of the relationship
between the Kosovo Albanian and Serb sides, but
progress has been limited. It is positive that, at least,
the positions of the two parties have been set down
clearly and that common concerns or points of eventual
agreement have been identified. We continue to believe
that further progress on standards - along, of course,
with the necessary political will - is one of the main
factors that can provide the necessary impetus for
closing the gap between the positions of the two sides.

But we also think it opportune at this juncture to
come back to the starting point and remind everyone of
the basic rules of this exercise, as contained in the
Contact Group guiding principles, which were
endorsed by the Security Council last November: the
settlement of status should be fully compatible with
international standards of human rights, democracy and
international law; the settlement of status must ensure
multi-ethnicity that is sustainable; the settlement of
status must strengthen regional security and stability;
and there shall be no changes in the current territory of
Kosovo.

Those principles constitute a right that can be
claimed and an obligation that should be respected for
both the Kosovo Albanians and the Serbs. In the
coming months, as the political process in Vienna
gathers speed, the efforts by the Provisional
Institutions must keep pace and deliver further results.
Such results will stand as the only proof that Kosovo is
ready to move forward.

