Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): Before I start, ifI
may make a request of the Secretariat - it would be
very helpful, I think, for the Council to have either a
briefing or a brief account of where the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons Fact-finding
Mission and the United Nations Department of Safety
and Security currently are and what their forward plans
are. Furthermore, it would be useful to know whether
there has been any delay in their getting into Douma
and an account of what has caused that delay. If it were
possible to have that within the next 24 hours, I would
be very grateful.

Turning to the issue before us in this meeting,
I would like to join others in thanking the Under-
Secretary-General for his briefing. It is a pity that some
speakers have used today's account of the humanitarian
situation to make political points. I recall the English
philosopher Edmund Burke, who said that it is a general
popular error to imagine the loudest complainers for
the public to be the most anxious for its welfare. I think
that might apply rather too much today.

We are talking about resolution 2401 (2018). I do not
have the full compendium of the British Government's
activities on the humanitarian side in Syria, butI can say
that in 2017 we gave $160 million to the United Nations
appeal and in 2018 we are giving $138 million dollars.
That compares to $5.5 million in 2017 and, as far as
I know, zero in 2018 from Russia. We are one of the
top three donors to the Syrian humanitarian response
plan, and we are the second largest bilateral donor to
the humanitarian response in Syria since 2011. To date,
we have committed $3.5 billion in response to the Syria
crisis, and that is the United Kingdom's largest-ever
response to a single humanitarian crisis. We encourage
all of us to do what we can to support United Nations
appeals and we, too, will be playing an active role in the
Brussels conference, which is to come.

Turning to Raqqa, we welcomed the first United
Nations assessment mission. The United Kingdom
continues to provide humanitarian support to Raqqa
and surrounding areas. Last October, we stepped up our
support to north-east Syria by restocking hospitals and
mobile surgical units and providing 145,000 medical
consultations and 31,000 relief kits, which included
cooking equipment and blankets. We helped improve
access to clean water for 15,000 people. We are also
contributing to the clearance of mines and explosives in
Raqqa, and we are looking at ways to provide additional
support to mine-clearance across Syria.

Turning to Rukban, I would like to take the
opportunity to commend the Government of Jordan
for providing humanitarian access to the population,
including the distribution of essential aid in January
2018. Further, we commend the efforts of United Nations
humanitarian agencies that have been negotiating
access from Damascus. I would like to emphasize the
right of displaced civilians in Rukban in the so-called
berm to protection and sustained humanitarian services
and distributions, whether they are cross-line or cross-
border, in accordance with humanitarian principles and
international humanitarian law.
We urge the regime and its backers to facilitate
access for the United Nations and humanitarian
partners to deliver desperately needed assistance to the
estimated 70,000 to 80,000 people in Douma and all
those remaining in eastern Ghouta. Like other speakers,
we too are concerned about the poor conditions in
camps and sites where people from eastern Ghouta have
fled. We look forward to a position where they can have
freedom of movement and where they can be allowed to
return home. In the meantime, they must be protected
against regime reprisals, and we have, in consultations
at an earlier stage, asked for more attention to be
given by the United Nations, but also by the Syrian
Government, to giving visas to United Nations staff
who can go in and help perform a protection function.

I had intended to speak about the political resolution
and next steps, but the French Ambassador has laid this
out very clearly, and I have nothing to add to that but
that I wholeheartedly support what he said. We call on
all members of the Council to rally to the notion that
we should use what has happened as an opportunity to
get the political process back on track. We want to have
a very good discussion of possible ways to do so at our
retreat in Sweden where we will have the benefit of the
presence of the Secretary-General as well.

In closing, I would like to end with one of Edmund
Burke's more famous pleas: "All that is needed for the
triumph of evil is for good men to do nothing." We
can all do something and I hope we will use the next
days wisely.

