Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): I would like to thank
France for its able leadership of the Council this month
and for convening this important debate. I would
also like to thank the briefers for their informative
statements.

On 16 December 2014, in a most inhuman and
barbaric act, the enemies of Afghanistan massacred
more than 120 people, all civilians, the majority ofwhom
were children playing volleyball. Incidents like that are
vivid examples of the profound impact that conflict
has on the lives of children and the shadow that it casts
over their daily lives. Violence cuts their childhood
short and leaves them without their families and loved
ones. Children are regularly the subjects of heinous
acts of senseless terror carried out against mosques,
markets, schools, homes and critical infrastructure in
Afghanistan.

The continuing violent campaign against the
Afghan people has had a profound and tragic effect
on the lives of civilians. In 2014, over 10,000 civilians
were killed or injured, with a sharp increase in child
casualties by 48 per cent. Conflict in Afghanistan has
engendered a situation in which young boys and girls
are extremely vulnerable to exploitation by extremist
groups. The Taliban and other extremist groups use
children as soldiers, spies and human shields. They use
them to plant improvised explosive devices and roadside
bombs, and they continue to cast a heinous gloom over
their lives. Terrorist and extremist groups, including
those that claim affiliation to the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant, regularly target children to carry out
their evil agendas.

In flagrant violation of international law and
the basic tenets of Islam, extremist groups continue
to brutally attack schools, their staff and students,
particularly women and girls. In 2014, as a result oftheir
brutal campaign, 157 schools were destroyed, blown up
and set on fire and 537 schools were closed as a result
of threats by the Taliban and other extremist groups.
Regrettably, those threats, coupled by poverty and
unemployment, hinder children's access to education
and make them more vulnerable to exploitation by
extremists.

The impact of conflict on children extends beyond
the risk of death or injury. Children whose families have
been killed or incapacitated are often left as the sole
breadwinners in the family. Therefore, in an attempt
to provide for their own and their family's livelihoods,
children often try to join the national and local police
or the army, even through falsification of their age and
identification so that they can serve.

Understanding these awful circumstances, my
Government has taken major steps towards delivering
on its commitments. Today, President Ghani, in his
address to the United States Congress in Washington,
DC, once again reiterated the full commitment of the
Afghan Government to protecting children, who are the
future of our country. In a milestone step, in November
2014 the Government of Afghanistan enacted a
law prohibiting underage recruitment in security
institutions, which was approved by the Afghan
Parliament in February. The endorsement of a road
map in August 2014 to accelerate the implementation
of the action plan to end child recruitment into the
security forces is a testament of our unwavering
commitment in this regard. The culmination of these
bold steps was the rejection, in 2014, of several hundred
underage applicants who attempted to enlist in security
institutions.

We have also put in place a series ofmeasures to raise
public awareness, including through the establishment
of dozens of community-based school protection
councils in provinces and through convening various
seminars and workshops to train religious scholars,
teachers, elders and students on the rights of children
with the support of the international community. We
are grateful for the technical and financial assistance
of the United Nations, in particular UNICEF and the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, in
this regard.

As our National Security Forces have assumed
full responsibility for providing security throughout
the country since the beginning of this year, the
Government of Afghanistan is strongly committed to
making every effort to ensure its forces' compatibility
with international standards of which the prevention of
underage recruitment is core. Therefore, bringing the
underage recruitment in all security institutions to an
absolute end is a top priority for the Government of
Afghanistan. To this end, I would like to echo the call
of my Government on the United Nations to consider
the withdrawal of Afghan national and local police
from the Secretary-General's black list.

Taking into account the enormous progress made
in alleviating the impact of conflict on children in
Afghanistan and the tremendous challenges ahead of
us, the continued support of our international partners,
their technical expertise and funding, in addition
to their advocacy, are of paramount importance to
our efforts. We thank our international friends and
partners, particularly Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, and her Office, for their support
in this regard.

