Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Ambassador Quinlan for his briefing and
commend him for the enormous efforts he has made
to push forward the work of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006) .

China has always attached great importance to
the work of the Committee and stands ready to work
with the Chair in implementing the various activities
of the Committee in a balanced, orderly and prudent
manner. It has been China's consistent view that all
parties are duty-bound to implement the Security
Council's resolutions on sanctions against Iran in an
accurate, comprehensive and faithful manner. But
sanctions are not an end in themselves. The work of
both the Committee and the Council is to serve the goal
of achieving diplomatic solutions. It is hoped that the
Committee will follow the resolution's mandate, apply
the principles of objectivity, fairness and pragmatism
and, on the basis of clear facts, solid evidence and
extensive consultations, properly deal with the
individual cases of suspected sanctions violations.
China will act on the basis of the aforementioned
principles and participate in the work of the Committee
in a responsible manner.

China recognizes the positive momentum
demonstrated by the latest diplomatic efforts and
welcomes the fact that the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) has maintained consultations with
Iran on outstanding issues concerning Iran's nuclear
programme and reached agreement on the steps to be
taken in the future. As the first stage agreements between
the P5+1 and Iran have been successfully implemented,
the negotiations on a comprehensive agreement have
unfolded and the dialogue with Iran has entered a new
stage. Following the recently concluded first round of
dialogue, the P5+1 and Iran have conducted interactive
and frank exchanges on questions of mutual concern
and have reached consensus. In spite of remaining
differences on some issues, all parties concerned have
demonstrated the will to address the concerns of the
other side. That will help them to continue to seek
common ground and resolve their differences.

With the deepeneing of negotiations, however,
the dialogue process will face increasing challenges
ahead. Therefore, China proposes the following: first,
to continue the process of the P5+1 dialogue with Iran
and bring that mechanism into full play through joint
commitment and consultations on an equal footing
in order to resolve the issue peacefully; secondly, to
reach a comprehensive, fair and reasonable long-term
solution that accommodates the concerns of all parties;
thirdly, to try to follow the principle of step-by-step
reciprocity and enhnace mutual trust by meeting each
other half way, in order to create favourable conditions
for achieving a breakgrhough; fourthly, to create a
viable atmosphere for dialogue and negotiations by
demonstrating good faith and maintaining confidence
and patience; and, fifthly, while focusing on addressing
the Iranian nuclear issue itself, we should adopt a new
security concept featuring mutual trust, mutual benefit,
equality and coordination, engage in constructive
multilateral and bilateral cooperation and find a
comprehensive solution that addresses the issue by
looking into both the root causes and the symptoms.

China has always endeavoured to promote dialogue
in an impartial and responsible manner. It will
participate in the dialogue in a constructive manner and
wor tirelessly for the comprehensive implementation of
the resolution.

