Mr. Michon (France) (spoke in French): I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for your statement and your visit to Mogadishu and to reiterate to you France's full support in your work. I should like to touch on to three points. The first relates to the arms embargo, which remains an essential tool for moving towards sustainable peace in Somalia. The embargo limits the trafficking of arms and ammunition to Somalia and prevents terrorist groups from obtaining them. The embargo also makes it possible to support the federal Somali authorities in their efforts to reform the security sector and improve their capacity to manage arms and munitions. In addition, notification and exemption procedures enable them to obtain the equipment that they require for their defence and security forces. My second point concerns the fight against the funding of Al-Shabaab. For our part, we hope that the Panel of Experts will begin to work together with the Federal Government of Somalia and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in analysing Al-Shabaab's revenue sources and on mapping that terrorist group's illegal taxation system, as requested by the Council in resolution 2498 (2019), of 15 November 2019. This is a complex but important task that will contribute to strengthening our collective action against Al-Shabaab's funding. We therefore call on all Member States to cooperate fully with the Panel of Experts on this issue. My third and last point involves the cooperation of the Somali authorities with the Panel of Experts, which has been a difficult subject over the past couple of months. We welcome the progress that has been made since the beginning of 2020, with the three visits by the new coordinator of the Panel of Experts to Mogadishu and the discussions that were begun with regard to priority cooperation between the Federal Government of Somalia and the Panel of Experts. We believe that these efforts are headed in the right direction and respond in part to the expectations of the Council. It is now vital that all Panel experts be able to carry out their work in a free and independent manner through regular visits to Somalia, on the basis of the mandate that was given to them by the Council.
