Mr. Harrison (United Kingdom): The
representative of Belgium will shortly speak on behalf
of the European Union, and my delegation fully
endorses what he will say. As he will describe, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the wider
region of the Great Lakes are very high up on the
Union's agenda at the moment.

I should like to thank Special Representative
Morjane for his briefing, which was, as ever, very
clear, very helpful, very well informed and very well
judged. My delegation would like to join others in
paying a warm tribute to Ambassador Morjane for the
constant and vigorous effort that he has put in
throughout his time as the Secretary-General's Special
Representative and for the way in which he has driven
the peace process forward, often in very difficult
conditions. This year, in particular, we are starting to
see some real movement, and it is a great tribute to
Ambassador Morjane that that is happening. My
delegation also wishes him well in the important new
duties that he is taking up. From both a professional
and personal point of View, we hope that they will
bring him back to New York from time to time.

As Ambassador Levitte has said, there is now a
window of opportunity in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. The disengagement process is now broadly
complete. There have been various sticking points
along the way, and some still remain. The
Rassemblement congolais pour la de'mocratie has still
not demilitarized Kisangani, despite the demands in
previous Security Council resolutions. It is also clear
that some Forces armees congolaises troops remain
beyond positions agreed in the Harare sub-plans.

Such issues must be resolved without delay. The
prize of a demilitarized Kisangani would be a very
valuable one. This Council has kept a close watch on
progress made so far, and has been prepared to speak
up firmly when any of the parties has failed to meet its
commitments. We must continue to do so, for, as the
Secretary-General said in his perceptive introduction to
this debate, the progress so far made is still not
irreversible. Moving the peace process forward
requires continued, steady movement by all the parties
in line with their reciprocal obligations. Backsliding in
one area by one party could still send the country back
into a negative cycle and a return to violence. We must
not let this happen.

On disarmament, demobilization, reintegration,
repatriation or resettlement (DDRRR), we all need
seriously to get down to business. On the one hand, the
parties must move ahead in providing full information
and, in liaison with the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC), in drawing up and implementing realistic
plans for the DDRRR of the armed groups. On the
other hand, the international community must be ready
to assist in taking forward these plans. The United
Kingdom stands ready to play its part alongside other
donors. Serious and practical DDRRR planning is
essential to move the peace process forward, but also to
build confidence among the parties and to show
members of the armed groups that there is a real
alternative to fighting.

At the same time, MONUC should be ready to
respond to early requests for DDRRR and, in
coordination with other parts of international
community, to provide practical assistance, as far as is
feasible, within its existing mandate and within its
capacity.

The recent meetings between some of the leaders
of the Lusaka parties, in particular the meeting between
President Kabila and President Kagame, have been
extremely important in building up the necessary
confidence to move ahead with both DDRRR and the
withdrawal process. It is vital that such exchanges
should continue. It is encouraging news that President
Kabila and President Kagame have agreed to stay in
regular contact.

The United Kingdom also fully supports the work
of the facilitator of the inter-Congolese dialogue, Sir
Ketumile Masire, and his team. Their current effort to
engage the Congolese people in the dialogue and to
identify representatives from all the communities
across the country is absolutely crucial. All Congolese
people need to know that they have a say and a stake in
the future of their country. Only a genuinely open,
representative and inclusive dialogue can provide the
basis for peace and stability. The preparatory meeting
for the dialogue, which is now scheduled for 20
August, must drive this process forward. We call on all
parties to cooperate fully with the facilitator and to
allow full access, including by civil society, to the
facilitator and his representatives.

Progress in the peace process should mean an
easing of the plight of the Congolese people, but there
is clearly a dire need for humanitarian assistance across
the country. As the Secretary-General said, we learned
recently from various non-governmental organizations
of the plight of the Congolese people and of the
humanitarian situation, which is perhaps one of the
worst in the world.

Against that background, it is very disappointing
that the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has turned down the recently nominated United
Nations Humanitarian Coordinator. I happen to have
been a colleague of his in a previous posting, and I can
endorse the point made by others that he was an
outstanding candidate. We hope that agreement will
soon be reached to allow this important role to be
filled. Only the people of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo will suffer if there is a further delay.

We also call once more on all parties to allow
full, unimpeded access to United Nations and non-
governmental organization personnel who are working
to provide humanitarian assistance, and to ensure that
their security and safety are respected.

