Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like commend France and the
United Kingdom on their initiative to request today's
meeting, and you, Madam President, on your decision
to promptly convene the meeting to enable the Security
Council to address the subject of the alleged use of
poisonous substances - chemical agents and chemical
weapons - yesterday, 4 April - my country's national
holiday - in Khan Shaykhun, Idlib governorate.
Scores were killed and hundreds suffocated, including
children. The entire civilian population was affected.
We express sincere condolences to the families of the
victims and to our Syrian brothers and sisters. We wish
the injured a speedy recovery.

I would like to congratulate today's briefer, Mr. Kim
Won-soo, on his clear and objective presentation and
to commend him for taking the precaution, to the
extent possible, of consulting with the representatives
of the Syrian Government here in New York. The
communique issued by the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), which
is already tasked with gathering and analysing
information from all available sources in order to
determine those responsible, is also concerned about
proceeding with caution.

As you, Madam, recalled here on 28 February (see S/PV.7893), nothing can justify the atrocity of the use
of chemical substances as weapons anywhere or at
any time, including in Syria, a conflict zone, and in
particular on civilian populations. That is why, staying
true to its principled stance, and in its capacity as a
State party to the Convention on Chemical Weapons,
Senegal reiterates, through me, its firm condemnation
of the use of weapons of mass destruction of all
kinds - including chemical weapons - as occurred
yesterday in Khan Shaykhun.

Yesterday's barbaric act in an interminable war in
Syria and ongoing allegations of the use of chemical
weapons in that country further illustrate the relevance
of the OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism. In that regard, we continue to encourage the
steering committee in its efforts, pursuant to resolution
2235 (2015) and 2319 (2016), to conduct objective and
impartial investigations to identify those responsible
for the unacceptable use of chemical substances as
weapons. Ongoing consultations between the OPCW
secretariat and the competent Syrian authorities are
also of vital importance to ensure that the Fact-finding
Mission can effectively discharge its mission.

How can we not be concerned yet again about
non-State actors - terrorist groups such as Islamic
State and the former Al-Nusra Front - possessing such
loathsome weapons? That is why we are calling for
improved cooperation among all States Members of the
United Nations, in particular those of the region, to put
an end to the ongoing threat posed by chemical weapons
in Syria and beyond. Once again, my delegation calls
on all the members of the Security Council to return to
the spirit of consensus and cooperation that prevailed
prior to the adoption of resolutions 2118 (2013) and
2235 (2015). It should be recalled that those resolutions
enabled the Council to make tangible progress on
the destruction of the chemical-weapon production
facilities declared by the Syrian Government. It is now
up to the members of the Council to work together to
provide follow up to the substantive findings of the
investigations undertaken by the Joint Investigative
Mechanism. Everyone is well aware of the complexity
of its work.

In conclusion, we continue to believe that only
a negotiated political solution based on the Geneva
communique (S/2012/522, annex) and resolution 2254
(2015) will help us achieve a lasting solution to this
conflict, which is having devastating humanitarian
consequences, while we must also shed light on all the
facts concering the allegations of the use of prohibited
weapons in Syria. My delegation therefore once again
expresses its desire for the success of the fifth round
of the Geneva talks, which began on 23 March, and we
hope that, together with the Astana process, the talks
will also strengthen the substantive findings of the
fourth session, which helped us, for the first time, to get
to the substantive issues, such as constitutional reform,
the political transition and the holding United Nations-
supervised elections.

In the interim, Senegal calls for a swift and reliable
assessment of what took place in Idlib yesterday. We
also call for the speedy and reliable identification of
the perpetrators. As for the team of the OPCW Fact-
Finding Mission for Syria, whose members are ready
to start work, and that of the OPCW-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism, whose conclusions are
pending to identify those responsible, Senegal reiterate
its full support.

