Mr. Yusuf (Somalia): I would like to begin by
thanking you, Mr. President, for giving me this
opportunity to address the Security Council. As the
Indonesian presidency of the Council comes to an
end, allow me to warmly congratulate you, Sir, on
your excellent leadership in presiding over the Council
for the month of May and your country's continued
contribution to the maintenance of international peace
and security. I would also like to take this opportunity
to wish the brotherly State of Kuwait every success in
its upcoming presidency of the Council for the month
of June.

My delegation welcomes the Security Council's
adoption of resolution 2472 (2019), which renews the
mandate of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) for a period of 12 months, and I give special
thanks to the penholder, the United Kingdom, and other
Council members for their positive contributions in
reaching consensus on the resolutionjust adopted.

At the outset, Ipay tribute to the deep commitment of
the African Union and the troop- and police-contributing
countries of AMISOM. Their willingness to stand by
Somalia in its darkest days has played a critical role in
the progress we are all witnessing today. Their bravery
and sacrifice as they stand side by side with the Somali
people is a true testament to the strong bond that unites
us. We are grateful for their unwavering commitment
and partnership as we move into the next chapter of the
transition plan.

We are also pleased that the protection of civilians
continues to be a top priority in the mandate. It will
allow AMISOM. to benefit from the necessary means
to provide support to our Government, which has the
primary responsibility to protect persons and property
throughout the national territory.

Thanks to the efforts ofthe members ofthe Security
Council, the Somalia of today is markedly different
from the Somalia to whose aid the United Nations
and the African Union came over a decade ago. With
regard to our objectives on security and justice, we are
in the process of concluding the biometrics registration
of every member of the Somali National Army. This
exercise has taken two years to complete. Together with
the outcomes of the operational readiness assessment,
it will form the basis of a professional and efficient
military force. Alongside payroll and institutional
reforms, we are harmonizing support, resupply and
sustainment for our forces. We are also generating new
troops trained to modern standards and equipped to
tackle the vicious threat of Al-Shabaab.

In recent weeks, with the support of AMISOM, the
Somali National Army beganjoint operations in Lower
Shabelle region, capturing the strategic bridge town of
Sabid and Canole from Al-Shabaab's control as well
as the agriculturally rich Bariire. The successful joint
operations to liberate Lower Shabelle from Al-Shabaab
demonstrate that Somalia remains fully committed in
delivering on the implementation of the transition plan
and the revised AMISOM. concept of operations 2018-
2021.

The ongoing operations in Lower Shabelle have
widely disrupted Al-Shabaab's networks and supply
lines, and, though it is too early to call, the liberation
of those areas has already had a ripple effect on
Mogadishu's security, especially during the holy month
ofRamadan. Not only is Al-Shabaab in retreat in Lower
Shabelle, but the Somali National Army has begun
cleansing Al-Shabaab from along key main supply
routes such as the strategic road from Mogadishu to
Jowhar, in Middle Shabelle.

To prevent Al-Shabaab's resurgence, we need
adequate investment in helping the Federal Government
of Somalia rebuild and extend local governance in the
areas liberated from Al-Shabaab. We should not see
security efforts as an end but as a crucial means of
sustaining long-term peace in Somalia. Long-term peace
requires security gains that are consolidated by good
governance, investment and sustainable development.

Therefore, in parallel we have endorsed a justice
and corrections model to implement federal and
state police plans and have updated our national
stabilization strategy to build local governance and
promote reconciliation. These reforms are aimed at
working towards the objectives set out in the first phase
of the transition plan and implementing the national
security architecture.

Furthermore, with the support of the International
Monetary Fund, we have made significant progress
towards debt relief under the third staff-monitored
programme. Domestic revenue has increased 27 per
cent, and this upward trend continues to be driven by
sustained efforts to broaden the tax base.

Not only have we in Somalia made great progress
on our domestic reforms, but our relations with our
neighbours and friends have also been strengthened.
There is no doubt that as these reforms take root, they
will lead to a strong backlash from spoilers, but we are
committed to the development and strengthening of our
institutions as we gradually assume responsibility for
our security.

We are cognizant of the fact that AMISOM. cannot
stay in Somalia forever and that it is necessary to
transition its responsibilities to the Somali security
forces. We are committed to the transition plan, which
will enable AMISOM's brave men and women to leave
the noble legacy ofa successful deployment in Somalia.

However, Somalia stands at a crucial juncture, as we
are approaching one-person-one-vote elections in 2020-
2021. We are focused on ensuring a secure, transparent
and credible process that is embraced by our people
and marks another important step in consolidating
democracy and the rule of law in the country.
Therefore, any planned drawdown must be done
after thoroughly assessing the conditions on the ground.
Furthermore, resolution 2472 (2019), adopted today,
stresses the importance of implementing the proposed
requirement to reduce AMISOM's troop ceiling by
1,000 in February 2020 in a more strategic manner. We
look forward to continued consultation in that regard.

To conclude, I would like to thank the Council for
its continued support for and commitment to Somalia.
I would like to once again thank the African Union, the
United Nations and all troop-contributing countries for
their work throughout the mandate that has just ended.
We hope that AMISOM's new mandate will be the
culmination of efforts to bring sustainable peace and
stability to the Federal Republic of Somalia.

