Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation aligns itself with the
statement made earlier by the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries and would like to thank you,
Sir, and the presidency of Azerbaijan for convening this
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question.

We all know the essential requirements for creating
the necessary conditions for negotiations that lead to
successful outcomes: political will, good faith and
transparency. However, inthe present case-the situation
between Palestine and Israel - while negotiations
have resumed between the parties and eight rounds
of negotiations have been held, Israel, the occupying
Power, continues to demonstrate its lack of political
will, bad faith and lack of transparency. Indeed, it
has intensified its policy of building settlements, the
blockade of the Gaza Strip, its systematic violations
of the most basic rights of the Palestinian people and
the escalation of attacks in occupied East Jerusalem
against mosques and against the Palestinian people's
right to freedom of religion and culture.

Nicaragua regrets the lack of progress since the
most recent resumption of the peace negotiations, which
demonstrates yet again that Israel's true intentions are
directed not at achieving peace, but rather to imposing
conditions for negotiations and buying time in order
to permanently alter the demographic and religious
composition of those territories, in a serious violation
of international law.

We also take the opportunity this debate provides
to reiterate our solidarity with the Palestinian political
prisoners who are being held in Israeli jails and are
mistreated by the authorities, leading to hunger strikes
and fatalities. We demand that the more than 5,000
Palestinians in prison be released immediately. We urge
all those who defend human rights to join us in a global
campaign of solidarity with Palestinian prisoners.

Year after year and month after month, we must
continue to denounce and condemn Israel's illegal
occupation and its expansionist policies, which, despite
all the efforts to achieve peace, continue to hinder
the process of negotiating for a political, peaceful
and lasting solution. The anti-settlement organization
Peace Now has issued a report that states that there has
been a 70 per cent increase in the construction of Israeli
settlements in the West Bank, including in occupied
East Jerusalem. We ask the Council, is that consistent
with the peace process and the ongoing negotiations?

Now more than ever, and after the approval by
the vast majority of the international community of
resolution 67/19, we are unavoidably committed to
rectifying the historic injustice committed against this
sister nation. Despite the fact that we have been unable to
achieve such recognition - owing to a lack of political
will on the part of one of the permanent members of
the Security Council, which has blocked the legitimate
aspirations of the Palestinian cause with its veto and
its threats - we, the international community, must
continue to support all the initiatives of the Palestinian
State, to persuade that permanent member to reconsider
and rectify that injustice once and for all and finally
achieve international peace and security in the Middle
East.

Peace in the Middle East entails not only solving
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict but nust also necessarily
include the situation in all the Arab territories occupied
by Israel, particularly Syria and Lebanon. In addition,
Israel must immediately cease its attacks, practices and
policies against the territorial integrity, sovereignty
and self-determination of the Arab peoples and States
of the Middle East. Peace should be achieved through
dialogue and a political settlement. The negotiations
between Palestine and Israel should continue in
good faith and transparency. At the same time, the
"Geneva II" conference is the only way to settle the
Syrian conflict, with the participation of all the parties
concerned.

In conclusion, we would like to call on the
international community to declare 2014 an
international year of solidarity with Palestine, which
should culminate, finally, in the State of Palestine's
admission as a full Member of the United Nations.
Nicaragua reaffirms its absolute and total solidarity
with the Palestinian people in their struggle for
freedom and in the exercise of their inalienable right
to self-determination, including the right of Palestinian
refugees to return to live in peace and freedom in their
State, with East Jerusalem as its capital, based on
the pre-1967 borders, and with two States, Israel and
Palestine, living side by side in accordance with the
relevant resolutions of the United Nations.

