Mr. Listre (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): May I
begin by thanking you, Sir, for your presence at this
debate. I also want to commend the delegation of
Bangladesh for the way in which it has presided over
the work of the Security Council this month with great
efficiency and transparency.

I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
recent report on the prevention of armed conflict. We
agree with his basic premise that we must move from a
culture of reaction to one of prevention.

The prevention of armed conflict is a very broad
subject because it involves different actors from both
within and outside the United Nations. Given the fact
that the issue will also be discussed in the General
Assembly, in this forum I will focus on the Security
Council's preventive role and on the need to coordinate
this task with the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council. I will also refer to the deterrent
role of the international criminal Tribunals.

We believe that the starting point of our analysis
is the new concept of international security that has
evolved since the end of the cold war. This new
concept requires the Security Council to re-examine the
way in which it deals with the kinds of conflicts that
the founders of our Organization had not envisaged.
The majority of the conflicts of the post-cold-war era
are domestic, with international repercussions. They
emerge from complex and diverse causes, ranging from
economic to ethnic and religious questions. The targets
are no longer exclusively of a military nature. In many
cases, the civilian population has become the main
victim.

In this context, the role of prevention requires the
Security Council to be aware of the deep-seated causes
of all such conflicts. The Council does not always have
such an awareness. That is why we believe that there
are three specific instruments that could help the
Council better to assess the pre-conflict situation and
thus improve its decision-making process. Those
instruments are already being used by the Council in
conflict management. We feel that the challenge now is
to use them more frequently in conflict prevention.

First, close and substantive cooperation is
necessary between the Council and the regional and
subregional organizations. We believe it important for
the Council to convene regular meetings with high-
ranking political officers of those organizations in
order to exchange opinions and information. Last
February, the Council met with the Lusaka Political
Committee in connection with the situation in the Great
Lakes region and with the Committee of Six of the
Economic Community of West African States in
connection with Sierra Leone. This trend towards a
more fluid dialogue is undoubtedly positive and should
be encouraged, but it is being implemented as a
conflict-management tool. We believe that such
meetings should also be convened in order to assess
latent or potential conflicts.

Secondly, these comments apply to Security
Council missions. Since September 1999, there has
been a resumption of Council missions to affected
countries. These missions are very positive because
they allow the Council to gain direct knowledge of the
reality of a conflict concerning which they will later be
called to make decisions. We think that these missions
must also be carried out with a preventive purpose in
pre-conflict situations, with the consent of the parties
concerned. That is why we deemed it important that,
during the Council's mission in May to the Great Lakes
region to address the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, it took the decision to include
Burundi - where there is a risk of full-scale
confrontation - in its planned itinerary. The mission
met with the facilitator of the peace process, former
South African President Nelson Mandela, President
Buyoya of Burundi and President Mkapa of Tanzania.

The third point that I wish to stress is the need for
direct dialogue between the Security Council and the
parties concerned. The practice of holding private
meetings with the parties - which started to gain
momentum in late 1999 - is, in our opinion, a step in
the right direction. We also think that, in particular
circumstances, the parties directly affected should have
the opportunity to participate in the Council's informal
consultations. The access of the parties to a conflict to
the Security Council is a fundamental issue that
deserves the Council's careful consideration, since it
touches on the transparency and efficiency of its
decision-making process. There is no doubt that
conflict prevention is mostly viewed as a Chapter VI
issue. However, in our view, conflict prevention does
not preclude, in some specific cases, the application of
Chapter VII of the Charter. We think that in some of
the conflicts currently on the agenda of the Council, the
application of an arms embargo in an early stage of the
conflict would have helped prevent its worsening.

Information as to what is really happening on the
ground is essential in any effective preventive action;
without it the early warning systems can operate only
with difficulty. Availability of information is necessary
for successful preventive action, but it is not enough. It
must be accompanied by the political will to act. When
such political will existed, the Council deployed
preventive peacekeeping operations in Macedonia and
the Central African Republic. On other occasions, such
as during the conflict in Rwanda in 1994, the genocide
could have been avoided if certain members of the
Council had garnered the political will to act. In the
case of Rwanda, information was available.

Prevention also means creating the proper
conditions for the rule of law, human rights, and
coexistence, including religious tolerance, productive
investments, access to health care, and equal economic
and educational opportunities. This concept of
prevention - which deals with the root causes of
conflict, not the immediate ones - is a task for the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council (ECOSOC). We believe that this task must be
carried out in cooperation and coordination with the
Security Council.

I would like to refer very briefly to the relation
between the Security Council and Economic and Social
Council. Even before the San Francisco Conference,
the framers of the Charter had wisely established, in
Dumbarton Oaks, a link between ECOSOC and
Security Council through Article 65 of the Charter.
Subsequent practice tells us, however, that only on one
occasion, in 1949, did the Economic and Social
Council, through the Secretary-General, convey to the
Security Council the result of its deliberations on
human rights in Palestine. Only once, in 1950, did the
Security Council request a report from the Economic
and Social Council on the civilian population in Korea.
We think it is high time to revitalize Article 65 of the
Charter.

Given that most of the conflicts on the Security
Council's present agenda do not relate to conventional
territorial disputes, but rather to ethnic reasons,
religious intolerance, abject poverty, control over
natural resources or systematic violations of human
rights, an opportunity is created for the Economic and
Social Council to cooperate with the Security Council
through recommendations conducive to conflict
prevention, an area which traditionally had seemed to
be outside its sphere of competence. That is why we
believe it would have been very useful to hold the joint
Security Council - ECOSOC meeting proposed last
April, during the United Kingdom Presidency. It would
have signified the beginning of a dialogue among two
of the principal bodies of the United Nations with the
shared purpose of contributing to the peaceful
settlement of conflicts.

We all agree on the need to coordinate the work
of the Security Council, the General Assembly, and the
Economic and Social Council. I think we also need to
reflect upon the issue of who is going to implement
such coordination. We believe we must explore the
possibility of a role for the Secretary-General in this
regard.

Justice is an indispensable component of peace.
In this context, the International Criminal Tribunals are
another instrument for conflict prevention because they
provide the perception that crimes against humanity,
such as the ones committed in the former Yugoslavia,
Rwanda, and Sierra Leone, will not go unpunished.
The work of these Tribunals must be fully supported.
We think that the entering into force of the Rome
Statute will have an important deterrent effect.

Prevention is a joint enterprise, which involves,
with differing levels of responsibility, various actors:
national governments, the United Nations, regional
and subregional organizations, non-governmental
organizations and the private sector. These actors must
perform their activities in a coordinated manner, and
not in a competitive or exclusive fashion. We believe
this to be one of the main messages from the report of
the Secretary-General.

Finally, and above all, no preventive action will
be effective unless the parties to a conflict have the
political will to live the objectives of peace,
reconstruction and development as their own
objectives, and unless the international community, for
its part, has the political will to support the prevention
efforts, patiently and with the needed resources.

