Mr. Briz Gutierrez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful to you, Mr. President, for
having convened this meeting on peacebuilding, as
well as for having prepared the concept paper
circulated on 1 April (see S/2010/167).

We would also like to thank the Ministers from
Afghanistan, Sierra Leone and Timor-Leste and the
representative of the World Bank for their
participation.

As is well known, after an internal conflict of
over four decades, Guatemala signed its peace
agreements in December 1996. The process that led to
that act and, in particular, the subsequent peacebuilding
process, has left us with many lessons, some of which
we would like to share in the context of the questions
raised in the concept paper. Unfortunately, in a five-
minute statement, only some general concepts can be
formulated, which, though they may not sound like
anything new, do contain important observations. I will
mention eight points.

The first thing is that every peacebuilding process
is unique and that in this area, as in so many others,
there is no universally valid formula. We are often
asked if our own experience is transferable to other
countries. Rather than respond with a clear yes or no,
we tend to say that it depends on the specific
circumstances of each country and each situation.

The second point that stands out for us is the
cardinal importance of domestic actors - former
parties to a conflict and civil society - having a sense
of ownership of the process. Not only is this logical,
but, in the absence of a sense of ownership, it would be
difficult to build productive relationships between
domestic actors and international cooperation entities.

Thirdly, if there is a sense of ownership and
functioning national institutions, the country will be
paradoxically better prepared to tolerate a higher level
of participation on the part of the international
community in the decision-making process. Guatemala
serves as an example of this. The United Nations
played a fundamental role in every step involved in the
winning and building of peace, but it carried out this
role at the request of the domestic parties and not as an
external actor with its own agenda. Thus, many viewed
the Organization as another stakeholder in the peace
process, and not as an extraneous presence.

This leads me to our fourth point, which is the
crucial importance of international cooperation in
peacebuilding processes. Without a doubt, during the
first years of implementation of the commitments
contained in our own peace accords, external financing
acted as a catalyst for many projects, programmes and
policies that would have been hard to carry out without
such support. Guatemala underlines the importance of
avoiding what the concept paper (S/20lO/ 167) calls the
"peacebuilding gaps" between security and economic
recovery.

The fifth point is that peacebuilding must
necessarily address those sources of tension that led to
conflict in the first place, be they due to ideological
polarization, different historical grievances or serious
economic and social disparities. At least in our case,
the peace accords can be interpreted as a sort of road
map that enabled the peacebuilding process to tackle
head-on the main sources of tension that fueled the
conflict. The very titles of the various accords illustrate
the point - including, in particular, the Human Rights
Accord, and the Accords on the Identity and Rights of
Indigenous Peoples, on Socioeconomic and Agrarian
Issues, and on the Strengthening of Civilian Power and
the Role of the Army in a Democratic Society.

A sixth lesson to be drawn from our experience is
that peacebuilding is by definition a holistic process.
Multiple and diverse commitments must be addressed
simultaneously, and not in an isolated or sequential
way. This, too, makes clear the enormous complexity
of moving forward with such a process.

Seventh, it takes a long time to reverse a number
of aspects of the conflict that existed prior to the
peacebuilding process, since they have become
entrenched in attitudes and modes of behaviour. For
example, Guatemala still suffers, to this day from the
culture of impunity that was born in the shadow of the
internal conflict and now shelters delinquent activities.
We therefore turned once again to the United Nations,
devising an innovative arrangement to strengthen the
rule of law in the form of the International Commission
against Impunity in Guatemala. My main point is that,
16 years after our internal conflict came to an end, we
continue to suffer its consequences.
Eighth and last, just as the concept paper has
identified a gap between security and economic
recovery, peacebuilding is often accompanied by a gap
in expectations. At least in our case, logically, the
peace accords did not resolve all the age-old and
structural problems facing our society, but we continue
to strive to close that gap.

That concludes the essence of the experience that
we wished to share with the Council today.

