Mr. Nambiar (India): Let me begin by
congratulating Pakistan and you personally, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of May 2003. We were happy to
have His Excellency Mr. Khurshid Kasuri, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Pakistan, in our midst this morning
at this Council meeting dedicated specifically to a
subject of your choice. I also take this opportunity to
congratulate Mexico on its handling of the presidency
of the Council last month.

The subject for consideration by the Council
today is the peaceful settlement of disputes. The faith
of nations in this world body is embedded in the
collective commitment of its Members to the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
The maintenance of international peace and security is
the principal purpose of the Charter and involves the
prevention and removal of threats to the peace, as well
as the suppression of acts of aggression. Equally, the
emphasis upon bringing about the adjustment or
settlement, by pacific means and in conformity with the
principles of justice and international law, of
international disputes or situations that might lead to a
breach of the peace is no less prominent a purpose.
Indeed, together they constitute the very first purpose
of the United Nations under Article 1, paragraph 1, of
the Charter. More than 50 years ago, speaking before
the United Nations, Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru
declared:

"This Assembly took shape after two mighty wars
and as a consequence of those wars. The lesson
of history, the long course of history, and more
especially the lesson of the last great wars which
have devastated humanity, has been that out of
hatred and violence only hatred and violence will
come. We have got into a cycle of hatred and
violence, and not the most brilliant debate will
get us out of it, unless we look some other way
and find some other means. It is obvious that if
[we] continue in this cycle and have wars which
this Assembly was especially meant to avoid and
prevent, the result will not only be tremendous
devastation all over the world but the non-
achievement by any individual Power or group of
its objective." (A/PV.]54, pp. 16-13 
Every nation, big or small, strives for a basic
modicum of stability in its domestic and international
environment in order to enable it to pursue its own
national objectives. Every nation thus has a legitimate
interest in matters of peace and war and must shoulder
its responsibility to ensure that end. Where disputes
between States or situations between States that might
endanger international peace and security arise, it is
incumbent upon those States to settle them by peaceful
means. Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Charter
specifically enjoins this upon all Member States.
Where the United Nations has a role and relevance, its
efforts should be welcomed. A basic premise of the
pacific settlement of disputes relates to the provision
under the Charter calling on all Member States to first
resort to peaceful means in settling disputes that
threaten the maintenance of international peace and
security. The opening article of Chapter VI, Article 33,
paragraph 1, makes it clear that the parties to any
dispute likely to endanger the maintenance of
international peace and security

"shall, first of all, seek a solution by negotiation,
enquiry, mediation, conciliation, arbitration,
judicial settlement, resort to regional agencies or
arrangement, or other peaceful means of their
own choice."

The Charter establishes no hierarchy among the various
means enumerated therein.

A cursory look at Chapter VI shows that it
concerns only those disputes that endanger the
maintenance of international peace and security. Not all
disputes that affect States or exist between States are
covered. While it needs to be recognized that the
Security Council and the General Assembly have in the
normal course rarely refused to admit a question for
failing to fulfil the clause "likely to endanger the
maintenance of international peace and security" and
have chosen to interpret this Article liberally, they have
generally adopted a flexible and pragmatic approach,
one that has been based on a recognition of the political
realities on the ground rather than on purely legalistic
approaches.

Evidently, the means provided for in Article 33
are not intended to be exhaustive. The reference to
"other peaceful means of their choice" was clearly
added to provide the parties with greater freedom of
choice. The drafters desired action by the Organization
only as a last resort, with the onus left upon the parties
to settle disputes peacefully among themselves either
directly, through the means listed in the Article, or
through resort to regional organizations if need be.

The idea that local disputes should be solved
locally seems to have been favoured by the drafters.
Even where the Council or the Assembly has taken up
consideration of a situation or question, the primary
responsibility for settlement remains with the parties
themselves. Article 36, paragraph 2, requires the
Council to take into consideration the existence of
agreements between the parties for the pacific
settlement of disputes and the procedures adopted by
the parties prior to requesting the Council to take up
the issue. Given this primary responsibility resting with
the parties to settle their differences or disputes
between themselves, the competence of the United
Nations organs is only subsidiary. Likewise, the
measures outlined in Chapter VI are non-coercive and
possess no legally binding character beyond what has
been accepted by parties and within the terms of their
own understanding of such acceptance of commitment.

How far does the power of the Security Council
under Chapter VI extend? It is pertinent to note that
Article 33 requires the Council, when it deems
necessary, to call upon the parties to settle their
disputes by peaceful methods; but the choice of means
of settlement by parties, strictly construed, should
entail that the parties are bound no further than to
engage their best efforts to find a peaceful solution.
The requirements of specific results are not indicated.

The Council's power to investigate in order to
decide whether a dispute or a situation requires its
attention or whether it constitutes an independent basis
of action is derived from Article 34. While invocation
of that Article has in specific instances constituted the
preconditions calling upon the parties under Article 33,
paragraph 2, or for making recommendations under
Article 36 or Article 37, paragraph 2, this Article has
also been used to determine whether or not a dispute or
situation actually does endanger international peace
and security.

Article 36 gives the Council power to recommend
appropriate procedures or methods of adjustment for
situations brought before it. The procedure
recommended in Article 36 should take into
consideration any procedure for the settlement of
disputes that has already been adopted by the parties.
But in the choice of procedures under this Article, the
Council is not bound by the list included in Article 33,
paragraph 1. The Council may devise new methods or
suggest a combination of existing procedures, coupled
with its recommendations for a particular procedure,
with advice that the parties should consider other
suitable methods. The distinction between the
appropriate procedures or methods of adjustment that
can be recommended by the Council and the terms of
settlement that can be recommended by the Council
under Article 37 is not always clear.

For its part, the General Assembly has over the
years attempted to enhance the effectiveness of the
peaceful settlement of disputes between States through
its own resolutions and declarations. The Manila
Declaration on the Peaceful Settlement of International
Disputes, of 15 November 1982 (resolution 37/10), and
Declaration on the Prevention and Removal of
Disputes and Situations Which May Threaten
International Peace and Security and on the Role of the
United Nations in this Field, of 5 December 1988
(resolution 43/51), are important in this respect. An
examination of these resolutions and declarations
indicates that they relate to the settlement of all
disputes and are not confined only to the disputes
referred to in Chapter VI of the Charter.

These resolutions and declarations, furthermore,
reiterate the right of all States to resort to peaceful
means of their own choice for the prevention and
removal of disputes or situations, which is central to
the pacific settlement of disputes in the following
manner. In seeking a peaceful settlement the party shall
agree on such peaceful means as may be appropriate to
the circumstances of the States and the nature of the
dispute. In the event of a failure of the parties to reach
an early solution by means specified in the Charter, the
parties should continue to seek a peaceful solution and
consult forthwith on mutually agreed means to settle
the dispute peacefully.

A further important element insisted upon in
these declarations is that States should, in accordance
with international law, implement in good faith all the
provisions and agreements concluded by them for the
settlement of disputes affecting them. Resolutions
adopted by the General Assembly in that regard may
suggest the use of various means at its disposal. Where
cases arise of the Secretary-General making use of
fact-finding capabilities relating to a dispute or a
situation, they are to be pursued only with the express
consent of the State or States concerned.

The path of negotiation is seen by many
distinguished jurists as the most preferable method of
dispute settlement. First, since the resolution of the
dispute is by mutual consent, often arrived at after a
kind of bargaining that involves elements of give and
take, there is a greater probability of the parties
carrying out the agreement faithfully. Secondly, if
government by consent expresses the spirit of
democracy, then the diplomacy of bilateral negotiations
is nearest to that spirit. Thirdly, arbitration and judicial
settlement are essentially zero-sum games. By contrast,
in bilateral diplomacy each party seeks to get
something it desires, with the total pay-off becoming a
variable sum that provides each side scope for
maximizing that sum - in other words, the process of
bilateral negotiation would be more likely to lead to a
win-win situation for both the parties. Fourthly, an
imposed solution to a dispute is likely to be reopened
by the party that feels aggrieved or feels that it was
compelled at the time of settlement, thus proving to be
no real settlement at all.

A decade ago, the report of the Secretary-General
entitled "An Agenda for Peace" (S/24lll)stated that if
conflicts had gone unresolved in the past, it was not
because techniques for peaceful settlement were
unknown or inadequate. The fault lay first in the lack
of political will of parties to seek a solution to their
differences through such means as are suggested in
Chapter VI of the Charter and, secondly, in the lack of
leverage at the disposal of a third party if that was the
procedure chosen. Each party tends to seek a better
solution than what it had been called upon to accept. A
third party might not find a reason to use the leverage it
has for the settlement of the particular dispute. Where
it has, the development of a different order of vested
interests cannot be ruled out.

Some disputes, given their specific character and
complexity, may not be amenable to resolution
according to any pre-set time schedule. It is true that,
apart from the danger of the eruption of violence
because of an unresolved dispute, an unresolved
conflict relating to resources might stand in the way of
exploitation of the resources for the benefit of the
community. If the dispute related to a territory under
colonial occupation or alien domination, non-resolution
would place the people concerned in a condition of
uncertainty or prolong their travails or sufferings.
However, its indiscriminate applicability to situations
of irredentist, secessionist or other political movements
within independent States with composite populations
of different ethnic and religious persuasions can be
extremely risky, even destabilizing. This could be even
more serious when such movements are externally
inspired or assisted.

In a world where the indispensability of the
sovereign State as the fundamental political unit of the
international community is still vigorously reaffirmed,
the perceptions by States of their territorial integrity
and the essential values undergirding their respective
political structures are bound to rank as the utmost
priority. This will admit little compromise.

Against this background, we would commend the
emphasis placed by the Manila Declaration on the
obligation of States to settle international disputes on
the basis of the sovereign equality of States and in
accordance with the principle of free choice of means,
thus incorporating one of the basic principles of the
Declaration on Principles of International Law
concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among
States in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations (General Assembly resolution 2625 (XXV)). In
particular, the Declaration on Friendly Relations states
that any attempt aimed at the partial or total disruption
of the national unity and territorial integrity of a State
or country or at its political independence is
incompatible with the purposes and principles of the
Charter.

No State can permit aggression against its own
territory. Nothing in the Charter can impair the inherent
right of each Member State to take all necessary
measures for its self-defence if there is an armed attack
against it. This is equally true if a State is subjected to
a continuous low-intensity proxy war through
infiltration, cross-border terrorism or other means
using force. Where Member States have agreed to
implement resolutions of the United Nations, they are
justified in expecting such implementation to be
complete and in the sequence agreed to without
emasculation, revision or reinterpretation. Where
attempts are made to apply such resolutions selectively
or in a partial, self-serving manner, they have
obviously not worked, but have only served to subvert
the original spirit of these resolutions. In some cases,
over time their subtext has changed and they have
proved obsolete, defunct or overtaken by events on the
ground.

India's experience with the working of the United
Nations has been sufficiently long and educative for us
to remain vigilant of the threats, pressures and
blandishments that have been exerted upon us during
various periods of our history in the guise of furthering
the pacific settlement of disputes affecting us. Our
stance has been consistent and principled. We have not
been deterred by the temporary approbation or
opprobrium of the members of this body or other
bodies of this Organization, despite our abiding respect
for it. We remain confident that we retain the
understanding, sympathy and support of its broader
membership in our overall stance. For the rest, we are
fully conscious of being able to summon the firmness
and resilience needed to safeguard our national
interests. We are also aware that, more than anything,
we need to remain continuously responsive to and
reflective of the needs and aspirations of our peoples as
expressed through our own democratic institutions.

It is our view that the democratic norm provides
the best possible means to address discontent within
societies and disputes between them. Respect for
pluralism and diversity is fundamental to that
approach. A society that promotes democratic norms
and respect for tolerance is better placed to address
disputes than one that lacks those values. Democratic
societies are far less prone to extremist ideologies
based on conflict, violence or militarism. They are also
less inclined to wage wars. Periodic elections that
make political leaders accountable to parliaments and
to voters act as a regular check against any
predisposition to policies of military adventurism.

As Prime Minister Vajpayee said recently,

"If the twentieth century saw the global
growth of democracy, the new century should see
its further expansion and enrichment. Especially,
we should develop democracy as an effective
instrument for fulfilling people's aspirations and
resolving conflicts and contentious issues.
History has proved time and again that free and
democratic societies are the ones that are
creative, self-corrective and self-regenerative."

I wish to conclude by returning to the speech to
which I referred in the beginning of my statement, in
which Prime Minister Nehru of India declared that he
had no fear of the future. He went on to say,

. if we banish this fear [of the future], if we
place confidence, even though we may take risks
[of trust], rather than to risk violent language,
violent actions and in the end war, I think those
risks are worth taking." (A/PV.154, p. 22)

