Mr. Temenov (Kazakhstan): I j oin others in thanking
the three co-leads - the Permanent Representatives
of Peru, Kuwait and the United Kingdom - for their
detailed briefings on the Security Council mission
to Bangladesh and Myanmar. I would like to express
special gratitude to the Government of Kuwait for
its generosity in providing flight arrangements and
logistical support to the Security Council delegation.
The mission would not have been possible without the
joint efforts of the Governments of Bangladesh and
Myanmar and of the United Nations country teams and
other member States of the Council that worked very
hard to make it happen.

On behalf of the delegation of Kazakhstan, I express
gratitude to the host Governments for their assistance
in organizing meetings with Government officials,
as well as other stakeholders, including civil society
representatives. It was a very special opportunity indeed
to hold discussions with the highest authorities of both
Governments on the issue of Rohingya refugees - the
world's greatest and worst refugee crisis today.

The Security Council mission to Bangladesh and
Myanmar was a vivid and stark revelation and an
opportunity to obtain direct and first-hand experience
of the true plight of the Rohingya people. Being on the
front lines presented a glaring and shocking reality and
awakened our conscience, prompting us to act more
robustly and collectively.

During the visit to the refugee camps in Cox's
Bazar, we were able to witness a severe humanitarian
catastrophe that affects the entire region. We would
like to commend the Government of Bangladesh on its
generous hospitality in receiving such a large number
of refugees and providing them with shelter and other
forms of assistance. We hope that the Government of
Bangladesh, as well as the United Nations and other
humanitarian partners, will continue to undertake
monsoon-preparedness activities to mitigate the
effects of the rains on refugees and prevent a high
number of human casualties. That is especially relevant
given that 60 per cent of the Rohingya refugees are
children, including 41 per cent who are under the
age of 12, and therefore particularly vulnerable to
emergency situations.

We noted the efforts of the Government of Myanmar
to find a solution to the issue of Rohingya refugees and
its preparations for their repatriation. We understand
that the crisis cannot be solved overnight and will
be an arduous process that will demand the active
participation of all stakeholders. Given the magnitude
of the problem, the repatriation of refugees will be
a most formidable task and will require concerted
efforts on the part of many organizations, countries
and actors. We therefore hope that the Government of
Myanmar will continue to cooperate with the United
Nations Development Programme and the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
Gradually, other relevant United Nations agencies,
international donors and partners should be able to lend
the necessary support. We see the beginning of efforts
by Myanmar and would encourage that they be directed
at establishing the rule of law and good governance.

One of the most critical problems is ensuring the
safe, voluntary and dignified return of refugees and
internally displaced persons to their homes in Rakhine
state. As underlined by my delegation during previous
meetings on the issue, there can be no lasting solution
for the Rohingya issue without addressing the root
causes of the crisis. They include primarily the issues
of citizenship for the Rohingya people, the restoration
of their rights and freedoms, poverty alleviation and
development, access to education, employment and
freedom of movement.

It is hoped that the visit by the Security Council
will pave the way for closer cooperation and finding
long-term solutions through truth, reconciliation and
transitional justice, as occurs after every conflict.
With the United Nations fact-finding mission at
work, we realize that justice is a precondition for
re-establishing trust among all communities and
deterring future violence.

Unhindered access for humanitarian assistance
to the affected population is crucial. We hope that the
goodwill created by the visit will result in unfettered
and safe access to United Nations agencies offering
emergency assistance and seeking to alleviate suffering,
in particular of children, women and the elderly.

The Red Cross Movement, which has been providing
humanitarian assistance in northern Rakhine at the
request of the Government, cannot meet all the needs.
We therefore call on the Government of Myanmar to
allow full and safe access to Rakhine for the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the World
Food Programme, the World Health Organizaiton,
UNICEF and other United Nations agencies to
effectively deliver life-saving humanitarian assistance.

We are encouraged by the commitment of the
Government of Myanmar to working with the United
Nations, and to endorsing and implementing the
recommendations of the Rakhine Advisory Commission
in order to restore intercommunal harmony, sustainable
peace, stability and prosperity. We are confident that
the new Special Envoy of the Secretary-General on
Myanmar, Ms. Christine Schraner Burgener, will bring
new impetus for enhanced cooperation with the United
Nations, and we hope that Naypyidaw will fully support
the Special Envoy in discharging her mandate.

My delegation is committed to joining efforts to
find a sustainable solution to the plight of the Rohingya
refugees and people affected by the recent crisis and
mass displacement.

