Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): My country's Government has reviewed the
forty-fifth monthly report (S/2017/982), submitted
by the Under-Secretary-General for the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA).
While we note the improvements that it contains, we
continue to hope that future reports will reflect the
reality on the ground in an objective, transparent and
professional manner.

In the same vein, my country's Government looks
forward to the announced visit by the Under-Secretary-
General to Syria in January and will remain open to
putting the relationship back on track and bridging the
confidence gap resulting from some mistakes made
recently by OCHA. We confirm the need for there to
be no double standards or politicization in the work
of OCHA. Furthermore, it should not submit to the
pressure being imposed on it by some permanent States
members of the Council to use humanitarian file as a
tool to exert influence over the Syrian Government.

My country's Government confirms that those
preparing the monthly report should work on the basis
of respect for the content of relevant United Nations
resolutions, and in particular full commitment to
respecting the sovereignty and territorial unity and
integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic, as well as the
provision of humanitarian support in Syria without
politicization or selectivity.

On Monday, we sent an official letter to the
Secretary-General and the President of the Security
Council, laying out the position of the Syrian
Government on the current report. However, I should
like to make the following points.

The current report, like its predecessors, continues
to suffer from a major flaw. Those preparing it have
relied on politicized and other open sources that
lack credibility, while continuing to ignore trusted
Syrian Government sources. The Syrian Government
regrets that the report's writers refer to what they
call "administrative impediments and deliberate
restrictions" that they claim limit the delivery of
humanitarian aid to unstable areas. Despite the fact
that armed terrorist groups continue to shell cities in
residential areas and to escalate and perpetrate violations
in the de-escalation zones, my country's Government
offers every possible facility to ensure the delivery of
that aid when directed to eligible Syrian citizens and
when the necessary and proper arrangements are made
according to Syrian laws and regulations.

In that regard, I note the reference in the report to
the fact that the United Nations has managed to deliver
humanitarian aid to millions of people in need inside
Syria. That could not have been achieved without the
cooperation, coordination and support of the Syrian
Arab Republic and its institutions. On this matter, I
remind the members of the Council of the trilateral
cooperation mechanism that was established in
September, which includes the Syrian Government, the
friendly Russian Federation and the United Nations. It
has worked effectively and regularly to avoid any gaps
and obstacles with a view to facilitating coordination
and enhancing humanitarian access, and has achieved
positive results of late.

We ask those preparing the report to inform the
Member States of the real facts and figures that reflect
the tangible progress made in ensuring the delivery
of humanitarian access to its eligible beneficiaries,
thanks to the efforts of the Syrian Government and
its allies to liberate most Syrian territories from
abominable terrorism.

The Government of Syria regrets the continued
insistence of those preparing the report on promoting
cross-border aid delivery. We confirm that most of that
aid continues to fall into the hands of armed terrorist
groups present throughout the targeted areas. How else
can we explain the continued suffering of civilians in
those regions as a result of terrorists' controlling and
seizing the nutritional material and aid that is delivered
and then reselling it at exorbitant prices to those who
need it?

My country's Government further notes that the
border crossings of Bab al-Hawa, Bab Salama and Ar-
Ramtha are being used to smuggle arms and equipment
to the very same armed terrorist organizations in Syria.
We believe that the express desire of the Secretary-
General and his aids in Syria to turn over a new leaf
of professional work and cooperation with the Syrian
Government runs counter to the continued inclusion
by the report's writers of baseless claims promoting
cross-border aid, tainting the image of the Syrian
Government, or even ignoring its efforts, thereby
effectively serving the political goals of some States
that have a negative influence in the Security Council,
including by promoting urgent claims for the renewal of
resolution 2165 (2014).

My country's Government confirms the need for
United Nations personnel in Syria to refrain from
dealing with any secessionist entities, illegal so-called
local councils or unlicensed civil society organizations.
We warn that most of those organizations have close
ties, amounting to subservience, to the armed terrorist
groups. Moreover, we call on the United Nations and
its agencies to stop using the border crossing of Fish
Khabur because it is an illegal crossing that is used
by certain parties and organizations that enter Syrian
territory illicitly.

The Syrian Government continues to have grave
concern over the persistent use of exaggeration and
hyperbole by those writing the reports, their use of
the expression "besieged areas" and their inclusion of
misleading information about the situation in eastern
Ghouta, in rural Damascus. Civilians in eastern Ghouta
are actually under an internal siege that is being imposed
by the various armed organizations present there, which
take advantage of civilians and use them as human
shields. Those armed organizations seize, monopolize
and distribute humanitarian aidto their supporters or
sell it at inflated prices to those who need it, as was the
case in the neighbourhoods of eastern Aleppo.

On the other hand, my country's Government calls
on those who wrote the report to be transparent and
clear in holding the so-called international coalition
led by the United States responsible for the destruction
of Raqqa city and the massacres perpetrated by the
United States-led coalition in Raqqa city - which was
completely destroyed - and other Syrian areas, killing
hundreds and destroying many residential areas; and for
using internationally prohibited weapons - especially
white phosphorous - that constitute illegal war actions
tantamount to war crimes, crimes against humanity
and violations of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law.

My country's Government also calls on those who
prepared the report to be transparent and credible by
clear stressing in future reports the deeply negative
impacts of the unilateral economic coercive measures
imposed on Syria by the United States of America,
members of the European Union and other States, which
have affected even the activities of the United Nations
agencies and foreign non-governmental organizations
operating in the country. Those measures have led to
the stalling of several important projects that were
designed to respond to the needs of the Syrian people.

Moreover, my country's Government calls on those
who prepared the report to not simply take stock of the
rate of funding but to express clearly and openly that
some donors who made pledges are not fulfilling their
financial commitments, and that some have imposed
political conditions for the funding of international
organizations operating in Syria and obstructed the
Syrian Government's plans for the rehabilitation of
infrastructure and the return of internally displaced
persons to their homes once security and stability
are restored.

In conclusion, the Syrian Arab Republic rejects the
call of the Secretary-General for the situation in the
Syrian Arab Republic to be referred to the International
Criminal Court (ICC). We affirm that the ICC has no
jurisdiction over the situation in Syria. The Court has
lost all credibility since it was rendered a mere political
tool to impose the law of force and not the force oflaw.
The Syrian Arab Republic also rejects the Secretary-
General's call for cooperation with the so-called
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011, and calls on Member States
to read document A/71/799, which contains the text of
a letter from our Permanent Mission to the Secretary-
General, setting out the serious legal flaws of General
Assembly resolution 71/248, which established an
illegitimate mechanism that is not recognized by my
country's Government or by the Governments of several
other Member States.

The Syrian Arab Republic calls on the Under-
Secretary-General to focus transparently and
professionally on improving ties with the Syrian Arab
Republic, as well as on supporting coordination and
reaching out in order to preserve the humanitarian file
from any political pressure or foreign considerations
that some influential Governments are trying to
impose on the United Nations agencies working in the
humanitarian sector.

