Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey
Feltman and Under-Secretary- General Stephen O'Brien
for their briefings.

The countries of Central and West Africa have
recently further strengthened their cooperation on
security, and the overall situation in the region is stable.
The countries of the Lake Chad Basin have established
the Multinational Joint Task Force and intensified their
fight against terrorism, making significant progress in
that regard, for which China expresses its appreciation.
The security problem and the humanitarian situation
in the region remain very serious, however. Repeated
terrorist attacks and rampant criminal activities, such
as piracy in the Gulf of Guinea, pose a threat to the
security and stability of the region.

The international community should support
the countries of Central and West Africa, including
the countries of the Lake Chad Basin region, in the
following areas.

First, they should support African countries in
their counter-terrorism efforts, which constitute. a
very important component of international counter-
terrorism efforts. The international community must
actively support and assist the countries of the region in
their capacity-building to fight terrorism, enabling the
Multinational Joint Task Force to effectively conduct
its operations to eliminate the threats to the countries,
particularly in the Lake Chad Basin, posed by terrorist
organizations and activities.

Secondly, there must be greater cooperation with
regional and subregional organizations, including the
African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States and the Lake Chad Basin Commission.
The international community must fully respect
the leading role played by regional organizations in
addressing the region's problems, and draw on the
unique expertise and advantages of those organizations
with a view to building synergies and promoting
solutions to regional hotspot issues through such
methods as dialogue, mediation and good-offices.

Thirdly, humanitarian aid should be provided to the
region as soon as possible. The international community
should adhere to the purposes set forth in the Charter
of the United Nations and the fundamental principles
of humanity, neutrality and impartiality, as established
by relevant General Assembly resolutions, and actively
provide humanitarian assistance to the countries
concerned based on respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of nations, in order to mitigate the
food shortage and insecurity facing regional countries.

Fourthly, countries of the region must also
be provided assistance so that they can achieve
development by addressing the root causes of conflict.
The international community should also increase its
financial assistance to those countries on the basis of
respect for their national sovereignty so that they can
truly build their capacities to promote economic and
social development.

China has always actively supported Africa in
capacity-building, abiding by its policy of sincerity,
good faith and friendship towards Africa, characterized
by prioritizing justice over interests. During the
Chinese presidency in April, we took the initiative to
hold an open debate of the Security Council on piracy
in the Gulf of Guinea (see S/PV.7675), which resulted
in presidential statement S/PRST/2016/4, in which the
Council offered a positive response to the aspirations
of the regional countries for international cooperation
in combatting piracy, thereby building an international
consensus on fighting piracy in the Gulf of Guinea,
offering a new approach to a collective response to the
piracy issue.

China will continue to implement the outcome
of the Johannesburg Summit and the China-Africa
Cooperation Forum, and is ready to work with the
international community and countries concerned
to support the countries of Central and West Africa
in their efforts to achieve lasting peace and common
prosperity.

