Mr. Ntahomvukiye (Burundi) (spoke in French):
Allow me at the outset to commend the Security Council
and the presidency of the United States for having included
on the Council's agenda security issues of the countries of
the Great Lakes subregion. The problem of security in this
part of Africa is at the centre of Burundi's concerns, given
the tension and the internal, cross-border and interrelated
wars that develop there to the point of imperiling entire
nations now for many years.

The Government of Burundi welcomes the opportunity
offered to express its great hope that the implementation of
the Lusaka Agreement will create a favourable climate for
the process of peace and reconciliation undertaken in my
country over the past three years. One of the causes of the
resurgence of violence in recent months is rooted in the
coalition of armed rebel groups that come and go in the
subregion where militias and other armies have taken to the
bush and continue their guerrilla activities.

I will not revert to the explanations already given here
at the United Nations and elsewhere on Burundi's position
in the war that is ravaging the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. However, I would like to recall that Burundi stands
ready to make its contribution and to play its full role in
implementing the Lusaka Agreement, which explicitly
acknowledges its security concerns along its border with the
Democratic Republic of the Congo due to the activity of
part of the Burundi rebellion in that country.

More than in the various meetings in Kampala, Lusaka
and Harare, Burundi requests to be particularly associated
with the settlement of the following items identified in the
Agreement: first, disarmament of armed groups, including
the Forces for the Defence of Democracy of Burundi, as
stipulated in chapter 8, article 8.2.2 and chapter 9 of the
Agreement; secondly, the voluntary repatriation of
Burundian and Congolese refugees, as stipulated in
chapter 8, article 8.2.2; thirdly, reintegration into society
of members of armed groups, as stipulated in chapter 8,
article 8.2.2 of the Agreement; and fourthly,
normalization of the situation along the common border
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Burundi, as stipulated in chapter 12 of the Agreement.

In keeping with our traditional policy of good-
neighbourliness, Burundi entirely endorses the measures
recommended in chapter 12 of the Agreement. In this
connection, it reaffirms its desire to cooperate with all
signatories to the Agreement and other involved parties.
Peace and stability in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo are indispensable to lasting peace in the subregion
and in Burundi in particular.

