Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation appreciates the convening of this meeting
and the briefings by Mr. Michel Kafando, Ambassador
Fatima Mohammed and Ambassador Jiirg Lauber.

We would like to begin our statement by
commending the actions of the Government of Burundi
in connection with the upcoming general elections,
including the announcement by President Nkurunziza
that he will not stand, the adoption of the national
development plan and the United Nations Development
Assistance Framework for the period from 2019 to 2023.

However, we believe that those objectives should
be complemented by strengthening the intra-Burundian
dialogue, which does not yet have the participation of
all the stakeholders. It is important to remember that
inclusive dialogue is the only viable way to genuinely
make progress towards peace and reconciliation and the
implementation of the commitments made in the Arusha
Peace and Reconciliation Agreement for Burundi.

We believe that the preparations for the next general
elections, scheduled for 2020, must be complemented
by the necessary confidence-building measures among
all political and social stakeholders. We think that it is
positive that the national development plan, linked to
the Sustainable Development Goals, seeks to promote
the development of rural areas of Burundi based on
good governance, sustainable management of the
environment and planned land use.

In that regard, the support that the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) can provide in that context is
important, as Ambassador Lauber said, with a view
to achieving a sustainable economy. The efforts of the
PBC with regard to promoting dialogue on that issue
between the Government and international institutions
and partners are also significant.

On the other hand, we note with concern the
ongoing reports of human rights violations and
abuses. Like other representatives, we believe that the
Government's decision to definitively close the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights does not help the objective of providing full
guarantees to all Burundian actors in the free exercise
of their fundamental rights. We believe that it is
important to find points of convergence and to resolve
the differences that prevent the presence of the Office
in the country.

The humanitarian situation continues to be a source
of concern when we see the continuing presence of
Burundian refugees in various neighbouring countries.
We believe that the Government must take action on that
issue with the support of the international community.

We therefore believe that it is important for
the Council to continue to monitor and support
developments in the country and for regional and
subregional organizations and neighbouring countries
to continue to provide their assistance and support in
order to strengthen Burundi's response to its upcoming
objectives and challenges, including the holding of
credible, transparent and inclusive elections in 2020.

