Mr. Pujalte (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, my delegation would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this public meeting
on an issue of the utmost importance for my country. I
should also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report to the Security Council, contained in document
S/2003/1217, on ways and means in which the Council
could contribute to dealing with the question of the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons. I should
also like to express gratitude and appreciation to the
Under-Secretary-General for Disarmament Affairs, Mr.
Nobuyasu Abe, for introducing the report.

The fact that hundreds of thousands of people fall
victim to small arms and light weapons every year
makes it necessary for the Security Council to address
the question of the proliferation of such weapons in the
framework of its chief responsibility - that of
maintaining international peace and security.

In considering this issue it should View with a
broad perspective the destabilizing effects of such
weapons and the way in which they prevent the
creation of conditions for stable and lasting
development.

Another important element that must be examined
is the link between such activity and transnational
organized crime, the illicit drug trade and terrorism.
That is why, within the Counter-Terrorism Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), my
country promoted the idea of including this issue on
the Committee's agenda and on the reports submitted
by countries.

The main response of the Council to the problem
has been the imposition of arms embargoes through the
sanctions regimes that it establishes. The results,
however, have not always been entirely satisfactory.
The problem is exacerbated by the diversity of the
sources of production of weapons, the many means of
their transportation, lax internal regulation, the absence
of international legal instruments governing the trade,
the traffic in used weapons and the black market.

That is why an effort must be made at both the
domestic and the international levels. At the national
level, more and better controls are needed over sales.
In the international sphere, the Council should, as a
first step, encourage States to provide information
about the transfer of small arms and light weapons.
Over the long term we need a legally-binding
international instrument that provides for the
punishment of those involved in the illicit trade in
these weapons, including brokers.

All States - not only the recipients of illicit
small arms and light weapons - have a responsibility
for dealing with the traffic in and production of such
weapons. Indeed, in my country's opinion, the
producing and exporting countries have the greatest
responsibility. We should require a greater degree of
participation and commitment on their part with regard
to the measures adopted by our Organization with a
view to controlling such weapons.

Having participated in the work of the Group of
Governmental Experts established pursuant to General
Assembly resolution 56/24 V charged with the task of
considering the possibility of developing an
international instrument enabling States to identify and
trace, in a timely and reliable way, illicit small arms
and light weapons, Mexico welcomes the adoption by
the General Assembly, by consensus, of resolution
58/241, which, inter alia, provides for negotiations on
such an international instrument to begin this year.

As the report of the Secretary-General states,
General Assembly resolution 58/241 also requests the
Secretary-General to hold consultations with all
Member States, relevant regional and subregional
organizations, international bodies and experts in the
field regarding the adoption of new measures aimed at
intensifying international cooperation to prevent,
combat and eliminate illicit brokerage in the trade in
small arms and light weapons.
Mexico participated in the work of the Council as
a non-permanent member for 2002-2003, and we will
continue to pay close attention to the work of the
Council.

My country believes that this first open debate
concerns an area in which it is important to pool the
efforts of the various United Nations organs; regional
and subregional organizations; and the relevant
international agencies.

In that regard, my delegation deems extremely
important the promotion of the implementation of
recommendation 4, contained in the October 2002
statement by the President of the Security Council,
which refers to increased interaction between the
Security Council and the General Assembly with
regard to the question of small arms and light weapons.

