Mr. Onanga Ndiaye (Gabon) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I would like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Pascoe for the clear briefing he has just given
us. I would also like to join Council members who
have spoken before me in expressing my thanks for the
information provided by the ambassadors of Palestine
and Israel.

My delegation would like to reiterate our concern
at the lack of progress made since our most recent
debate on this issue (6340th meeting). It quite rightly
shows how urgently we need to close the gap between
Palestinians and Israelis, as we approach the end of the
freeze on new Israeli settlements.

My delegation would like to welcome the
international community's inspired new dynamic, in
particular the recent initiatives of the United States,
Egypt, Morocco, the Quartet and the United Nations,
aimed at promoting the resumption of direct talks
between the parties in accordance with their
obligations and the provisions of the Road Map.

I therefore welcome the regional meeting for
Africa organized by the United Nations on 1 and 2 July
2010 in Rabat on strengthening African support for a
just and lasting solution to the question of Jerusalem. It
was reaffirmed at the end of the meeting that the only
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict lies in an
agreement negotiated between the parties and that only
a two-State solution, with an independent and viable
Palestinian State living side by side in peace and
security with Israel and its other neighbours, can bring
peace to the region.

As recalled by the Secretary-General, the
situation in the Middle East will remain tense if we do
not arrive at a comprehensive settlement that takes all
aspects of the problem into account. My delegation
believes that it is important to find solutions to Israel's
security concerns as well as to the question of West
Bank settlements, border demarcation between the two
States in accordance with resolution 242 (1967) and the
Fourth Geneva Convention, the status of Jerusalem and
respect for human rights and for the right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination.

A political solution in the Middle East will also
be found by resolving the security situation, as
advocated by the Quartet in its statement of 21 June.
However, security must be a reality for both sides.
Thus, while for the Government of Israel security is
synonymous with the end of arms smuggling, for the
Palestinian Authority it means respect for the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people.

Moreover, Gabon welcomes the recent efforts by
the Israeli Government aimed at adjusting its policy
towards Gaza, in particular by allowing the entry of
additional goods such as building materials, thus
enabling the United Nations and the international
community to continue to provide aid to the people of
Gaza.

We also welcome the review now underway of
the plan for the administration of Judea and Samaria, in
particular measures aimed at employment and the free
circulation of goods and persons. However, we favour
a complete lifting of restrictions, including at the
border crossings. We also call for the freeing by the
parties of all political prisoners, including Israeli
soldier Gilad Shalit.

With regard to East Jerusalem, my delegation
expresses its regret at the destruction of Palestinian
families' property on 13 July in certain districts. We
deplore this unilateral and provocative act, which is a
violation of international law and undermines efforts
aimed at resuming negotiations and strengthening
mutual confidence.

Moreover, we remain fully committed to finding
a solution through peaceful and constructive
negotiations that will integrate the legal, religious,
social and environmental aspects of East Jerusalem. We
believe that the negotiations should be guided by the
borders indicated in the resolutions of 1967 and by the
Fourth Geneva Convention.

Several members of the Council have often
rightly held that, while we must not neglect the
symptoms of the disease, we should focus on its root
causes of the disease itself. My country thus remains
convinced that it is urgent to intensify negotiations in
order not only to make direct contact possible but also
to reach a lasting peace, which, let me recall, involves
creating a viable Palestinian State. We therefore urge
the parties to show restraint and avoid any unilateral
action and any provocation. We again invite
international partners to promote a climate of trust
between the parties and throughout the region.

