Mr. Jurica (Croatia): First of all, I would like to
thank Ms. Hannelore Hoppe, Director and Deputy to
the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, for
her exhaustive and informative briefing to the Security
Council.

The uncontrolled spread of small arms continues
to pose serious problems for human security,
development and the protection of human rights around
the world. There is an urgent need for the international
community to show courage and unity in addressing
this critical issue. In that context, we welcome the
continuing efforts of the Security Council aimed at
addressing the issue of small arms.

One of the major problems that all post-conflict
countries face is the problem of accumulated small
arms and light weapons, which can pose a threat to
internal and regional security. I would like to stress the
importance of this topic and to express our willingness
to significantly contribute to addressing it, since
Croatia has extensive experience in tackling problems
associated with small arms in a post-conflict society.

We regard the United Nations Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects as a key foundation for the strengthening of
global, regional and national actions on the control of
small arms and light weapons.

The upcoming biennial meeting to consider
national, regional and global implementation of the
Programme of Action, to be held in July this year, is of
particular importance, and Croatia supports the
approach of having in-depth discussions on a limited
number of issues. One of the items on the agenda at the
meeting will be the consideration of the
implementation of the International Tracing
Instrument, which was adopted in 2005. Croatia sees
that instrument as an important tool at the disposal of
the international community for countering the illicit
trade in small arms.

My country supported the resolution calling for
the establishment of a task force to prepare an arms
trade treaty and thereby supporting international efforts
for more effective arms control. Aware of the threat
posed by the uncontrolled arms trade, particularly in
the light of the effects of war on a society in general,
Croatia would support a universal legally binding
instrument to regulate the conventional arms trade in
all its aspects. In that regard, we welcome the
beginning of the work of the Group of Governmental
Experts, which held its first session in February this
year.

Other efforts aimed at increased international
cooperation in the field of small arms are also of great
value. In that context, we would like to mention the
work that has been done within the framework of the
Group of Governmental Experts to consider further
steps to enhance international cooperation in
preventing, combating and eradicating the illicit
brokering in small arms and light weapons in all its
aspects. We attach great importance to the work being
done in that Group to consider further steps to enhance
cooperation with regard to the issue of surplus
conventional ammunition stockpiles.

In the field of the international cooperation at the
global level, we would like to note the increasing
relevance for small arms of the United Nations
Register of Conventional Arms.

At the regional level, we would like to register
our support for the many efforts aimed at curbing the
proliferation of small arms in South-East Europe. For
its part, my country is host to one of the most
successful Stability Pact projects, which is playing an
important role in this effort: the Regional Arms Control
Verification and Implementation Assistance Centre
(RACVIAC), located near Zagreb. RACVIAC is
helping to define new strategic goals in South-East
Europe, which include, among other things, those
related to issues such as conventional arms control,
enhanced confidence-building measures and
strengthening stability and cooperation in South-East
Europe, combating terrorism and the non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction, as well as the fight
against organized crime. One concrete example on
small arms was the Conference on Firearms Control
Initiatives in South-East Europe, held at RACVIAC on
23 and 24 April 2008.

With regard to Security Council arms embargoes,
we are of the opinion that they are powerful tools that
can help us address the illicit trade and brokering in
small arms. We call upon Member States to respect and
fully enforce existing arms embargoes. In that respect,
Croatia shares the View of the Secretary-General on the
increased potential of arms embargoes as a part of
post-conflict peacebuilding.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to
reiterate its call for continued and increased
international cooperation with a View to efficiently
addressing the illicit trafficking of small arms. Croatia
is ready to support such efforts.

