Mr. Burian (Slovakia): Let me join previous
speakers in thanking Mr. Qazi for his informative
briefing. We also thank Ambassador Khalilzad for his
report on behalf of the countries making up the
Multinational Force, including my own country. In
addition, we welcome the presence at this meeting of
His Excellency Mr. Hoshyar Zebari, the Foreign
Minister of Iraq, and thank him for his comprehensive
statement.

First, I wish to commend the ongoing efforts of
the United Nations and the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), under the leadership of Mr.
Qazi, and their dedicated work in Iraq under truly
difficult and challenging conditions and circumstances.
We share the View of Mr. Zebari that strong United
Nations involvement in Iraq's reconstruction and
stabilization is instrumental. In that regard, we are

encouraged by the fact that the Secretary-General is
considering expanding the role and presence of the
United Nations in Iraq where possible. We wish to
emphasize our support in that respect.

We also welcome the launching of the
International Compact with Iraq. Slovakia commends
the Iraqi Government for the ambitious commitments it
made in the Compact. We believe that timely
implementation of those commitments will be central
in developing and expanding the cooperation between
Iraq and all its international partners, including the
United Nations.

We also welcome the outcomes of the ministerial
conference among Iraq's neighbouring countries with
international participation, which took place in Sharm
el-Sheikh on 4 May. We hope that the conference will
give rise to a long-term process of regional confidence-
building through dialogue and cooperation. Moreover,
we are encouraged by the decision to activate the
technical committees on security, refugees and energy.
In our view, it is important to maintain the momentum
that has been built and to seek further ways to
strengthen mutual collaboration in order to address the
ongoing challenges in Iraq.

At the same time, we believe that regional actors,
and particularly Iraq's immediate neighbours, could
and should play a more active role in promoting peace
and stability in Iraq, which would benefit not only that
country, but also its neighbours and the wider region.
Their contributions to the success of Iraq's stabilization
therefore remain instrumental.

All these efforts and initiatives and their
outcomes show the international community's new
level of solidarity with and commitment to Iraq, as
well as its willingness to contribute actively in tackling
the many challenges faced by that country and its
people. However, to ensure full success, the active and
full engagement of the Iraqi Government in the process
of transition and stabilization remains decisive. Simply
put, Iraqi ownership of that process is crucial. As the
Secretary-General rightly puts it in paragraph 64 of his
report (S/2007/330), "Solutions must be found through
sustained national dialogue, the patient search for
compromise, and within the framework of the
Constitution". We hope that those principles will be
reflected in all efforts to achieve lasting and
sustainable peace and stability in Iraq.
In that regard, we welcome the progress achieved
in the constitutional review process and commend the
Constitutional Review Committee for its constructive
role. We also welcome the establishment of the
Independent High Electoral Commission as a notable
recent achievement. On the other hand, we regret that
progress was delayed on some other vital legislation,
such as laws on hydrocarbons, provincial elections, de-
Baathification and amnesty. We also regret that the
level of Violence, terrorist and sectarian attacks, human
rights violations and general insecurity is still high in
Iraq. That remains a source of constant concern for us.
We strongly condemn all such acts of violence,
including today's shocking attack on one of the holiest
sites in Shia Islam, the holy shrine of Imam Ali
Al-Hadi and Imam Hassan Al-Askari in Samarra. We
join and support the Secretary-General in his call on all
Iraqis to exercise maximum restraint and to avoid
sinking into a vicious cycle of revenge.

Finally, it is also important that all possible
efforts be undertaken to address the increasing
humanitarian suffering of a large number of Iraqi
refugees and displaced persons. In that regard, we
welcome the international conference organized by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, held in Geneva on 17 and 18 April, to
address the needs of Iraqi refugees and internally
displaced persons, as well as its positive and
constructive outcomes. However, here again - and
especially in this particular case - we View it as
imperative it is to promote inclusive national dialogue
and reconciliation among all constituencies and
communities in Iraq. Only such an approach can
effectively prevent further outflows of people and
enable Iraqi refugees and displaced persons to return to
their homes.

In conclusion, I would like to underline
Slovakia's readiness to support and assist the process
of peacebuilding and reconstruction in Iraq.

