Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in French): Like
other delegations, Switzerland is deeply concerned by
the scale of violence perpetrated against children.

First of all, the abduction of children is becoming
a war practice used in systematic campaigns of
intimidation and reprisals against civilian populations.
Switzerland is particularly concerned by those
developments, because they are often the precursor
to many other serious violations committed against
children, such as torture, sexual violence and enforced
disappearances.

Switzerland therefore welcomes the decision of the
Security Council to make the abduction of children a
criterion for listing in the Secretary-General's annual
report on children and armed conflict, and that is why
my country decided to co-sponsor the resolution.

Secondly, many non-State armed groups are
attacking children's education, either by forcing
children to stop attending classes and to join their
ranks while exploiting them for propaganda purposes
or by misusing educational facilities. Schools should be
safe places where children can learn and should in no
case be used as shields or shelters for combatants. In
that regard, Switzerland welcomes the signing of the
Safe Schools Declaration by 37 States that committed
themselves to ensuring that schools would no longer be
targeted in conflicts.

Thirdly, violations against children by non-State
armed groups remain a major challenge, as others
have already noted. Switzerland believes that it is
urgent to find measures to strengthen compliance
with international law by those actors. In that regard,
we welcome the non-paper prepared by France for
the March 2015 debate, which called for Member
States to ensure that in their fight against terrorism
and Violent extremism they comply with international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law and that
they avoid criminalizing any contact initiated for
exclusively humanitarian reasons with non-State armed
groups considered extremist. We strongly urge the
international community to support organizations such
as the International Committee of the Red Cross and
Geneva Call, which have direct access to such groups
and which can make a difference through dialogue,
awareness-raising and training aimed at implementing
action plans and at ending violations against children.

Switzerland calls on States to View children
primarily as victims and to draw up measures that
will not adversely affect them, in accordance with
international humanitarian law and human rights. My
country believes that we should avoid the detention of
children suspected of having or determined to have
links to armed groups considered violent extremists.
In addition, the international community should give
higher priority to youth awareness-raising programmes
aimed at the prevention of all forms of extremism and to
include a deradicalization component in disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes.

Finally, Switzerland believes that the international
community should send a clear signal that there will
be no impunity for crimes committed against children.
While States have the primary responsibility to take the
necessary steps to bring the perpetrators of such acts
to justice, the International Criminal Court, as others
have noted, can play an important role when States are
unable or unwilling to do so,

I cannot conclude my remarks without thanking
Ms. Leila Zerrougui and her team, whose important
work Switzerland thoroughly supports.

