Mr. Hahn Choonghee (Republic of Korea): The
Republic of Korea appreciates the initiative of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to convene today's
open debate on "Post-conflict peacebuilding: review
of the peacebuilding architecture". This debate is
particularly timely as it takes place at a time when
both the Security Council and the General Assembly
are preoccupied with the negotiations over the draft
joint resolutions on the review of the peacebuilding
architecture.

Let me also thank the current and former Chairs
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), Ambassador
Kamau of Kenya and Ambassador Skoog of Sweden,
respectively, for their insightful briefings to the
Council, each bringing unique perspectives from
different phases ofthe review, which is in its final stage.

I also thank Ambassador Rosenthal, who has been
sitting beside me throughout the entirety of today's
debate, and his team for the tremendous work done in
leading the Advisory Group of Experts, whose findings
have stimulated very useful and vibrant discussions on
the subject of peacebuilding in the first phase of the
review, and the delegations of Angola and Australia,
which are navigating the second phase of the review
as co-facilitators of the intergovernmental negotiations.

The Republic of Korea, as the recently elected
Vice-Chair of the PBC and as a member of its
Organizational Committee since 2015, fully supports
the statement made by the Chair of the PBC in the
earlier part of today's debate.

In particular, we concur with the view that, as
we work together to operationalize the outcome of
the review, we need to develop the links between our
collective desire to sustain peace and the principles
agreed under the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1). In
this regard, let me lay out my delegation's views on the
issues proposed by the presidency in its concept note
dated February 1 (S/2016/104).

First, one of the most salient observations made by
the report of the Advisory Group of Experts (S/2015/490)
is that the current peacebuilding architecture must
overcome the perennial challenges of underpriority,
underfunding and fragmentation. Taken together, these
challenges are a reflection of the fact that a decade after
its establishment, the Peacebuilding Commission has
yet to find its proper place within the United Nations
system, making it difficult to reach its full potential to
prevent the outbreak, resurgence and relapse of armed
conflict.

To address such shortcomings of the past decade of
peacebuilding, the Republic of Korea is of the view that
due institutional arrangements and political attention
by the Organization should be given to peacebuilding
activities, starting with members of the Security
Council. As the primary organ responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
Security Council must be a true partner and patron of
sustaining peace. In this regard, the Republic of Korea
applauds the recent trend seen in the Security Council
to include the PBC in its deliberations, including the
series of open debates convened last year during the
Chile and United Kingdom presidencies, in January and
November, respectively (see S/PV.7359 and S/PV.7561),
as well as the Council briefing and informal interactive
dialogue organized under the Malaysian presidency in
June (see S/PV.7472).

Secondly, the Republic ofKorea also agrees with the
point articulated in the Venezuelan presidency's concept
note (S/2016/ 104, annex) that successful peacebuilding
requires extensive long-term engagement, with the
recognition that it may not progress in a linear manner.
After the decade-long peacebuilding experiment, one
concrete lesson learned from our experience is that
genuine and sustainable peacebuilding efforts cannot
be limited to post-conflict activity, but rather as efforts
to prevent the lapse and relapse into conflict.
Such an aspiration to prioritize the vision of
long-term and sustainable peace is embodied in the
concept of "sustaining peace" introduced in the report
of the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of
the Peacekeeping Architecture (see S/2015/490) and
later explained by its authors to the Member States.
It is therefore our intention to highlight the long-term
nature of peacebuilding engagement in our capacity
as the Chair of the PBC's Working Group on Lessons
Learned.

Thirdly, peacebuilding is a cross-cutting activity
that connects the development, peace and security
and human rights pillars of the United Nations. This
interlinkage is of particular importance to the PBC,
which was established as an intergovernmental
advisory body to the Security Council and the General
Assembly with a specific mandate to focus attention
on the reconstruction and institution-building efforts
necessary for recovery from conflict and to support
the development of integrated strategies in order to
lay the foundation for sustainable development. The
Republic of Korea, as a donor to the various United
Nations conflict-prevention activities, including the
Peacebuilding Fund, recognizes the important nexus
between development and peace and security and
intends to increase its contribution in this area in the
years ahead.

Finally, the importance of the role of regional and
subregional organizations across the full spectrum of
United Nations peace operations cannot be emphasized
enough. The need to engage regional and subregional
organizations in the variety of efforts undertaken by
the United Nations in pursuit of peace and security
has been identified in all recent reviews, including
the report of the Advisory Group of Experts and the
report of the High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations (see S/2015/446). The Republic of Korea is
glad to see that the elements related to this particular
aspect of peacebuilding have garnered consensual
support among the wide membership participating in
the intergovernmental negotiations.

In conclusion, the adoption of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development last September (General Assembly resolution 70/1), in particular Goa1 16,
which calls for peaceful societies, access to justice and
inclusive institutions, presents a historic opportunity for
the United Nations peacebuilding discourse to address
a much broader spectrum in future. In this final phase
of the review, the onus is now on the Security Council
and the General Assembly to seize the opportunity and
lay a foundation for the next decade of a lasting and
sustaining peace.

