Mr. Gfirber (Switzerland) (Spoke in French):
Four years after the last debate on the subject before
the Council today (see S/PV. 5474), the time has come
to take stock of the situation. Protection, development
and the implementation of the rule of law lie at the
very heart of the mission of the United Nations. The
Security Council is confronted daily with the challenge
of reaffirming the primacy of the rule of law in its
activities and working methods in order to strengthen
the legitimacy of its decisions.

Although the subject of rule of law is very broad,
I would like to highlight four particular aspects. First is
the promotion of the rule of law in situations of
conflict. Respect for international humanitarian law is
a crucial aspect of the rule of law in conflict situations.
The Security Council has a special role to play in this
respect, and it should consistently insist on compliance
with international humanitarian law in the specific
situations with which it is seized. This is one of the
main conclusions of the events organized by
Switzerland in Geneva and New York to mark the
sixtieth anniversary of the Geneva Conventions.
Questions concerning the application and monitoring
of international humanitarian law merit in-depth
discussion. Switzerland is willing to commit itself to
this course of action.
10-42851
We welcome the latest resolution of the Security
Council on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(resolution 1894 (2009), adopted in November 2009.
We would like to see the protection of civilians
adequately reflected in the mandates of United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

Secondly, in regard to combating impunity and
promoting the rule of law in post-conflict situations,
societies emerging from prolonged periods of conflict
inevitably assume a heavy legacy of massive human
rights violations while in a very precarious state.
Switzerland would like to see a process of strategic
reflection take place on the lessons learned on the
subject of combining the principles on countering
impunity developed by Louis Joinet with strategies for
strengthening the rule of law in societies in transition.

Thirdly, in the area of international justice and
the peaceful settlement of disputes, Switzerland gives
top priority to promoting and ensuring respect for
international law, a true pillar of a just and peaceful
international order. The International Court of Justice
is at the heart of an international order based on the
primacy of law. Switzerland encourages all States that
have not already done so to recognize the jurisdiction
of the Court as ipso facto compulsory.

The first Review Conference of the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court has just ended. The
inclusion in the Statute of the crime of aggression is a
historic event in the development of international law.
The fact that, 65 years after the Nuremberg and Tokyo
trials, an individual can now be convicted by a
permanent international court of the crime of
aggression is without doubt a symbolic step towards a
culture of peace.

Fourthly, in regard to the effectiveness and
credibility of the sanctions system, Switzerland wishes
to underscore the usefulness of the system of targeted
sanctions. We believe that it must be preserved and
consolidated and that the option of additional
improvements should be considered. The Security
Council has responded favourably to the requests of
some countries, including Switzerland, to establish
fairer procedures. In paragraph 20 of resolution 1904
(2009), the Council decided to establish the Office of
the Ombudsperson with responsibility for receiving
complaints from individuals affected by sanctions.
Switzerland welcomes the progress made in the
sanctions regime in this area. As a result, the ability to
3
take into account the rights of individuals at the
international level has been improved and the
legitimacy of the sanctions system strengthened.
Switzerland will follow the implementation of the
resolution closely.

Finally, we reaffirm our support for the Rule of
Law Coordination and Resource Group, chaired by the
Deputy Secretary-General and supported by the Rule of
Law Unit.

