The President (interpretation from Spanish): I thank
the representative of Germany for his kind words
addressed to me.

I will now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Chile.

In the first place, I wish to express my satisfaction
over the interest in and support for the initiative of
holding this orientation debate on the serious crisis in
Afghanistan. The positive response of a large number of
delegations is clear proof that the international community
is concerned about the continuing suffering of the Afghan
People.

Furthermore, Chile considers it extremely timely and
necessary to be able to hear in this open debate the
comments, opinions, suggestions, ideas and points of view
of other delegations, including those of many States of
the region, non-members of the Council which are
affected in a variety of ways by the Afghan crisis. We
believe that we are thus making a contribution to
promoting peace initiatives and resolving a conflict in a
Member State, and also better meeting the common desire
to have a Council which works in increasingly transparent
ways. We think that we may also in this manner achieve

 

the legitimacy and support which all decisions of the
Council should have.

In recent years, despite the enormous efforts made by
the United Nations and other States, as well as by the
Afghan parties, we note with regret that the warring
factions in Afghanistan seem to continue to prefer the
military option.

Resolutions of the General Assembly have repeatedly
remained unimplemented, and in recent months we have
continued to be distressed by the continuation of military
activity in Kabul and other areas, resulting in death and
destruction and seriously endangering regional peace and
stability.

My delegation wishes to repeat the importance it
attaches to the fact that those States that bear the heaviest
responsibility for resolving the conflict should take the
necessary measures to promote peace in Afghanistan.
Ending the flow of arms, ammunition and other military
supplies is indispensable for promoting an end to conflict.

We believe that it is urgent to put an immediate end
to undue interference in the internal affairs of Afghanistan.
Similarly, the commitments undertaken by the present
Government should be fully respected. At the same time,
we feel that the efforts of the parties, including those of all
Afghan representatives and of the States most closely
concerned, should focus on the search for an immediate and
lasting cease-fire agreement. We feel that it would be useful
at a later stage to consider convening an international
conference to address all the Afghan problems
comprehensively.

Along with all this, the continuation of development
programmes aimed at rehabilitating economic activity and
the growing reintegration of people to productive tasks is of
special importance. This seems all the more necessary when
we consider the disturbingly high levels of drug production
in Afghanistan, which has a negative impact on the peace
process, since it is an agent for destabilization in
neighbouring countries and throughout the region.
Lastly, Chile wishes to pay a very sincere and heartfelt
tribute to the work of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the International Organization
for Migration, the United Nations Children's Fund, the
World Food Programme and other non-governmental
organizations that, in very difficult circumstances, are
striving to ease the suffering of the people most affected.
We appeal for the free flow of humanitarian assistance to
Kabul.

Along with other delegations here, we also commend
and fully support the initiatives carried out by the Special
Mission representing the Secretary-General in the region.

We know, however, that no progress in the Afghan
situation is possible without the resolute cooperation of all
parties to the conflict. We appeal - and this will seem
unnecessary, but I believe that here in the Security
Council we need to emphasize these points - to the
Government and factions to think first and foremost of
the people of Afghanistan. There can be no agreement
without the participation of everyone, but neither can
there be a political agreement unless the well-being of the
people of Afghanistan is made the paramount objective.
The search for power, territorial control and Victory over
another merely increases suffering; the Afghan leaders
themselves know that as well as anyone. Having heard
and read the positions of the Afghan leadership, one
wishes there were more affection, more love, more
sensitivity towards people, towards the innocent human
beings whose fates depend exclusively on their
geographic location and who are not consulted.

This debate conveys a clear message of the
Council's concern over and interest in the Afghan
situation - and we would wish to see the Afghan leaders
show the same interest and the same concern towards
their own people - and of firm support for the peace
process. We appeal in the strongest terms to the parties to
respond positively so that, beginning now, a future of
peace, progress and stability, so sorely needed by the
Afghan people, can begin to be built.

I now resume my function as President of the
Security Council.

The next speaker is the representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.

