Mr. Fowler (Canada) (interpretation from F rench):
As this is my first opportunity to address the Security
Council during February, allow me to congratulate you,
Madam President, on the way your presidency has
unfolded. I know that, as a result of your capable
guidance, the Council has carried out its tasks in a fruitful
and effective manner. Allow me also to offer my
congratulations to the representative of the United
Kingdom, Ambassador Weston, on the way he guided the
Council's deliberations during January.

Canada has watched the Haitian people with
admiration as it passed one of the most important
milestones in its progress towards democracy. On
7 February, contingent on the 17 December elections, the
Haitian people made possible a transfer of power from
one democratically elected President to another. This is a
success of which all Haitians can be proud.

Canada has sought to take advantage of all possible
opportunities for it to show proof of its commitment to
helping the Haitians along their road to peace, prosperity
and stability. We have provided technical, material and
financial assistance, and have taken an enthusiastic part in
all United Nations efforts aimed at bringing peace and

 

stability into the daily lives of the Haitian people. Our
commitment will be maintained as Haiti continues with its
development.

(spoke in English)

While marking the achievements to date, we must also
measure the steps still to be taken. We welcome the two
letters from President Preval to the Secretary-General
requesting the continuation of a United Nations and an
international presence through the United Nations Mission
in Haiti (UNMIH) and the International Civilian Mission to
Haiti (MICIVIH). Canada is committed to ensuring that
democracy in Haiti is deeply rooted.

In this regard, I am pleased to join many others in
offering praise and appreciation to Special Representative
Brahimi, whose outstanding diplomatic skills and quiet
competence have contributed so much to the success of the
United Nations engagement in Haiti.

We do believe that there is a continuing role for the
international community which will extend far beyond the
length of UNMIH'S or MICIVIH'S specific mandates: Haiti
is engaged in a long-term process of institution-building,
economic reconstruction and the rehabilitation of its justice
system. We all, as members of the international community,
continue to play an important role in assisting the Haitian
Government in this process. While our commitment may
take many forms, these are not undertakings which can be
arbitrarily or summarily concluded. It is therefore
incumbent upon us to ensure that the focus of the
international community remains clearly fixed on Haiti so
that Haiti may overcome its legacy of violence and
injustice.

We consider it important that the negotiation of this
resolution has once again drawn our attention to the
importance of our continuing to learn the lessons of
previous peace-keeping missions. Canada has consistently
insisted that mandates, and the resources deployed in
support of those mandates, cannot be considered separate
and unrelated issues. The resource requirements detailed in
the relevant reports of the Secretary-General are not
arbitrary figures. Rather, they reflect the best military
advice available to the Secretary-General and must be given
due consideration by the Council in adopting enabling
resolutions. When the Council fails to heed such advice,
significant risk is necessarily incurred, sometimes with
disastrous consequences.

Specifically, the issue of force size and troop levels
seemed to be the determining issue in the negotiation of
this resolution. As a significant troop contributor to peace-
keeping operations over nearly five decades, Canada has
often stressed how essential it is that the United Nations
learn from its past peace-keeping record and accept that
peace-keeping missions must be adequately resourced.
The very legitimacy of the United Nations's
peace-keeping vocation will be put at risk if sufficient
resources are not made available to accomplish the
mandates which the Security Council sets for those
missions.

The Secretary-General's military advisers and
potential troop contributors to a renewed but significantly
reduced UNMIH assessed that a contingent of 1,900
would be the minimum viable force required to
accomplish UNMIH's mandate with an acceptable degree
of risk to the United Nations personnel involved.

This force, at 9 per cent of the size of the
multinational force which intervened in September 1994
to establish a stable and secure environment, and one
third the size of the currently mandated UNMIH, was
designed to be of sufficient strength to be capable of
executing the military mission it was being assigned, and
no more. The mission included both maintaining a visible
United Nations presence throughout the country and
providing for the security of United Nations personnel
and other designated persons, including, of course, the
crucially important Civilian Police.

UNMIH, with its Civilian Police component, is an
example of a small, tightly organized, broad-based
Mission focused specifically on the problems of instability
and the need to buttress the fledgling judicial apparatus in
Haiti. UNMIH has been engaged in assisting Haitians
with the peaceful reconstruction of their society. This, in
our View, is an entirely appropriate role for the United
Nations to play.

Canadians have steadfastly stood by the Haitian
people in their struggle to build a democratic society; to
this end, Canada is committed to a significant contribution
to a reduced and extended UNMIH.

Given the strength of our determination not to
abandon Haiti at this critical stage, the Canadian
Government has decided, pursuant to paragraph 11 of
resolution 1048 (1996), to make available, entirely at our
own expense, additional military personnel that we
consider necessary to enable to enable UNMIH to fulfil

 

its mandate with an acceptable degree of risk to the
personnel involved.

We would very much have preferred the Secretary-
General's recommendations for the extended force to have
been accepted by the Council in their entirety. This is a
collective United Nations responsibility, and it should be
organized and resourced accordingly. However, given the
alternative of no force at all and the prospect of leaving
Haiti without any United Nations support at a critical
juncture in Haiti's political development, the Canadian
Government decided to bridge the gap between what the
Council could agree and the Secretary-General's
requirements.

We must stress however, that from our perspective -
and we have every reason to believe that the Government
of Haiti is entirely comfortable with this position - the
Canadian troops which will complete the force envisaged in
the Secretary-General's report will work closely with
United Nations forces in the context of a unified force. We
intend to enter into an agreement with the United Nations
that will place our additional troops under the command
and control of the commander of UNMIH, and we
anticipate that our additional troops will follow the same
rules of engagement and be afforded the same protection as
that part of the force which will be funded by United
Nations general assessment.

Canada has taken the step of offering additional
troops because of our commitment to Haiti and our
concern that United Nations credibility not be jeopardized
once again. It is clearly not an ideal arrangement and not
one that we see as providing a model for future United
Nations peace-keeping. We continue to believe firmly that
all Member States should, through assessed contributions,
help shoulder the burden of maintaining international
peace and security. That said, the interests of the people
of Haiti have caused us to set aside those important
considerations in an effort to ensure an effective United
Nations Mission in Haiti.

In closing, I would like to register my appreciation
for the kind words which you, Madam President, and
many members of the Council have addressed to the
Canadian Government in response to its undertaking to
send additional troops to Haiti to assist with the
maintenance of a secure and stable environment.

