Ms. Eckels-Currie (United States of America):
Mr. President, allow me to welcome you to the Council.

I wish to thank Secretary-General Guterres for
his comments this morning, and I also want to thank
Mr. Daccord for his briefing today. It is good to see him
again after many years. I believe that the last time I saw
him was when I was still working for the International
Committee of the Red Cross, which seems like a
lifetime ago. It is, unfortunately, under circumstances
that are not so positive, as he is here giving us a stark
reminder of the horrific situation that far too many
innocent civilians now endure in conflicts across the
globe. We are strongly encouraged by the presence here
today of Ms. Hanaa Edwar and her testimony before the
Council. Briefings such as hers give us a real sense of
the reality on the ground, and we encourage the Council
to continue this important practice.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2018/462) paints
a dismal picture of the protection of civilians in the
field and in its paragraph 5 describes a

"state of unrelenting horror and suffering affecting
millions of women, children and men across
all conflicts".

The state of affairs with respect to the protection
of civilians is bleak, and millions of people are bearing
the consequences. Tens ofthousands of innocent people
are dying from unlawful attacks involving explosive
weapons and chemical weapons, deliberate attacks on
schools and medical facilities, extrajudicial killings,
starvation, sexual violence and blatant disregard
for international humanitarian law. Millions more
are either missing or have been forced from their
homes, and medical and humanitarian personnel are
being targeted at an alarming rate. Sexual violence
increasingly is being used as a tactic of war, and
victims continue to be targeted based on their ethnic
and religious backgrounds. Member States seemingly
feel no qualms about routinely denying humanitarian
access to civilians in dire need, from Burma to Yemen.

We all have an obligation and moral duty to demand
and uphold the international community's resounding
rejection of the use of chemical weapons in war 100
years ago, after the First World War demonstrated the
horrors of these weapons. We all have an obligation
to uphold Security Council resolutions that call for
the protection of schools, medical facilities and even
journalists from being targets in war. We have an
obligation to insist on unhindered humanitarian access
for all those in need and on safe, voluntary evacuations of
civilians compelled to flee their homes, consistent with
our obligations under international humanitarian and
human rights law. It is critical that all States Members
of the United Nations do their part to protect civilians.

The United States welcomes the Secretary-
General's steps to improve peacekeeping and revive
a sense of collective responsibility for the success of
United Nations peacekeeping operations. But we need
to be honest and clear when Member States are not
living up to their commitments, and we - especially
we in the Council - should be willing to apply
meaningful pressure when parties to a conflict do not
change course.

In missions across the globe, peacekeepers today
serve at great personal risk and act heroically, in many
cases, to protect civilians. However, we also still have
far too many examples of peacekeepers failing to take
necessary action to protect civilians. We continue to see
units retreat from towns they are supposed to protect
rather than standing their ground as armed attackers
approach. We continue to see those who are responsible
for protecting civilians abuse their positions of trust.

Improving the protection of civilians in
peacekeeping requires increased accountability, and
the United States welcomes the Secretary-General's
steps to institutionalize a culture of accountability
for performance in United Nations peacekeeping,
starting with the development and implementation of
a comprehensive performance policy that identifies
transparent standards for performance and details
measures to hold underperformers accountable. The
United States stands firmly behind the commitment
to enhancing performance for the protection of
civilians and encourages all Member States to do
the same by supporting the Kigali Principles on the
Protection of Civilians, which were designed to help
peacekeepers effectively implement their protection-of-
civilian mandates.

For example, the Principles call for troop-
contributing countries to empower military
commanders of peacekeeping contingents to use force
to protect civilians, knowing that if commanders have
to wait hours and hours for guidance from their capitals,
it may be too late to prevent a fast-approaching attack
on a nearby village. If properly implemented, there
is little doubt that the Kigali Principles would make
peacekeeping missions more effective, improve civilian
security and save lives.

We also join our United Kingdom colleagues in
support of the human rights elements of peacekeeping
missions. Their work fulfils crucial protection and
prevention aspects of Council mandates, to which all
Council members, but especially the five permanent
members, have agreed.

But what else can we, as the Security Council or as
Member States, do to promote respect for international
human rights law? For one, we as the Security Council
should stand in solidarity against genocide, crimes
against humanity, war crimes and ethnic cleansing, and
work together to adopt urgently needed resolutions in
all such cases.

Secondly, we as the Council should use the entire
range of tools at our disposal that can and should be
employed to compel parties to comply with applicable
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law, and to promote accountability
for breaches or violations. That includes sanctions,
arms embargoes, fact-finding missions, independent
mechanisms to gather, collect and store evidence, and
justice mechanisms to bring to justice those responsible
for those violations.

Thirdly, each State should ensure that they have
appropriate legislative and institutional arrangements
to address current and prevent future violations of
international humanitarian law and violations and
abuses of fundamental human rights. Accountability
is essential to provide both justice for victims of such
violations and to end the culture of impunity that leads
to them in the first place. Individual States should
also investigate and, where appropriate, prosecute
crimes committed within their jurisdiction. Credible
national accountability efforts should be encouraged
and supported along with other mechanisms, including
fact-finding missions, commissions of inquiry and
international and hybrid tribunals. Those mechanisms
are critical when national options are unavailable
or futile.

Fourthly, we should use all the prevention tools we
have at our disposal to stop cycles of conflict, build
social cohesion and promote and protect human rights.
We note the Secretary-General's important leadership
on the prevention and peacebuilding agendas.

Finally, the international community must give this
issue the attention it deserves. Today is an important
step in that regard. We all know it is not enough to
merely be outraged by the accounts we have heard
here today - and pretty much every other week that
we sit in the Council. It is not enough to say the right
things in the Chamber and then walk out of here and do
nothing. We must remain committed to promoting the
protection of civilians by doing our own part as well.
We have to use the tools that we have to ensure that we
are doing our part to protect civilian lives and fulfil
our own conventional and customary obligations under
international humanitarian law and international human
rights law. That is not something that any of us can do
alone, but that should not stop all of us from taking the
robust national and regional steps we can. We will need
solid commitments and urgent action by all to truly and
effectively protect innocent human lives.
