Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): I, too, would
like to thank and congratulate the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) for the presentation
of her eleventh report. I reiterate Senegal's support for
the Rome Statute, and reaffirm our commitment to
resolution 1970 (2011), which was adopted unanimously
on 26 February 2011.

In referring the situation in Libya to the ICC, the
Security Council intended to act quickly and effectively
to combat impunity in that country. Therefore, when
considering the report, the Council was pleased to note
that despite the instability of the prevailing security
situation in the country, in addition to limited financial
resources, the Office of the Prosecutor is managing
to engage with the Office of the Libyan Prosecutor
General and to effectively implement the memorandum
of understanding signed in November 2013 on the
division of work between the Court and Libyan
authorities. That is the irrefutable proof of a genuine
desire, unquestionable commitment and the effective
determination of the stakeholders.

We therefore encourage the Prosecutor to carry
on this work in the same vein, and we call on the
Libyan judicial authorities to continue working to
build a credible and effective judicial system, while
also continuing efforts to share information and
cooperate with the Office of the Prosecutor. It is
ultimately they - the Libyan authorities - who are
responsible for ensuring respect for the rule of law in
their country. In that regard, the idea of forming an
international contact group on issues related to justice,
a contact group that would facilitate legal and material
support to Libya - which had been suggested in the
past - deserves more of our attention and awareness.

We also call on them to employ greater efforts to
create a stable security environment that guarantees
freedom, justice and respect for individual rights.
Moreover, we encourage them to develop and
implement a comprehensive strategy to put an end
to crimes and impunity in the country. During this
decisive phase of its transition, the support of the
international community remains essential and goes
beyond the scope of cooperation between Libya and the
ICC, which remains significant to this process and also
to the success of the mandate entrusted to the Court by
resolution 1970 (2011). As such, it is essential that the
Security Council continue to support the United Nations
mediation efforts led by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya, Mr. Martin Kobler. The
Council, convinced that there can only be a political
solution to the Libyan crisis, should reiterate its call
to take the action necessary for the effective and full
operationalization of the Government of national
accord. As the Prosecutor even notes in her report,
"the ICC is, however, not a panacea for the difficulties
facing Libya".

Let me also take this opportunity to recall that the
ongoing support and actions of the Security Council
with respect to the ICC are required not only to deliver
justice and maintain international peace and security,
but above all to insist once again on the relevance of a
mechanism that would make it possible to evaluate more
effectively the operational monitoring of situations
referred by the Council to the ICC. In that vein, I
would invite States to offer greater support, including
through the allocation of additional resources, which is
necessary for the success of the various investigations
initiated by the Office of the Prosecutor.
The universal struggle against impunity justifies
our continued commitment to the Court in order to save
lives, restore justice for the numerous victims who seek
it, and to build peaceful and inclusive societies.

