Mr. Traore (Guinea) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I wish to thank you, Sir, for organizing this
public meeting on the situation between Iraq and
Kuwait. My thanks also go to the Ambassador of South
Africa, who, in his capacity as Chairman of the
Coordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned Movement
(NAM), made this request.

The holding of this debate is most timely. The
subject we are discussing is at the heart of current
international events and at the centre of the Council's
concerns. This is an important occasion for United
Nations Member States to engage in a broad exchange
of views on what should be done to resolve the thorny
Iraqi question.

Since the resumption of discussions some months
ago with the Iraqi Government on the modalities for
the return of the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC)
and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA),
how many comments have been made, and how many
questions have arisen regarding this crisis? Even if the
latest meeting in Vienna on practical arrangements did
not meet all expectations, it did allow for a significant
advance in the resolution of the necessary
preconditions for resuming inspections in Iraq.

In that regard, we should mention in particular
the acceptance by the Iraqi authorities of all the rights
of inspection, in conformity with the provisions
contained in the relevant Security Council resolutions.
That means that the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC)
and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
will have immediate, unconditional and unrestricted
access to all sites, mobile or fixed, that they deem
appropriate to inspect. While taking note of that
commitment, my delegation is of the view that the
Security Council should ensure that it is carried out
fully and completely in order to avoid a repetition of
the bad precedent of 1998, which many delegations
still bear in mind. That means that a precise, updated
mandate should be given to inspectors, whose activities
should not meet with any hindrance.
My delegation is prepared to make its
contribution to any approach in line with that rationale.
We note that the objective is the elimination of all
weapons of mass destruction. Furthermore, we believe
that all other related and pending questions should be
resolved as swiftly as possible in order to enable the
inspectors to get back to work. From that perspective,
the talks entered into must be pursued and brought to
fruition in a spirit of good cooperation and objectivity.
In that regard, my delegation wishes to express its
thanks to Mr. Blix and to Mr. ElBaradei for their efforts
and determination to carry out their mandate
effectively. Moreover, we take this opportunity to urge
the Iraqi authorities to make every effort to achieve a
definitive settlement of the issue of missing persons
and that of confiscated Kuwaiti property, in conformity
with the relevant Security Council resolutions.

My country, Guinea, is devoted to the scrupulous
respect for Council resolutions and to the maintenance
of international peace and security. We hope that we
shall continue to give pride of place to negotiation,
with a view to peacefully resolving this crisis and to
keeping the international community safe from a
conflagration that would have grave consequences. My
delegation is convinced that, if the measures that we
have described are effectively carried out in a spirit of
good will and frank cooperation, supported by
flexibility and impartiality, we shall together be able to
overcome the obstacles and to achieve the
comprehensive implementation of all the relevant
Council resolutions. Thus, we shall have done good
work by having contributed to preserving the unity and
the credibility of the Council as well as peace and
security in the sensitive region of the Middle East.

