Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I thank Ms. Sandra
Honore, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Haiti and Head of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), for her
briefing on the current developments in the country.
I appreciate in particular her intensive engagement
with the political decision-makers in Haiti, advocating
for the continuity of democratic institutions, national
dialogue, a consensual legislative agenda and progress
towards the holding of free and fair elections.

Rwanda would like to congratulate the leadership
and the people of Haiti for their incredible resilience and
for the spirit they have exhibited in the search for peace,
stability, security and development, in particular since
the 2010 earthquake. As indicated in the Secretary-
General's report (S/2014/162), Haiti has recorded
remarkable progress in almost all areas - including
in the political, security, humanitarian spheres and in
the rule of law - despite the challenges that Haiti and
its people continue to face. We are also encouraged by
the Government's commitment to fostering a greater
alignment of international assistance with national
priorities, increased transparency and strengthened
mutual accountability. Those efforts have contributed
to the Haitian economy's fast recovery.

Regarding the political situation, Rwanda
congratulates the Haitian Parliament and
President Michel Martelly on the adoption and
promulgation on 10 December of an electoral law
that has significantly de-escalated political tensions.
We particularly commend Haiti's political actors,
civil society and the Conference Episcopale de Haiti
for launching an inter-Haitian dialogue focusing on
the three areas of concern: democratic governance,
elections and amending the Constitution. We encourage
all political actors in Haiti to consider this as a historic
opportunity for building their State that they must
commit to making work, however difficult that may be.
The international community should continue to help
Haiti as it prepares for the forthcoming elections.

We are encouraged by the improved security
situation in the country throughout the reporting
period, as indicated by the crime statistics collected by
the National Police and MINUSTAH. The year 2013
saw a stable marginal downward trend in major crimes
compared to the previous year. However, it is worrying
that cases of rape continued to increase. We call on
the Government, with MINUSTAH's support, to put
in place strategies to ensure the protection of women
and girls and reverse this trend. That said, we commend
the National Police for its performance, which, with the
support of MINUSTAH, has significantly improved the
security situation in the country.

Regarding promotion of the rule of law, we note
that the National Police is increasingly proactive and
visible. Its work has resulted in the dismantling of
several criminal gangs. The Secretary-General's report
indicates, however, that the vast majority of reported
rapes are never properly adjudicated, due to weaknesses
in the courts, prosecution offices and police stations,
but we have also taken note of the initiatives being
taken to address the issue, including through capacity-
building for judicial officers and putting proper
structures in place within the police, with the support
of MINUSTAH and the United Nations Development
Programme.

Regarding the humanitarian situation, although
there are still more than 140,000 Haitians displaced
by the 2010 earthquake, it is encouraging to hear that
by the end of last year 90 per cent of the population
displaced by the earthquake had left the internally
displaced persons (IDP) camps. We commend the
collaboration of the Government, the United Nations
and non-governmental partners in that effort. We
believe that with the support of international partners,
all the survivors of the earthquake will soon be resettled.
We also welcome the fact that the overall incidence of
cholera has been halved since the disease first broke
out in late 2010, and that severe food insecurity was
brought down from 1.5 million people affected in early
2013 to 600,000 by the end of the year.

We welcome the continued United Nations efforts
to eliminate the cholera epidemic, and call on all
stakeholders to continue to mobilize the necessary
resources and assist in the efforts to treat and eliminate
cholera in Haiti. In that regard, we note that the
Haitian humanitarian action plan for 2014 identifies
a need for $169 million - intended to provide basic
services for the remaining IDPs living in camps, and to
address critical needs related to the cholera epidemic,
food insecurity, nutrition, protection and disaster
preparedness - of which only $6 million have been
received. We call particularly on the Government and
all partners to ensure reduction of the prevalence of
acute malnutrition among children aged under five,
which continues to affect more than 500,000 children.

Concerning MINUSTAH's status, we take note of
the five options presented by the Secretary-General
for the Mission's reconfiguration after 2016. We
believe that its reconfiguration should be based on
the dynamics on the ground, in line with the security
and political conditions in the country. In that regard,
Rwanda welcomes the Secretary-General's intention
to undertake a full-scale strategic assessment, aimed
at providing an updated and in-depth evaluation of
conditions on the ground, on the recommendations of
which the Security Council should base its decision
about options for the drawdown.

To conclude, I would like to say that Rwanda will
continue to support the Government of Haiti in its
reconstruction period, and, as a police-contributing
country to MINUSTAH, we remain committed and stand
ready to assist the Government in professionalizing its
police forces.

