Mr. Kulyk (Ukraine): The tragic course of events
in the Middle East is viewed with deep concern in
Ukraine. Particularly disturbing is that the new flare-up
of violence in the Palestinian territory and within Israel
is resulting in numerous additional victims among the
innocent civilian population, and it is increasingly
aggravating the situation in the entire region. We were
really shocked at the recent series of bloody acts of
violence that caused new loss of lives and injuries
among Palestinians and Israelis and almost shattered
the slim hopes for the resumption of peace negotiations
between them. My country deplores and condemns all
these acts of violence and expresses condolences to the
families of their innocent victims.

On 2 and 9 August 2001, the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs of Ukraine released statements in this regard.
These statements underline in particular that the entire
history of the conflict in the Middle East, as well as the
current course of events in the region, proves that the
problem cannot be solved by force. There can be no
excuse for the excessive use of force or for acts of
terrorism, irrespective of their motivations. Violence
begets new violence; it brings alienation and animosity
to relations between the two sides and makes the
prospect for a settlement of the conflict more remote.

Ukraine calls upon both sides to undertake
resolute and immediate measures to achieve a ceasefire
and stop bloodshed, to prevent a further escalation of
violence and create the necessary favourable
preconditions for returning to the negotiating table. We
believe that the recommendations of the Mitchell
Committee constitute a solid basis for finding a way
out of the ongoing crisis in the Middle East and for the
resumption of the Israeli-Palestinian negotiating
process.

The current situation requires that the Israeli and
Palestinian leadership act with redoubled prudence,
flexibility and realism. It is necessary for them to
demonstrate the utmost restraint, political resolve and
will to reach mutually acceptable and constructive
decisions.

The events of the most recent weeks on the
ground are particularly disturbing. The situation is
steadily deteriorating, characterized by the ever
increasing dynamics of attacks and counter-attacks,
growing extremism and hatred. It looks like the vicious
circle of mutual violence and vengeance is
unbreakable. It is truly regrettable that the United
States-assisted ceasefire agreement has not been able to
halt the daily bloodshed and shun violence.

It is our firm conviction that the continuous
practice of deliberate killings of pre-selected
Palestinian individuals and devastating tank raids into
the Palestinian-controlled territory should cease.

We also believe that effective control should be
exercised over the Palestinian radical elements in order
to the stop the practice of suicide bombings and
terrorist attacks and reduce incitements and
provocations.

We are also convinced that the earliest
resumption of effective cooperation between the two
parties in the field of security, as well as of their broad
contacts at all levels in general, will substantially help
in de-escalating the violence and in coming back to the
final status talks.

In the current circumstances on the ground, we
see merit in the idea of the international monitoring
mechanism to assist the parties in implementing the
Mitchell Committee recommendations. In our View, it
deserves further careful consideration and could
contribute to the protection of civilians.

Ukraine remains fully supportive of the
individual and joint efforts of the co-sponsors of the
Middle East peace process, as well as those of all
international players involved in the process of seeking
ways to forestall the ongoing regional crisis. My
country welcomes the diplomatic efforts made by the
European Union to that end. We are also pleased with
the active role of the United Nations Secretary-General
and his Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process in the current situation, and we encourage them
to continue their activities.

For its part, Ukraine is determined to continue its
contribution to the cause of achieving general stability
in the Middle East and of bringing about a final
resolution of the Palestinian question.

