Mr. Escalona Ojeda (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, I wish to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the current
month. I welcome the fact that the Council has
considered it important to convene a debate on so
essential a topic as that before us today: threats to
international peace and security caused by terrorist
acts. Undoubtedly, that is an issue that can be analysed
from various perspectives and in various ways.
However, if there is one thing on which all peoples and
nearly all Governments throughout the world have
agreed, it is that without justice there can be no peace,
and without peace there can be no international
security.

When the Government of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela revised its constitution in 1999, we set
out in its preamble the overall guidelines for our legal
and political conduct in the international arena. They
promote peaceful cooperation among nations and
encourage and strengthen Latin American integration
in accordance with the principle of non-intervention
and the self-determination of peoples, the universal and
indivisible guarantee of human rights, the
democratization of international society, nuclear
disarmament, ecological balance and environmental
resources as the common and inalienable heritage of
humankind.

Those guidelines have guided the course of our
nation over the past nine years, during which we have
been subjected to various kinds of international threats.
These have included organizing internal conspiracies in
order to overthrow the Government and weakening
democracy by spreading violence and attempting to
promote chaos in order to destabilize our society so
that we will be declared an unviable State, a failed
State, with all the consequences that that could have
for our sovereignty, our territorial integrity and our
very existence as a nation.

In that context, a serious terrorist act was
committed in Venezuela. It involved the assassination
of Prosecutor Danilo Anderson, who was investigating
the very people who had been involved in the coup
d'e'tat against President Hugo Chavez Frias. As a
result, President Chavez Frias has denounced in
various international forums those Governments that
claim they defend peace and fight terrorism, while they
attack other States and promote terrorism against them.

The terrible and deplorable events of
11 September 2001 aroused global indignation, and
Venezuela clearly condemned them. However, they

gave rise to a policy that has various aspects. First, it
changed the fight against terrorism into an excuse to
attack and invade other countries. Secondly, it led to
the systematic use of terror and human rights violations
as a way to punish others for reasons linked to racial,
cultural and religious discrimination, which has
affected Muslim citizens in particular, as if it were a
clash of civilizations, which cannot be true. What we
are seeing in today's world is, on the contrary, a
meeting among various cultures and a profound and
promising process of racial mixing. Despite the fact
that such a positive process is under way, what has
been imposed is ethnic cleansing, giving rise to
conflicts that loom over the global political arena and
pose a serious threat to peace.

In the name of the supposed defence of national
and international security, constitutional rights are
being de-legitimized and violated, and legal statutes
and norms of international coexistence are being
flouted. Countries are being invaded, which has killed
tens of thousands, including women, the elderly,
children and entire villages. The cultural, economic
and ecological heritage and physical infrastructures are
being destroyed in a mad spree that surpasses any other
atrocity in history.

We cannot fight terrorism - which Venezuela
has always condemned - through State terrorism,
whose deadly aggression is masked with the
description "collateral damage", when what is involved
is families who have been bombed when they were
walking on a beach, having parties or simply staying
peacefully at home. We must denounce and condemn
those atrocities and demand that the aggressors be
stopped.

We repudiate the recent attacks in Mumbai. We
express our solidarity with the people and the
Government of India and hope that the ongoing
investigations will lead to the identification and
punishment of those responsible.
We condemn impunity. That is why we wish to
recall that, here in the United States, the dangerous
terrorist Luis Posada Carriles - who is responsible for
cruel acts, including blowing up a Cuban aircraft - is
at liberty and protected by the authorities. Impunity is
a lack of justice and is just as deadly as terrorist acts.

Today, we are experiencing different kinds of
threats to peace. One of them could be the terrible
global inequality, in which 5 per cent of the world's
population consumes 25 per cent of all world's energy
resources and the rich, who constitute 16 per cent of
the population - basically, the United States, Europe
and Japan - consume 80 per cent of the world's
goods.

Moreover, we should warn that the present
international financial system has shown that it
generates serious disturbances of the peace, since its
actions have increased unemployment, poverty and
injustice. That generates violence of all sorts and
creates a threat of chaos and terror, because without
justice there can be no peace.

Another aspect that is a serious threat to peace
has to do with environmental issues. The planet is
being killed through pollution, the destruction of
biological diversity, global warming and the ruin of
seas, rivers and other sources of water, all of which
constitutes a severe threat to mankind and the loss of
the planet's productivity. That intensifies hunger, above
all in women and children, which is a real act of terror.

We can in no way believe that it is necessary for a
human being to die in order to achieve peace. We
believe in consensual agreements that are reached in a
peaceful, fair and equitable manner. We think it is
possible to settle disputes and conflicts via dialogue
and negotiations, with respect for international law and
for especially human rights.

We once again call for disarmament and nuclear
non-proliferation as a condition for the security of all
nations. So too we recognize the right of all countries
to carry out whatever research they deem necessary for
the peaceful use of nuclear energy.

The practice of terror has no justification and
States have the obligation to put an end to torture,
detentions without trial, special military tribunals,
clandestine prisons, kidnappings and other affronts to
human dignity.
