Mr. Lucas (Angola): We would like at the outset
to thank the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno; the former
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mr. Amos
Namanga Ngongi; and the Secretary-General and High
Representative for the Common Foreign Policy and
Security Policy of the European Union, Mr. Javier
Solana, for their briefings on the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We pay special
tribute to Mr. Amos Namanga Ngongi for his
outstanding contribution to the advancement of peace
in Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The holding of this meeting at such a crucial
moment in the political process in the Congo reflects
the great importance that the international community
attaches to this issue and its concern about the events
that are unfolding in the country, as well as its resolve
to put an end to the bloodshed and to do everything in
its power in order to ensure that the Democratic
Republic of the Congo can build a future of peace and
prosperity for its citizens and contribute to regional
peace and stability.

Angola, as a neighbouring country of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, is particularly
concerned about the situation and has done everything
within its power to put an end to the Congolese crisis.
Among the efforts made with a view to reaching a
peaceful settlement in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the Government of Angola sponsored the
Luanda Agreement of 6 September 2002, which
established the basis for a settlement in the Ituri area
and remains the basis for the attainment of peace and a
political process in the region.

The consequences of the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which has inflicted
upon the population profound suffering and atrocities,
provoked the indignation of the international
community, prompting it to act swiftly and with
determination. Indeed, we have witnessed the grossest
violations human rights - blind acts of violence and
naked atrocities perpetrated against civilians. The
dramatic humanitarian situation has placed the
Congolese population in an untenable situation, and the
recruitment and use of children as soldiers has
provoked general indignation on the part of all peace-
loving nations.

Faced with such a dismal state of affairs, the
Security Council took decisive action and has
expressed its readiness to continue addressing the
Congolese issue with determination and a sense of
purpose. The deployment of the Interim Emergency
Multinational Force to Bunia to put an end to a
situation that threatened to derail the entire peace
process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
caused consternation to all of us, was a clear signal of
the international community's determination. The
Security Council is currently considering a mandate for
the United Nations mission in Congo that would
constitute a serious commitment to peace and an end to
human rights violations and impunity and provide for
the effective provision of humanitarian assistance to
the Congolese people.

It is clear that the conflict has a decisive external
factor. The international community has been
addressing that issue. In our view, however, it should
step up its efforts and adopt measures to deal with it
decisively. It is our belief that unless the issue of
foreign intervention in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is properly addressed and resolved, it will be
very difficult - if not impossible - to establish
sustainable peace in the country and ensure for the
Congolese people the peace they yearn for so dearly.

The proposals contained in the second special
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) (S/2003/566), which the
members of the Security Council have expressed their
willingness to support, might represent an important
breakthrough for the attainment of the goals outlined in
the report.

Consequently, the likely adoption of a resolution
containing provisions in line with the Secretary-
General's recommendations, against the background of
a Government of national unity in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, represents, it is to be hoped, a
solid framework for the achievement of sustainable
peace in the country.

In that connection, we welcome the establishment
of the Government of national unity and transition as
an important landmark on the road to peace and
national reconciliation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. It is our expectation that the United Nations
and the international community will play a decisive
role in assisting the Congolese Government and people
in the transitional phase.

The Security Council's adoption of a new
resolution and the deployment of MONUC with a new
mandate will place on the Congolese political leaders
the responsibility to allow the transitional institutions
to function at the national level, to address the question
of human rights as a national priority, to put an end to
the illegal exploitation of the natural resources of the
country, which must serve the Congolese people, and to
look into the future with confidence and work for the
common good.

As we now see it today, the international
community is prepared to invest much good will and
significant resources to ensure a peaceful transition and
to assist the economic and social reconstruction of the
country. It is up to the Congolese people to seize that
opportunity for a new beginning in order to build a
united, peaceful, prosperous and respected nation.

