Mr. El-Treki (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): I would also like to express to you, Sir, our
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for this month. We wish you
every success in your work. We would like to extend
our thanks and appreciation to your predecessor, the
representative of the United Kingdom, for the efforts
he made last month to make the work of the Council a
success.

We meet today not for the first time - and it will
not be the last - to discuss Israeli aggression against a
State member of the Security Council. Israel's
aggressive nature and years-long exercise of State
terrorism have continued unabated without any
decision taken to address the problem. Because of
Security Council inaction, aggression and political
assassinations have continued, as has occupation of
land. Syrian land too is still occupied because of Israeli
aggression.

I am not saying that this is a violation of the
Charter of the United Nations, for Israel has never
respected the Charter or any Security Council
resolutions. Perhaps we might now have an opportunity
to stop such aggression and an aggressor that has been
exercising State terrorism, which, owing to the lack of
constraints and measures to stop Israel from carrying
out terrorist acts, has promoted the spread of
international terrorism. Syria is a victim today.
Palestine is another victim. No one knows who will be
the next victim.

I would like to mention in particular the friends
of Israel. We must speak frankly with Israel. We should
not believe Israel. We should tell the Israelis that
continued aggression, assassinations and occupation
will not result in the achievement of a sense of security
for Israel. The entire question of security for Israel, the
only guarantee of security for Israel, lies in its abiding
by international resolutions, recognizing the rights of
the Palestinian people, withdrawing from occupied
Arab territories and putting an end to the State
terrorism that it exercises. Security cannot be achieved
through aggression. Despite the conditions that
encourage such aggression, it must end. I believe that
the Council, which is responsible for the maintenance
of international peace and security, must put an end to
such aggression.

We express our support for and solidarity with
sisterly Syria. We stand with Syria and Lebanon to
confront such aggression. No peace and no end to
terrorism can be achieved so long as people continue to
live under occupation and State terrorism is exercised
not just for self-defence but for the sake of occupation
and aggression.

We hope that the Council will rise to its
responsibilities, at least for once. It must say that
aggression must be stopped and condemned. The
Charter must be applied to Israelis, as it is to other
people. Only than can we end aggression and
occupation. We are certain that the Council is capable
of doing so, if it can muster the will and a sense of
responsibility towards the members.

