The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on the situation
concerning Western Sahara, document S/2002/178.
Members of the Council also have before them
document S/2002/850, which contains the text of a
draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council's
prior consultations.

I should also like to draw the attention of the
members of the Council to the following documents:
letters from Algeria, contained in documents
S/2002/782, S/2002/807 and S/2002/835; a letter from
Namibia, contained in document S/2002/749; and
letters from Morocco, contained in documents
S/2002/758, 5/2002/823 and 8/2002/832.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

A vote was taken by a Show of hands.

In favour:
Bulgaria, Cameroon, China, Colombia, France,
Guinea, Ireland, Mauritius, Mexico, Norway,
Russian Federation, Singapore, Syrian Arab
Republic, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America

The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1429 (2002).

Since, as far as I can see at this point, there is no
other outstanding business for a formal meeting of the
Council, this is likely to be the last open meeting under
the United Kingdom presidency of the Council. I
would therefore like to take this opportunity to thank
everyone within the Council and outside who have
supported the United Kingdom presidency during the
very busy month of July. But I particularly want to pay
tribute to those who help us so well and so
uncomplainingly within the Secretariat, the Council
Secretariat under Joseph Stephanides, for the most
part - it is very good to see the Assistant Secretary-
General back with us again today - the conference
officers, the verbatim reporters and the press reporters,
the interpreters and the translators, the security officers
and everyone else who has done excellent work in
assisting us.

I hope those of you who will be seeking some
refreshment in August, as I shall myself, will return
feeling a lot better and that those who are staying here
will have a quieter month under the able and probably
more controlled presidency of Ambassador
Negroponte.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.15 p.m.

