Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation wishes to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today's meeting. We
welcome the presentation of the report of Secretary-
General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2009/497). We thank
Mr. Zannier, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Kosovo, for his briefing and commend him
and the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) for their efforts to maintain peace
and stability in Kosovo and in the Balkan region.

We have listened carefully to the statements made
by His Excellency Mr. Jeremic', Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia, and by Mr. Hyseni. We welcome the
participation of the Austrian Vice Federal Minister for
European and International Affairs in today's meeting.

The report of the Secretary-General and the
briefing by Mr. Zannier have shown that in the last
reporting period the political situation in Kosovo
remains generally stable and that municipal elections
will be held on 15 November. However, the situation in
some areas in the north remains fragile. There has been
some small-scale conflict between Serb and Albanian
residents. China is concerned in that regard.

At the same time, we are encouraged to see that
under UNMIK's mediation, an initial settlement has
been reached in the disagreement between ethnic
Albanian and ethnic Serb residents. We hope that all
parties will continue to exercise restraint, enhance
dialogue and avoid statements and actions that might
threaten the peace and stability.

At present, the fragile situation in northern
Kosovo reflects some prominent issues facing both the
Serbian Government and the Kosovo authorities.
Serbia and Kosovo have serious differences on the
status and the future of Kosovo. The ethnic Serbs and
ethnic Albanians living in Kosovo urgently need to
enhance their mutual understanding and trust. Efforts
to encourage the displaced persons of those
communities to return to Kosovo should be stepped up,
in particular the reintegration of the Serb community in
Kosovo.

We believe that the continuation of the above
situation is not conducive to peace and stability in the
Balkan region. The settlement of the issue depends on
the joint efforts of the Serbian Government and the
Kosovo authorities. China respects the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Serbia. We hope that, through
dialogue and negotiations, Serbia and Kosovo will
reach a mutually acceptable settlement to the Kosovo
issue. The Kosovo authorities should also create
favourable conditions for the settlement of conflict
between the communities and the question of their
return.
China has noted that with the change in the
situation on the ground, UNMIK has undergone a
reconfiguration and a drawdown. We believe that the
adjustment of UNMIK is only technical and should not
involve the question of the status of Kosovo or change
the neutral position of the United Nations. UNMIK
should continue to observe the mandate provided by
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) and other
relevant documents. We hope that it will strengthen its
communication with Serbia and with Kosovo, pay
attention to fulfilling the functions of the newly created
Office for Community Support and Facilitation,
continue to play a crucial role in the proper settlement
of the Kosovo issue and promote peace and stability in
the Balkan region. We also hope that the parties
concerned will cooperate closely with the Mission's
various efforts.

We welcome the readiness of the European Union
to play a role in maintaining stability in the Balkan
region. We hope that EULEX will continue to operate
under the overall authority of the United Nations and
within the status-neutral framework of resolution 1244
(1999), to cooperate with UNMIK's work and to play
its due role in maintaining the peace and stability in
this region.

