The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
Secretary-General, ministers and other representatives
present in the Security Council Chamber. Their
presence is an affirmation of the importance of the
subject matter to be addressed.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. I wish to draw
Council members' attention to document S/2010/462,
containing a letter from the Permanent Representative
of Turkey addressed to the Secretary-General,
transmitting a concept paper on the item under
consideration.

Before I give the floor to the Secretary-General
for his briefing, allow me to say a few words on the
reasons that led us to organize this meeting.

Almost a decade has passed since 11 September
2001, when terrorists attacked the twin towers of the
World Trade Center in New York, only a few blocks
from where we are now. The adoption of resolution
1373 (2001) following that heinous and cowardly
attack on innocent civilians constituted a milestone in
the fight against terrorism. Indeed, the resolution had
meaning far beyond a sincere and natural outpouring of
solidarity all around the world, providing as it did a
sound and practical framework for the individual and
collective measures necessary to combat the scourge of
terrorism.

Today, that resolution remains a point of
reference and guidance for our campaign against
terrorism. However, despite the many positive steps
taken since then, terrorism continues to pose a serious
threat to international peace and security. In some parts
of the world, we are even witnessing an increase in the
activities of various terrorist groups. In other words,
terrorists have proved to be extremely resilient in their
ability to adapt to changing circumstances and to
2
exploit every gap or loophole they find in our common
stance.

That is why we have to be equally committed and
resilient in our fight against this threat. We must never
be complacent about our achievements, and we must
always try to do better. Moreover, considering that no
country is immune to the perils of terrorism, we have
to act collectively and in full solidarity with one
another. And there is no better place than the United
Nations for combining our strengths and displaying a
strong and united position. Indeed, the United Nations
has always held a central place in advancing the global
fight against terrorism, be it in terms of setting norms,
capacity-building or monitoring implementation.

Given its primary responsibility for maintaining
peace and security, the Security Council in particular
must continue to play a leading role in ensuring that we
are sufficiently equipped and prepared to combat
terrorism. This is precisely why we decided to organize
this meeting, with the following particular objectives in
mind: to undertake a true stock-taking of the past 10
years; to conduct an honest review of the effectiveness
of the steps we have taken so far; to make a candid
assessment of the current threat posed by terrorism;
and to lay out a bold and forward-looking strategy for
our future actions. We hope that such a frank and
focused exchange will help to re-energize the
international community's campaign against terrorism,
and highlight the priority areas that require continued
and concerted attention and action.

We would, of course, have preferred to have the
non-Council Members of the United Nations
participate in this meeting too. This would only have
helped to further reinforce our message against
terrorism. However, given the high-level meeting of
the General Assembly, we had to opt for this format
today, considering that there will be other occasions
before the end of the year at which all Members of the
United Nations will be able to participate and join in
the debate.

Furthermore, as the Chair of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee, Turkey has also worked
diligently since the beginning of the year to emphasize
the importance of close cooperation and coordination
among Member States. We are guided by the principles
of transparency, interaction and partnership, which we
believe will not only raise common awareness at the
international, regional and national levels, but will also
10-55136
streamline our efforts against the constantly evolving
threat of terrorism. We will continue to work in the
same spirit in the coming months.

I now invite the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, to take the floor. I am
grateful to him for joining us today. His strong
personal conviction and dedication to advancing the
cause of counter-terrorism since he took the helm of
our Organization have been most commendable. I
could therefore have not have thought of a better
introduction on this occasion.

