Mr. Tiirk (Slovenia): I would like to join the
preceding speakers in expressing our appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for having organized the briefing and the
discussion today in the present format. My remarks will be
brief since time is precious.

I would like to say, first of all, that we are grateful to
the Secretary-General for the comprehensive report and to
Mr. Miyet, the Under-Secretary-General, for the
introduction. We studied the report, which details the
military and security situation and the political aspects of
the situation, and we can certainly say that, like others, we
value very highly the role of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Sierra Leone (UNOMSIL), and we support the
expansion of its mandate. Moreover, the important feature
of the report - namely, the one related to human rights -
is something that deserves our full support, and we hope
that, during the detailed discussion that the Council will
have at a later stage, we will be able to speak about these
issues in some more detail.

Today, however, I would like to limit my remarks to
some of the points made by Ambassador Dahlgren, who
Visited the country recently. I would like, as others have, to
thank Ambassador Dahlgren for his presentation and join in
the opinion voiced by Ambassador Amorim a short while
ago when he characterized Ambassador Dahlgren's mission
as an embodiment of the wishes and aspirations of many
members of the Security Council. I think that his
presentation today provided useful insight into the situation.

The practice of the Chairmen of sanctions committees
Visiting the target countries or areas is very valuable. We
believe that it requires more careful consideration. The
experiences gained in this context should be given proper
consideration. This practice is still at an early stage. I think
that we are beyond the experimental stage, but not at the
stage where the practice is fully established and applicable
to all the sanctions committees. So I think that some further
reflection is necessary.

We understand that the sanctions Committee has
discussed some of the detailed issues relating to the
operation of sanctions. I would like to mention just one
point in this connection. Ambassador Dahlgren rightly
emphasized the importance of cooperation by all States in
the proper implementation of the sanctions regime. I think
that this is a very valid point, a central point in the
operation of the sanctions regime under resolution 1132
(1997), and I think that this basic point relates to all
sanctions regimes currently in place. I think the Security
Council should give proper consideration to the issue of
the implementation of sanctions later on, when the
discussion on the working paper by the Chairpersons of
the sanctions committees - which was referred to earlier
in the debate today - is taken up again by the Security
Council.

Finally, a few points on the political situation in
Sierra Leone in general. Again I would like to thank
Ambassador Dahlgren for providing us with very valuable
insights. He spoke about a very tense situation, about the
widespread guerilla warfare and about problems that are
very serious and to which solutions will not be easy to
find.

I would like to recall in this connection that the
Security Council has always insisted on a peaceful
resolution of the conflict. I would just like to quote from
paragraph 3 of resolution 1132 (1997) - the basic
resolution on this issue, adopted by the Security Council
on 8 October 1997. In the specific context of that time,
that resolution insisted on support "for the peaceful
restoration of the constitutional order" in the country.

Nothing that has happened subsequent to the
adoption of that resolution has changed that fundamental
insistence of the Security Council and the fundamental
principle of the Security Council's approach. Therefore,
we very strongly support all the efforts mentioned by
Ambassador Dahlgren to seek a peaceful solution.
I would like to mention that we certainly support the
efforts by Reverend Jackson and by the leaders in the
region, and, above all, we support the efforts of the
International Contact Group on Sierra Leone, which met
in London on 5 November. We would like to encourage
the continuation of those efforts.

Now, international efforts in themselves will not be
enough and the true path to a solution is national
reconciliation in the country. Many who have spoken
before me emphasized in this context the importance of
 

the fate of children and we certainly associate ourselves
with all their points.

We would like to add only one additional point. The
executions which have taken place in the recent past require
critical consideration by the Security Council. We do not
think that executions lead to national reconciliation and this
has to be given proper attention, especially in light of future
developments, including the fate of Foday Sankoh, which
may be an issue to be kept in mind by the Security
Council's members.

In conclusion, I would like to say once again that we
shall come back to the situation in a more detailed way
when the Council takes up the report. But at this stage I
would like to conclude by saying that the present format of
briefing and consideration of these issues by the Security
Council is very useful.

