Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): The draft
resolution on which we are going to vote today is of
particular importance because it is related to the
establishment of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET), which will
assume, inter alia, full responsibility for East Timor and
will be granted all the legislative and executive powers
necessary to carry out East Timor's to independence. On
this occasion, we wish to express our appreciation for the
efforts undertaken by the Secretary-General and his
Special Representative in this connection.

We believe that one of the very important tasks of
UNTAET will be to achieve reconciliation among the
East Timorese people and to prepare East Timor for
effective participation in the international community.
This objective can be realized only by transcending the
events of the past and looking to the future. In preparing
this draft resolution, we tried to stay clear of anything
that might inflame sensitivities and preferred to take a
different approach based on a positive outlook and on
paying tribute to the cooperation shown by the parties,
particularly the Indonesian Government. Without its
cooperation, this process would not have been carried out
in East Timor, starting with the popular consultation and
ending with the adoption of its results by the Indonesian
parliament. Concomitant with the above, steps were taken
by the Indonesian Government, which has proved that it
can assume its full responsibilities and that it does not
need to be reminded of them.

We wish to make clear our understanding of
operative paragraph 12 of the draft resolution. We agree
with the part of that paragraph that states that the
Indonesian authorities are responsible for taking measures
to ensure the return of refugees from West Timor and
other parts of Indonesia to East Timor. However, we
believe that the identification of the measures to be taken
should be left to the Indonesian Government itself, not
only because the areas mentioned are under Indonesia's
control and sovereignty, but also because the Indonesian
Government has demonstrated on a number of occasions
that it honours its commitments. Therefore, we believe

 

that there is no need to include the second part of operative
paragraph 12.

Despite this, and in demonstration of our cooperation
with the Council, we will vote in favour of the draft
resolution before us today, which was accepted by
Indonesia, as was stated earlier by its representative.

