Mr. Meek (United Kingdom): At the outset, I would
like to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Zarif for his final briefing. I am sure others
will join me in paying tribute to all his hard work on
Kosovo and his determination to improve the lives of
all of Kosovo's citizens. We wish him every success
in his new role. I also want to welcome Deputy Prime
Ministers Dacie and Thaci back to the Security Council
again.

Let me start by reiterating our well-known position
on the frequency of these meetings. We strongly
believe the frequency should be reduced. Although
many challenges remain, Kosovo's progress and its
trajectory are undeniable. The reality, as described
clearly in the Secretary-General's report (S/2015/579),
does not justify this level of the Council's attention.
We also believe strongly that this meeting should not
provide a platform to revisit nationalist positions that
are unhelpful and not in keeping with the spirit of a
dialogue. The report, although it shows that Kosovo
faces significant challenges, also presents clear evidence
of continuing steady progress. That is a welcome
trend. The security situation remains generally stable,
illegal migration is falling and we continue to see good
practical cooperation at the local level, most notably in
northern Kosovo.
The most important development since the Council
last met to discuss Kosovo (see S/PV.7448) took place
after the release ofthe Secretary-General's latest report:
the positive vote on the specialist court. Although the
delay on that issue was disappointing, we welcome
that important step forward. Dealing with the past, no
matter how difficult, controversial or painful, is vital if
Kosovo is to tackle impunity and build respect for the
rule of law. The vote in favour of the specialist court
was also an important demonstration of Kosovo leaders'
commitment to implement international agreements.
That was a difficult decision that equired political
courage, and we recognize the positive actions taken
by Deputy Prime Minister Thaci and Kosovo's Prime
Minister and Speaker of Parliament to ensure that it
passed. But more hard work will be needed before the
court is established and operational. Sustained effort
will be required to ensure accountability in the wake
of the allegations in the Marty report. Comprehensive,
robust witness-protection programmes must be a key
part of that process if the court is to be effective. As a
matter of urgency, we hope Kosovo's leaders will take
the necessary steps and work with all partners to ensure
that the court is established as soon as possible.

The Secretary-General's report also highlights
some wider concerns about the rule of law. In
particular, the Government of Kosovo must address
the weaknesses of the Kosovo judiciary and improve
its ability to handle sensitive cases. The report also
makes clear the valuable role the Kosovo police plays
in maintaining order and protecting all communities
from violence. That is welcome, and we hope that the
cooperation shown by the police and the Kosovo Serb
community in Klina can be replicated elsewhere. The
arrests of five people in connection with suspicious
activity at Badovac reservoir highlights the need for
continued vigilance, particularly regarding the threat
posed by terrorism and returning foreign fighters.

Turning to the dialogue facilitated by the European
Union, we welcome the continued engagement of both
sides. The dialogue process remains the most effective
means of normalizing relations in the Western Balkans.
It is vital to the future stability and prosperity of the
region, and the surest way to preventing any return to
the violence of the past. Both sides must demonstrate
and deliver the benefits of the dialogue for all their
citizens. The pace of the implementation of dialogue
agreements should be increased, and it is vital that new
agreements be reached, including on the association
of Serb municipalities, at the next meeting later this
month.
Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to
remark on the very clear and welcome leadership shown
by the President of Kosovo in addressing the legacy
of sexual violence in conflict. It is important to bring
the perpetrators of those despicable crimes to justice,
whoever they are and wherever they live. My Prime
Minister's special representative on the issue, Baroness
Anelay, saw that first-hand during her visit to Kosovo
in July, when she pledged further United Kingdom
support for rehabilitation programmes for survivors.
Taking action on sexual volence is another example
of the willingness of Kosovo's leaders to confront the
difficult issues of the past and secure a better future
for all their citizens. I hope they will continue that
approach in the coming months and in doing so take the
necessary steps to also ensure progress on the specialist
court and the dialogue.

