Mr. Bennouna (Morocco) (spoke in French):
Allow me at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of Council for this
month. We are confident that your well known personal
and professional abilities will ensure the full success of
the Council's work this month. Allow me also to
express the gratitude of the delegation of Morocco to
your predecessor, Ambassador Jean-Marc de La
Sabliere, Permanent Representative of France, for the
excellent manner in which he presided over the
Council's work last month. It is also a great pleasure
for me to congratulate Mr. Alvaro de Soto, United
Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process. I have had the pleasure of knowing him for
quite some time, during which I have come to know his
excellent qualities, which do honour to the
international civil service. On behalf of my delegation,
I commend him on the briefing he gave the Council
this morning on the situation on the ground. I wish him
every success in carrying out his extremely important
duties.

The Security Council is meeting today to discuss
the very disturbing situation prevailing in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem, at a
time when the international community is very closely
following Israel's planned withdrawal from the Gaza
Strip and certain parts of the northern West Bank.
Unfortunately, Israel's ongoing policy to expand
settlements, its continued construction of the wall, in
violation of international law, and its almost daily
assaults on the basic rights of Palestinians threaten to
worsen the climate of instability and crisis that exists
in the occupied Palestinian territories.

Like other speakers here, and as has been done in
other forums, we wish to reiterate that no one has a
monopoly on feelings. No one has a monopoly on
suffering. No one has a monopoly on innocent victims.
What Palestinians have come to the Council to ask for
is equal application of international law for everyone,
including compliance with humanitarian law, as well as
the right to exist as a State for two peoples involved in
a conflict as least as old as the United Nations itself, if
not far older. Palestinians are asking for hope for the
children, without regard to nationality or origin, so that
they may grow up, have an education and flourish, just
like all the other children of the world. Unfortunately,
Palestinian now face despair on a daily basis, which
inevitably marginalizes them and leads them to
extremism.

We condemn all acts of terrorism regardless of
origin or the motivation behind them. But we are also
aware that, in order to eradicate that scourge, hope
must be restored for Palestinians through the
establishment of their own State. In order to do that,
Israel must take the hand that has been extended to it
by the Palestinian Authority, with Mr. Mahmoud Abbas
at its head.

We caution against any action now being
undertaken to establish new settlements, which
constitutes a step backwards - and even a repudiation
of the peace efforts - and delays the genuine
implementation of the road map. As has been stated
repeatedly today, that holds also for Israel's obvious
desire to cut off East Jerusalem from its proper
Palestinian surroundings.

We were encouraged on hearing of the decision to
withdraw from the Gaza Strip. We even believed that it
was a positive initiative that should take place in the
context of the road map as a whole. We hope that
decision will be carried out and that it will immediately
be followed by the opening of genuine and frank
negotiations to continue the implementation of the road
map.

A year has already passed since the International
Court of Justice (ICJ) issued, on 9 July 2004, its
advisory opinion regarding the legal consequences
arising from the construction of a wall on occupied
Palestinian territory. That opinion enabled the General
Assembly - in its resolution ES-lO/15 of 20 July
2004 - to make recommendations for compliance with
international law. What was clearly at stake from the
beginning of the debate requesting an opinion, as
everyone at the United Nations will recall, was not
Israel's right to ensure its security on its territory, that
is, within the Green Line. No one disputes that. What is
at stake is the fact that the wall is located across that
Line, in disregard of humanitarian law and the basic
rights of the Palestinians. According to the Court, the
construction of the wall on Palestinian territory was
planned and carried out in violation of international
law. As such, Israel bore responsibility, and it was
concluded that the illicit action had to stop and that
reparation had to be made for damage suffered by the
population of the occupied territories.

The international community has called upon
Israel to restore international legality on the basis of
the opinion of the International Court of Justice. As
was pointed out this morning, Israel's Supreme Court
has also referred to certain illegalities committed in the
building of the wall. In that regard, however, we should
not overlook the fact that international law has the final
word on the matter and that it takes precedence over
the laws and legal practices of States, including
Israel's, which is no exception to the general rule.

Beyond that legal aspect, the dismantling of the
wall that has been built on occupied territory must
occur as part of the effort to restore trust between
Israelis and Palestinians. The Kingdom of Morocco,
which, as everyone knows, has for many decades been
faithful to its constructive role in favour of peace in the
Middle East through tolerance among cultures and
religions, once again urges Israel to take down the
wall, remove its settlements from occupied Palestinian
territory and launch a genuine effort to promote
dialogue and build a common future between the two
peoples involved. It is clear that such an effort should
take place in the context of a just and comprehensive
settlement in the Middle East based on the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council, in particular
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1397 (2002), as
well as resolution 1515 (2003), by which the Council
endorsed the road map.

This matter pertains to the future of a people with
which we have many ties. However, it also relates to
the future of international peace and security, which
the Security Council has the responsibility to maintain
on behalf of the international community.

