Mr. Skracie (Croatia): Allow me to begin by
thanking Mr. Ian Martin for his briefing and expressing
my delegation's appreciation and congratulations for
his successful leadership of the United Nations Mission
in Nepal (UNMIN) during what has proved to be a
pivotal and genuinely transformative period for Nepal.

In many ways, Nepal has emerged as a new
society. The Nepalese people and their political
representatives, who have demonstrated an admirable
ability for cooperation and consensus, deserve our
congratulations for the successful holding of elections
in April and the subsequent forming of the Constituent
Assembly, leading to the peaceful establishment of a
republic.
However, the peace process, which began in 2006
with the signing of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement, is not over yet. The elections were a
crucial stage in the peace process, a milestone rather
than a destination and the peace process is still
evolving.

In this context, we salute the 25 June agreement
between the political parties to amend the constitution
and move the peace process forward. It is now crucial
that all parties in Nepal sustain their commitment to an
inclusive and constructive political process during this
transition period. The participation of traditionally
marginalized groups and civil society is no less
important.

It is my delegation's hope to see the swift
formation of a new democratically-elected government
that will focus without delay on the outstanding
commitments arising out of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement and also on the immediate challenges that
have a direct impact on the well-being of the Nepalese
population, such as food shortages and the rise in fuel
prices.

Through the UNMIN mandate, the United
Nations has given an important contribution to this
historic process of Nepal's return to peace, stability
and democracy. The outcome represents a major
success for Nepal, the United Nations and the Security
Council. We agree that now is the time to adapt the
United Nations presence to the new reality and to take
note of the request of the interim Government of
Nepal, contained in its letter of 8 July, for a six-month
continuation of UNMIN, at a smaller scale, to engage
itself in the remainder of the mandate.

While the management of arms and armed
personnel remain the focus of UNMIN's mandate, we
would like to reiterate the Secretary-General's
emphasis on the need to achieve a transition to a
durable and permanent solution. While the national
ownership of this process is not in question, we concur
with the Secretary-General's assessment that, at this
point, monitoring of arms and armed personnel should
continue to be provided within the framework of a
special political mission that can continue to offer the
necessary support for the completion of the peace
process.

As we are focusing on UNMIN's exit strategy, we
are mindful that the report has rightly identified
remaining challenges of the post-election period that
require sustained effort and attention. Notably, these
would be the discharge of minors, the integration of
Maoist combatants and the democratization of the
army.

While we believe that it will be up to the new
government to address these issues as a matter of
priority, my delegation believes that we should avoid
the impression that UNMIN's gradual disengagement
somehow implies that these aspects of the peace
process are no longer relevant and can be disregarded.

In conclusion, we believe that the Nepalese
people deserve our continued support in consolidating
peace, democracy and development and that the United
Nations country team is well-placed to play a central
role.

