Mr. Mukerji (India): We congratulate you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council and for personally presiding over this quarterly
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question. I would also like to thank the
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs for
his briefing earlier today. And we warmly welcome the
new members thatjoined the Council this year: Angola,
Malaysia, New Zealand, Spain and the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela.

This quarterly debate is important in that it gives us
an opportunity to take stock of the developments in the
Middle East peace process. We would like to reiterate
our support for an amicable resolution of this long-
standing issue. We are concerned that the debates here
in the Security Council have not achieved the objective
of such a peaceful solution. The effectiveness of the
Council has therefore been brought into question.

We are particularly worried that there was a
downward trend last year in the peace process. Efforts
for serious negotiations between the parties were
inconclusive. In addition, we were faced with the
unfortunate situation of a resumption and escalation in
the tragic conflict in Gaza, which resulted in a large
number of civilian casualties and heavy damage to

property.

India's deep association with, and continuing
commitment to, Palestine is rooted in our modern
history, which goes back to our struggle for
independence. India's position on the issue of Palestine
is very clear. As Prime Minister Narendra Modi wrote
in his message on the occasion of the International
Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian People, on
21 November 2014, India reaffirms its support for the
cause of Palestine and solidarity with the Palestinian
people in their struggle for a sovereign, independent,
viable and united State of Palestine, within secure and
recognized borders, side-by-side and at peace with
Israel and with East Jerusalem as its capital.

Apart from political support to the Palestinian
cause, India continues to support the development and
nation-building efforts of Palestine by consistently
extending technical and financial assistance to
Palestine. We contribute $1 million annually to
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East. India recently
pledged $4 million in response to the national early
recovery and reconstruction plan for Gaza. We are also
implementing development projects in Palestine jointly
with Brazil and South Africa, within the framework
of the India, Brazil and South Africa group, and have
pledged $1 million for a new project to reconstruct the
Atta Habib Medical Centre in Gaza.
Addressing the ministerial-level meeting of the
Non-Aligned Movement's Committee on Palestine
in September 2014, our Minister of External Affairs
reiterated that India welcomed the ceasefire between
Palestine and Israel and called upon all sides to exercise
maximum restraint, avoid taking any actions that may
lead to a violation of the present ceasefire and work
towards a comprehensive resolution of the Palestinian
issue. We remain firmly convinced that dialogue
remains the only viable option that can effectively
address the issue.

We are deeply concerned about rising tensions
in East Jerusalem. The imperative need is for urgent
de-escalation, restraint, an avoidance of provocation
and a return to the peace process. Diplomacy and
statesmanship must prevail over hatred and violence.
There is no other road to a lasting peace.

We are deeply concerned with the activities of
radicalized and extremist groups in the northern parts
of Iraq and Syria, as their dangerous exacerbation of
sectarian and extremist tensions has a critical impact
on the peace and stability of the region. We note
that a proscribed terrorist group has twice targeted
United Nations peacekeepers in the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force. Efforts must be taken
by all parties and stakeholders in the region to curb that
trend. Member States must comply with resolutions
that proscribe terrorist groups operating in that region.
The early and effective prosecution of such groups is
essential.

Only such action endorsed by the Council will deter
such groups in other parts of the world from committing
acts of terror. We believe that the consolidation of
political processes and solutions while building durable
State institutions will be the most effective way of
addressing such extremism and radicalism in the region.

We have consistently supported a Syrian-led,
comprehensive political solution to the ongoing crisis
in Syria, in alignment with the Geneva communique
of 2012 (S/2012/522, annex). We would like to add our
voice of support for the efforts of the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, and
continue to urge all parties to demonstrate the requisite
political will, exercise restraint and commit to seeking
common ground in accommodating their differences.

