Mr. Brencick (United States of America): The
United States has voted in favour of this resolution, but
with the understanding that all parties will use the next
six months to aggressively negotiate a mutually
acceptable solution that brings peace, stability and
2

economic prosperity to the region in a manner
consistent with the principle of self-determination for
the people of Western Sahara.

The United States remains concerned that the
Western Sahara conflict has impeded regional
integration and development for the past 30 years. A
lasting resolution is long overdue. Unresolved, this
humanitarian crisis leaves the Sahraoui people with a
bleak and uncertain future. Further deterioration has
the potential to worsen their hardship and could
threaten political and economic progress in Algeria and
Morocco as well.

While we cannot impose a solution, we can call
on all parties to engage the United Nations and each
other in a spirit of flexibility and compromise. In
particular, we urge Morocco to move quickly to fulfil
its many promises to submit a comprehensive and
credible autonomy proposal for the Western Sahara. We
also urge Morocco to engage seriously in discussions
with all Sahraoui people, including the Polisario. These
discussions, without a predetermined agenda, could
form the basis for a new, United Nations-led
negotiating process.

Our hope is based on the faith that all parties will
exert the leadership and willingness necessary to
improve their collective future and solve this dispute.
The United Nations Mission for the Referendum in
Western Sahara (MINURSO) is not a viable alternative
to a permanent solution, and we, therefore, call on
Morocco, Algeria and the Polisario to move beyond
rhetoric to the serious work needed for the resolution
of this conflict. In practical terms, we also call on the
Secretary-General to examine the mechanisms and
timetable for the dismantlement of MINURSO, should
MINURSO continue to prove ineffective in fulfilling
its mandate or the concerned parties prove unable to
make substantial progress towards a political solution.

