Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I would like to join other
Security Council members in congratulating you and
your team, Mr. President, on Egypt's assumption of
the Council presidency for this month. I reaffirm my
delegation's full cooperation, and we wish you and your
team every success. I also wish to express my sincere
appreciation to Ambassador Liu Jieyi and his team for
China's effective leadership of the Council in April.

I wish to express my appreciation to Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon, to Mr. Peter Maurer, President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross, and to
Ms. Joanne Liu, President of Medecins Sans Frontieres
(MSF), for sharing their perspectives and insights on
the topic at hand. Their briefings add significant value
to our discussion today.

Malaysia welcomes the adoption of resolution 2286
(2016), which we co-sponsored alongside a significant
number of Member States. We commend the leadership
taken by Egypt, Japan, New Zealand, Spain and
Uruguay on this important initiative, which comes at
a very critical juncture. The resolution is an important
milestone and stands out as a timely response by the
Council in discharging its responsibility to maintain
international peace and security, specifically by
addressing the increasingly frequent and inhumane
attacks against health-care institutions by parties to
armed conflict.

Schools and medical facilities in Gaza were

targeted and bombed in 2014 during military offensives
by Israeli forces, killing and maiming thousands of
civilians, including children. The attacks occurred
despite the sharing of coordinates of the civilian
facilities with the Israeli authorities. In Kunduz,
Afghanistan, in October 2015, a medical facility
operated by MSF was repeatedly bombarded, killing
dozens of civilians, including patients and medical
personnel. Most recently, the attack against Al-Quds
Hospital in Syria, which killed 57 civilians, was a new
low with regard to the protection of civilians, medical
personnel and medical facilities. As noted by many
previous speakers, a prominent victim killed in the
attack was the only remaining pediatrician in Aleppo,
Muhammad Waseem Maas. Despite the intolerable
stress of living in a city under siege, Dr. Maas chose to
stay in Aleppo to treat the wounded and, as his friends
put it, "to help those babies crying", instead ofjoining
his family in Turkey. We also heard Ms. Liu's harrowing
description of attacks on MSF facilities in Yemen, and
we share similar outrage and distress.

Such attacks, whether premeditated or otherwise,
are simply unacceptable. They violate basic, established
principles of international humanitarian law, including
the Fourth Geneva Convention, as well as the principles
of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence
in the provision of humanitarian assistance, including
medical assistance. Attacks against medical personnel
and health facilities also constitute two-fold atrocities
against children. They not only kill and maim children,
they also leave them without access to much-needed
treatments, including lifesaving care.
The unanimous adoption of resolution 2286
(2016) demonstrates the Council's collective resolve
in responding to a worsening deterioration of civilian
protection in time of conflict. As we seek to maintain
international peace and security, the protection of
civilians must continue to be at the core ofthe Council's
work. We must reject the notion of "collateral damage"
as a convenient excuse to commit and perpetrate
attacks against civilians and civilian objects. Similarly,
countering terrorism has unfortunately become a
convenient narrative to justify attacks on civilians
and on humanitarian and medical personnel as well
as medical facilities. If by fighting terrorism means
we would be carrying out indiscriminate attacks on
civilians and the facilities, then, from the victims'
point of view, we are no different from the terrorists.
As clearly stipulated under international law, attacks
intentionally directed against civilians and civilian
objects, including medical and humanitarian personnel
and medical facilities, constitute war crimes.

Malaysia strongly supports calls to ensure
accountability as a crucial step in the fight against
impunity with regard to the protection of civilians and
civilian objects during armed conflicts. We therefore
call for independent and impartial investigations into all
alleged serious violations ofinternational humanitarian
law, particularly in connection with the protection
of civilians and civilian objects in armed conflicts.
We agree with Ms. Liu that perpetrators cannot be
investigators, judges or juries. Member States have an
obligation to cooperate with the relevant international
courts and tribunals in ensuring accountability for war
crimes and other serious violations of international
humanitarian law, in accordance with their
international commitments.

In conclusion, we are deeply humbled and touched
by the commitment and sacrifice of medical and
humanitarian personnel worldwide who devote their
lives to saving others under dangerous and trying
circumstances. We wish to pay tribute to those who
paid the ultimate price in the pursuit of such honourable
aims. The Security Council must persist in defending
and protecting the safety of medical personnel and
health facilities in situations of armed conflict, an
undertaking to which Malaysia is fully committed.

