Mr. Valle (Brazil) (spoke in French): I should
like first of all to wish you every success,
Mr. President, as you guide the work of the Council for
the month of March. The delegation of Brazil assures
you of its full cooperation.

We are also grateful to Ambassador Wang,
Permanent Representative of China, who guided the
work of the Council last month with such great skill.

My delegation is also pleased that Mr. Adnan
Terzic, Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia
and Herzegovina; Lord Paddy Ashdown, High
Representative for the Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina; and Mr. Jean-
Marie Guehenno, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, are with us today.

Given the presence of Mr. Terzic, we would like
to take this opportunity to say how pleased we are with
the progress made by the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina since the signing of the Dayton
Agreement in 1995. Lord Ashdown's thorough
briefing, as well as his personal testimony, enable us
clearly to identify those areas where tangible progress
has been made and to better understand those
developments that are less positive, with regard to
which improvements will have to be made.

(spoke in English)

It is rewarding to note the three priorities to
which Lord Ashdown is committed: consolidating the
rule of law, advancing economic reform and further
improving the functioning and effectiveness of the key
governing institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina -
key areas of effective progress. We welcome the
adoption by the Federation Parliament of the Civil
Procedure Code, and the establishment of a State-level
high judicial and prosecutorial council. Those are just
two examples of what it has been possible to do
through dialogue and cooperation. Multi-ethnic
structures at the State level are being created or are
already in place, showing that ethnic barriers can be
surmounted through dialogue and joint political and
economic endeavours.

We also take note of the progress made
concerning the implementation of the War Crimes
Chamber project, the State information and protection
agency and the completion of the mandates of three
commissions created to promote important reforms in
the State, as well as programmes for the return of
refugees and displaced persons in sustainable
conditions.

Apart from that, the Council is aware of some
challenges that still need to be addressed. The State-
level joint command and control of the armed forces of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the statute for the city of
Mostar are just two examples. Nevertheless, the
environment, including relations with neighbours, is
positive and encouraging.

I would also like to refer to the important role
played by the constructive engagement of other
partners, especially the European Commission and the
Stabilization Force (SFOR), a multinational force
deployed under NATO, in providing sound assistance
and support to this process. I also stress the sizeable
contribution provided by the European Union Police
Mission to the stabilization of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
It is encouraging to note that peace is within reach, as
proper international collaboration and cooperation is
part and parcel of the peace process.

In this particular case, the European environment
and the real prospects of participation in the political
and economic structures of the European Union are
important elements in stimulating the engagement of
all concerned parties in fulfilling their commitments to
the peace process. European standards, as mentioned
several times by Lord Ashdown, are being met, and we
should commend all parties for the good results of their
efforts.

Finally, we are encouraged by the fact that the
Governments of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and
Serbia and Montenegro are taking further steps to build
better neighbourly relations and to consolidate peace.
My delegation commends them for making such
important gestures, and we invite them to convey a
message of goodwill and confidence to all their citizens
and peoples.

