Mr. Galbavy (Slovakia): I thank you, Sir, for
convening this open debate and for giving us the
opportunity to speak. I would like to congratulate your
country on joining the Security Council and wish you
every success.

My delegation welcomed the adoption of presidential
statement S/PRST/2015/22, of 25 November 2015, in
which the Security Council underscored the importance
of the protection of civilians as one of the core issues
on its agenda. Swift action by the Security Council is
necessary in situations posing threads to civilians.

I would also like to thank the Deputy Secretary-
General, the Vice-President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross and the representative of
Oxfam for their respective briefings.

We are very concerned about the increasing gross
violations of the international humanitarian law,
especially by non-State actors, and attacks against
humanitarian workers and health-care workers and
facilities. Ongoing conflicts throughout the world have
horrifying impact on civilian populations. According to
Secretary-General's report (S/2015/453), displacement
has reached its highest levels since the Second World
War. There are more than 60 million refugees, including
38 million internally displaced persons, and the number
is still growing. Civilians in besieged towns, such
as Madaya, Kafraya and Fu'ah, are suffering from
malnutrition and lack of medical care, which is simply
unacceptable.

My delegation fully aligns itself with the statement
made earlier by the observer of the European Union.
I wish to take this opportunity to highlight a few
additional points.

First, the main responsibility for the protection of
its population lies with States. My country supports the
further advancement of the responsibility to protect
principles, anchored in three pillars.

Secondly, as far as United Nations peacekeeping
operations are concerned, many improvements have
been made since 1999, when the first peacekeeping
mission in Sierra Leone was mandated to take the
steps necessary to protect civilians. We commend
the Secretariat for elaborating its policy for the
implementation of protection of civilians mandates
and encourage them to further identify ways to make
this implementation more effective. We appreciate the
commitment expressed by the Secretary-General in
his respective reports to inform the Security Council
about situations where escalating risks or shortfalls
in the capability of missions to fulfill protection
mandates endanger civilians. We also support his
recommendation to submit reports on the protection of
civilians every 12 months and to hold open debates of
the Security Council in June and December.

Unfortunately, there are cases where those who
should protect become perpetrators. My country, as
a troop contributor, supports the Secretary-General's
zero-tolerance policy towards sexual exploitation and
abuse by United Nations peacekeepers.

Thirdly, the protection of civilians and security
sector reform (SSR) are complementary and mutually
reinforcing. They are both aimed at the protection of
civilians and their communities from physical violence,
and ultimately at improving human and State security in
a society. We believe that it is important to better clarify
how the protection of civilians and SSR are related in
order to strengthen the reinforcing relationship and
convergences between them in the decision-making
process of the Security Council.

Finally, I would like to emphasize the need to end
impunity and hold accountable those responsible for
crimes against humanity. In situations where national
authorities are unable or unwilling to conduct national
investigations, the role of the International Criminal
Court is indispensable. We therefore call on all United
Nations Member States to ratify the Rome Statutes and
its amendments and thereby achieve its universality.

