Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Tanin, for his briefing. I also welcome Foreign
Minister Dacie and Ambassador Citaku back to the
Security Council.

We appreciate the understanding reached by the
Council to end the practice of quarterly briefings on
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and that next year there will be two
meetings "on the issue", not necessarily on UNMIK.
There are much better uses for the Council's limited
time and resources than to maintain the past frequency
of UNMIK briefings.

It is disappointing that, at a moment when the
atmosphere begs for improvement, these Council
meetings continue to be used to deploy antagonistic
language. I agree with much of what my colleagues
of Germany and the United Kingdom have said. It is
unfortunate and one reason that many Council members
are reluctant to continue those meetings, wondering
whether they actually contribute to or detract from
the prospects for international peace and security.
We underscore that UNMIK has achieved its original
mandate and its drawdown is long overdue. The United
Nations continues to have an important and useful
role to play in Kosovo, but through the United Nations
country team and the United Nations Development
Programme, not through UNMIK, and that should be
reflected in the Council's approach to meetings "on
the issue".

As the United States has requested previously, we
would like the Secretariat to initiate a strategic review
of UNMIK to develop an exit strategy. Taking that
step will empower the Security Council with critical
resource management and oversight information to
better evaluate the United Nations presence in Kosovo.
Such a step would also advance the normalization of
relations between Kosovo and Serbia.

We continue to support the European
Union-facilitated dialogue between Kosovo and Serbia.
As our President has made clear, we believe that this
is a unique moment for both Serbia and Kosovo to
reach a comprehensive normalization agreement. We
believe that is achievable in 2019. Failure to seize this
opportunity would be a setback. The dialogue should be
both countries' overarching priority. Both Kosovo and
Serbia should take immediate steps to lower tensions,
remove barriers and create the conditions necessary
for rapid progress on the dialogue. For Kosovo, that
means immediately suspending tariffs on Serbian and
Bosnian imports. Reaching a deal will take courageous
leadership and flexibility on both sides. Normalizing
relations must be a priority for both countries. Now is
the time to work for forward momentum and pave the
way for their respective EU paths. We believe that is
the best way to ensure a stable, secure and prosperous
future for the Western Balkans.

