Mr. Plumbly (United Kingdom): This is likely to be
a long debate, and my delegation has already expressed its
views on another aspect of the Middle East question. I do
not therefore intend to speak at great length. There is a
tendency in the work of this Council towards more open
debates as a way of orienting the Council's consideration of
an issue and exposing it to the views of those most directly
concerned. In that sense we understand and support the
request of the Government of Lebanon for today's formal
meeting and have listened closely to the interventions so
far, in particular those of the delegations of Israel and
Lebanon.

There are, however, limits to the utility of debate if
it obscures what is, I believe, the overriding concern of
all in this room: to achieve an end to the cycle of
violence and a return to the peace process. My
Government has condemned the continuing rocket and
other attacks by Hezbollah on northern Israel, which have
led to civilian casualties. We have placed on record our
deep concern at the loss of life we are now seeing among
civilians in Lebanon, and the severe humanitarian
problems created by the departure of so many people
from southern Lebanon in the face of attacks on
population centres.

But expressions of concern are not enough. It seems
to my delegation that what we must do is focus on the
most urgent requirement, which is for all parties to move
to restore peace and a measure of stability in southern
Lebanon. Attacks directed at civilian targets must end.
The 1993 arrangement should be respected, or a more
effective one put in its place. We pay tribute to the efforts
of the United States and others to that end. Senior
officials of the British Government are currently in the
region, and we will do all we can to support such efforts,
and to encourage the only possible long-term solution:
resumption of the peace process, in accordance with the
relevant Security Council resolutions, including resolution
425 (1978), with the aim of creating a situation in which
the citizens of all States in the region can live securely
within their borders, free from fear of external attack.

