Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I would like to
thank the Secretary-General for the update on the
latest developments in Myanmar and the plight of
Rohingya refugees who fled from Rakhine state to
Bangladesh exactly one year ago. We are grateful to
Cate Blanchett, Goodwill Ambassador of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), for her emotional briefing. We hope that
her coming onboard will pave the way for progress
towards reconciliation and sustainable peace. We also
thank Associate Administrator Gettu for his valuable
contribution to the discussion today.

As fate would have it, it is just one year ago that
the Rakhine Advisory Commission, led by the late
former Secretary-General Kofi Annan, submitted
its recommendations. We pay tribute to Mr. Annan
and express our sincere hope that the Government of
Myanmar will implement all 88 of the Commission's
recommendations to bring lasting peace, security and
prosperity to Myanmar, including in Rakhine state.

Exactly a year ago, the international community
witnessed one of the largest humanitarian and human
rights catastrophes, with displacement amounting to the
more than 700,000 Rohingya refugees who have fled
into Bangladesh since the 25 August 2017 attack against
Myanmar security forces, which sparked the current
crisis. The report (A/HRC/39/64) of the Independent
International Fact-Finding Mission on Myanmar gives
a full accounting of the status quo.

What is most striking is that 60 per cent of the
Rohingya refugees are children who were forced to
leave their homes and, as the Security Council members
saw for themselves in April in Cox's Bazaar, have had to
stay in refugee camps in extremely difficult conditions.
Kazakhstan commends the efforts of the United Nations
and all humanitarian partners for helping the Rohingya

refugees by providing food, shelter, health care and
water, among other means of support.

We note some positive measures taken by the
Government of Myanmar. We are particularly
encouraged by the recent ministerial meeting in
Naypyidaw between Myanmar and Bangladesh. The
agreement on the speedy repatriation of displaced
refugees from Cox's Bazar back to Rakhine and the
establishment of a hotline at the ministerial level bode
well for some constructive outcomes.

Kazakhstan welcomes the memorandum of
understanding signed between the Government of
Myanmar and UNHCR and UNDP in June 2018. We
hope that United Nations funds and programmes
will henceforth have unfettered and safe access to all
the areas of Rakhine in order to render emergency
assistance. This is the much-awaited access needed to
alleviate the present human suffering.

The recently established independent commission
of inquiry could be considered one of the key steps
towards reconciliation and transitional justice. At
the same time, my delegation believes that including
a reputable representative of the Muslim community
in the commission would have greatly increased its
credibility and helped to build bridges.

Kazakhstan welcomes the opening of the office of
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General on Myanmar,
Ms. Christine Schraner Burgener, in Naypyidaw.
We are confident that the positive engagement of the
Myanmar authorities with the Special Envoy will
further strengthen the cooperation of the Government
of Myanmar with the United Nations .

At the same time, there can be no durable and
lasting solution for the Rohingya issue without
addressing the root causes of the crisis. Key among
them are those related to the citizenship and restoration
of the rights and freedom of the Rohingyas, poverty
alleviation and development. We are still observing
severe restrictions on their freedom of movement,
as well as restricted access to education, health care
and sources of livelihoods for those whom remain in
Rakhine state, even today as we speak. It is obvious
that only when the Rohingya refugees enjoy security,
see tangible progress in the aforementioned areas and
witness justice being served with respect to those who
have suffered outrageous acts ofviolence will they start
returning to the region.

Although, we completely understand that
intercommunal trust cannot be restored overnight, and
that it will be a long-running and challenging process,
United Nations agencies could be of help if provided
the access and conditions necessary for work. Such
negotiations, if they are to be successful, demand the
active participation of all stakeholders. The delegation
of Kazakhstan therefore urges the Government of
Myanmar to address all the related issues in depth and
make every effort to eliminate the root causes, with
the help of the international community. Given the
complexity and long-lasting effects of the humanitarian
crises in Rakhine state, we appeal to all Member States,
international organizations and other actors to continue
providing their support and assistance to Bangladesh
and Myanmar to overcome the crisis.

We should work patiently and diligently with both
sides, as well as other stakeholders, to achieve a tangible
result.The Security Council should not only continue to
be seized of the situation of the Rohingyas, but also
see that it is resolved satisfactorily. My delegation of
Kazakhstan is committed to supporting all aspects of
multilateral action to find a sustainable solution to the
plight of the Rohingya refugees.

