Mr. Khiari: As we have heard it said many times
before at the United Nations, the security situation in
Syria remains extremely volatile. Nevertheless, over
the past weeks we have seen an encouraging surge of
diplomatic activity on the north-east, though some
uncertainties remain.

On 17 October, Turkey and the United States
announced an agreement on a 120-hour pause in
Turkey's operations in order to "allow the withdrawal
of the Kurdish People's Protection Units (YPG) from
the safe zone". On Tuesday 22 October, the Presidents
of Turkey and the Russian Federation reiterated their
"commitment to the preservation of the political unity
and territorial integrity of Syria and the protection
of the national security of Turkey". They decided to
preserve the status quo in the current Operation Peace
Spring area, covering Tel Abyad and Ras Al-Ayn with a
depth of 32 kilometres. They also decided that Russian
military police and Syrian border guards would enter
areas east and west of Tel Abyad and Ras Al-Ayn in
order to facilitate the removal of YPG elements and
their weapons to the depth of 30 kilometres from the
Turkish-Syrian border.

The United Nations takes note of these agreements
and welcomes any effort to de-escalate the situation, in
line with the Charter of the United Nations, and to protect
civilians in accordance with international humanitarian
law. The United Nations also takes note of Turkey's
announcement that, at this stage, there is no further
need to conduct a new operation outside the present
operation area. The memorandum of understanding of
22 October between Turkey and Russia also indicates
that joint efforts will be launched to facilitate the
return of refugees in a safe and voluntary manner. The
President of Turkey has previously stated that the main
aim of Turkey's operation is to facilitate the return of
Syrian refugees. He has emphasized that up to 2 million
refugees could be resettled in the area.

I would like to reiterate our concern about the
humanitarian impact of military operations in northern
Syria since Turkey and allied Syrian opposition groups
began Operation Peace Spring on 9 October. While
violence has subsided since 20 October, when the
Syrian Democratic Forces withdrew from Ras Al-Ayn,
the situation remains in flux. Civilians in north-eastern
Syria continue to express concerns amid continued
uncertainty as to what may lie ahead. Many are
reminded of what occurred previously in Afrin and fear
further displacement from major cities and towns and
the disruption of humanitarian access. Many civilians
also fear the potential consequences of a possible return
of Government forces. This includes fear of arbitrary
detention, violent political retribution and imposed
conscription. We cannot stress enough that civilians,
including captured fighters, must be protected
under international human rights and international
humanitarian law. It is crucial that the Security Council
and all Member States represented in this Chamber
do everything in their power to protect civilians and
civilian infrastructure, ensure food and unimpeded
humanitarian access and help the parties resolve their
security concerns through peaceful means.

We recognize the generosity of Turkey and other
neighbouring countries in hosting so many refugees
fleeing Syria's devastating conflict. We urge the
international community to provide strengthened
support to Syria's neighbouring countries in shouldering
this burden. It is also important to stress that the return
of refugees must be voluntary, safe, dignified and well-
informed.

Ms. Ursula Mueller of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs made reference
to the approximately 70,000 civilians currently
sheltering in the Al-Hol and Al-Roj camps. Most have
been exposed to violence and trauma under the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant. They are now living in
extremely difficult conditions, where they face a range
of challenges and an uncertain and disconcerting fate.
This includes the risk of being denied repatriation,
rehabilitation and reintegration or a fair trial. All
children, including those suspected of being associated
with armed groups, are entitled to special care and
protection under international humanitarian law and
international human rights law, including the Convention
on the Rights of the Child. They must be treated first
and foremost as victims. Solutions for foreign nationals
need to be urgently found. We call on all Member States
to take all measures necessary to ensure that their
nationals are repatriated for the purposes of prosecution,
rehabilitation and/or reintegration, as appropriate and
in line with international law and standards.

I would also like to briefly update the Council
on the situation in the greater Idlib area. Following
the announcement of a ceasefire in late August,
there was a marked reduction in air strikes, although
heavy, ground-based artillery shelling continued to
be reported. Unfortunately, air strikes are reported
to have increased again since 12 October. There have
also been reports of helicopter attacks and the use
of barrel bombs. We count on all parties, especially
Turkey and the Russian Federation as guarantors of the
de-escalation agreement, to press all parties to the full
implementation of the September 2018 memorandum
of understanding. As the Secretary-General has said
many times, any large-scale military offensive in Idlib
would come at an unacceptable cost in terms of loss of
human lives and suffering.

We appreciate the Council's full support in helping
us continue to chart a political path forward regarding the
implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). The launch
of the Syrian-led and Syrian-owned Constitutional
Committee will be facilitated by the United Nations in
Geneva later this month.

Resolution 2254 (2015) calls for a nation-wide
ceasefire, reaffirms the sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity of Syria and stresses that
the only sustainable solution to the current conflict in
Syria is through an inclusive and Syrian-led political
process that meets the legitimate aspirations of the
Syrian people.

The need to implement resolution 2254 (2015)
has been reaffirmed by the Council repeatedly, most
recently in its presidential statement S/PRST/2019/12 of
8 October. What is now most urgently needed is decisive
action for a consolidation of the ceasefires in north-
east and north-west Syria, the protection of civilians
throughout the country and full support to ensure that
the political track remains on course.

