Mr. Seenz Biolley (Costa Rica) (interpretation from Spanish): Allow me to thank you, Mr. President, on behalf
of Costa Rica, for the timely convening of this formal
meeting devoted to the issue of refugees in the context of
international peace and security. Your decision, which my
country has supported from the very beginning, is the right
one, as this is an extremely important step on the road
towards the transparency and openness that the Security
Council must adopt in all its activities and also because,
above all, it enables all States Members of this
Organization to focus their attention on humanitarian issues
in the context of international peace and security.

This issue has gained great relevance in recent years.
My delegation, like the other members of the Security
Council, witnessed from close at hand something that must
surely be one of the greatest human tragedies in modern
history: the slaughter of hundreds of thousands of refugees
in the Great Lakes region of Africa, and, in particular, the
tragedy of the Rwandan refugees in eastern Zaire.

This causes feelings of horror and impotence within us
as we think about the thousands of people silenced by
intolerance, war and extreme poverty, and, in short, by the
dysfunctional nature of the societies from which they came
and of the societies that are receiving this multitude of
human beings.

The holocaust of African refugees has not come to an
end. It is taking place there, in the stark reality of central
Africa, while humanitarian organizations desperately try to
save the lives of as many people as they can. The solidarity
of international humanitarian organizations, both public and
private, towards these men, women and children, fills us
with hope for mankind and is in stark contrast with the
cruelty of those who are indiscriminately massacring
refugees or hindering their repatriation.

For decades we witnessed the localized wars and the
confrontations of the major Powers. During the cold war,
international peace and security, based on the strategic
movement of pieces, as in a game, was an end in itself,
which banished the human dimension from international
politics, postponed the primary objective of the United
Nations and took shape in low-intensity conflicts, usually in
the third world, of limited scope but with disastrous
consequences for populations.

Today, in contrast, we ought to speak of a new reality,
a new situation in the aftermath of global confrontation, in
which the international community could indeed now
focus on promoting the integral development of the
human being and foster the reign of all values that are
inherently human.

Nevertheless, we are still embroiled in geopolitical
discussions in which some insist on participating in
strategic military games, almost always in the developing
world. In Costa Rica's view, this is morally wrong, not
only because it ignores legal commitments and
international policies but also because it reduces all the
noble goals of the world, as organized in the United
Nations, to a mere game of words, empty and
meaningless in the real world.

There has been no consistency between what is
publicly proclaimed and what is done. There is much talk
of liberty, democracy, respect for human rights and
assistance for development, but, meanwhile, reality is
ignored, dictators continue to be supported, repressive
policies and violations of basic rights go unsanctioned,
and economic models that are prejudicial to the
inhabitants of the developing world are insistently
promoted.

The post-cold-war era is marked by obvious
economic inequality between the North and the South,
and it is no wonder that the greatest of the world's
present conflicts are developing in the former settings of
confrontation between the Powers - primarily, as I said
earlier, in the third world.

The statistics on refugees bear this out. Of the
world's 10 largest refugee groups, nine are in the third
world, totalling about 7,306,000 refugees. Only one,
consisting of about 1,330,000 refugees, is in the
developed world, according to the publication of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees entitled "UNHCR by Numbers", which was
distributed to the members of this Council.

This open meeting was called particularly in view of
the tragedy of the refugees in southern Africa, whose
fundamental rights, all of them, were disrespected by the
actors in that war, in a situation in which not even the
physical integrity of humanitarian workers was respected.
This crises demonstrates clearly that the actors in war
must, in this case as in any other, ensure humanitarian
organizations access to refugees so that those
organizations can assist them. The States that give
asylum, for their part, must guarantee protection and
humanitarian treatment to refugees, in accordance with

 

internationally recognized human rights standards and
humanitarian law.
Those States must also guarantee refugees the rights
of voluntary repatriation, integration in the asylum country
or resettlement in a third country, in such a way as to
guarantee their right to life as well as all their human
rights. Costa Rica believes the best solution to any refugee
problem is the creation of the social, economic and political
conditions in their country of origin that will allow them to
return voluntarily.

Any policy in support of refugees must, of course, be
applicable to the problem of internally displaced persons -
that is, those who, like refugees, have had to leave their
homes to flee from war. To that end, we wish to recall
operative paragraph 13 of resolution 51/75, adopted on 12
December 1996 by the General Assembly, which calls upon
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to
extend assistance to internally displaced persons, as well as
other groups, as a means of preventing the emergence of
large masses of refugees.

In my country's estimation, the international
community should take all necessary steps to safeguard the
human rights of refugees and displaced persons. This matter
generally receives only secondary attention, but in our
opinion, in the case of humanitarian situations in conflicts,
the United Nations must deploy personnel to protect the
human rights of such persons on the ground.

Costa Rica believes that in these new circumstances a
new international vision of the management of international
conflicts is required. The resolution of such conflicts must
be based on a new vision of security that focuses on the
human being. I am speaking of a far-reaching and integral
concept of human security that takes into account the
political, economic, social and environmental aspects of the
coexistence of peoples and States.

Costa Rica therefore rejects, as limited and alien to the
purposes of the United Nations, the persistent view of
international peace and security based on strategic
movements and geared to address military concerns
exclusively.

This naturally affects our view of peacekeeping and of
the duties of the United Nations and the Security Council
in this area. The concept of peacekeeping must outgrow this
narrow vision, must expand so that this Organization can
systematically and consistently make every effort to keep
and promote peace, while at the same time guaranteeing
and promoting respect for human rights and fostering
better economic and social conditions for all those
affected by crises situations. This is the morally right
thing to do.
In this regard, Costa Rica considers the revision and
updating of the concept of peacekeeping operations to be
of urgent importance. Those operations designed from a
military perspective must be reformed in order to
guarantee that their actions will cover the humanitarian
aspect of conflicts. Naturally, this implies a modification
of their structure, composition, command structure and
coordination, in order to make room for the system's
various agencies specialized in humanitarian matters, as
well as those involved in human rights.

My delegation also shares the opinion already
expressed here by some members of the Council with
regard to the need to broaden the horizon in order to
establish ways for preventive humanitarian tasks to be
carried out. This would have been especially useful in
cases such as that of Somalia, which some continue to
invoke as a low point for this Council.

It is also necessary to continue in the well-conceived
direction of carrying out valuable peace-building activities
once conflicts have ended. The political, economic and
social structures of the affected societies are virtually
demolished, and they clearly must be rebuilt in order to
materially strengthen peace by concrete actions aimed at
reconciliation, re-establishment of the state of law, the
creation of new economic opportunities and social
solidarity. The examples of countries such as El Salvador
and Haiti are instructive in this regard.

We are grateful for the legal discussions on the
nature of situations that can affect international peace and
security, as well as their operative consequences.
Nevertheless, it is Costa Rica's opinion that this question
requires us to define a political will that overcomes legal
ambiguities and procedural excuses. This formal meeting
constitutes a valuable opportunity to envision such a
possibility.

My country is aware that in the current
circumstances it is unlikely that much definitive progress
in this direction will be made, but we believe it to be our
moral and political duty to take up the matter in this
formal meeting of the Security Council. Our brief
experience in the Security Council, analysed in the light
of our own historical experience, leads us to express our
 

dissatisfaction with the management of humanitarian
questions in conflict situations and, at the same time, to
promote the new vision we need in this area.

