Mr. Bolton (United States of America): I, too
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Gambari
for his briefing.
It has been 11 days since the passage of
resolution 1701 (2006). We believe this resolution is an
important step forward and, when fully implemented,
that it will help lay the foundation for lasting peace in
the region. The United States is now actively engaged
with others to turn this opportunity into a reality.

The United States takes seriously the imperative
of fully implementing resolution 1701 (2006), starting
with its call to take immediate steps to extend financial
and humanitarian assistance to the people of Lebanon.
The United States has pledged $50 million in
humanitarian assistance to Lebanon, over half of which
has already been distributed. As President Bush
announced yesterday, we will increase this
humanitarian and reconstruction aid to more than $230
million in the weeks ahead. The President has also
announced his intention to work with Congress to
extend the availability of loan guarantees to help
rebuild Israeli infrastructure damaged by Hizbollah's
rockets.

In addition to alleviating the humanitarian
problem in southern Lebanon, it is imperative that we
move as quickly as possible to secure the peace by
enhancing the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL) and providing robust rules of
engagement. We urge potential troop-contributing
countries to expedite their internal decision-making
processes as we strive to reach our goal of an expanded
15,000-member international force. Delay in this case
does not serve the interests of anyone, except of those
who oppose a sovereign, free and democratic Lebanon,
one which is no longer used as a base to launch
terrorist attacks against Israel, killing its innocent
civilians.

As we plan for this deployment, we should be
encouraged that, broadly speaking, one of the
important goals of resolution 1701 (2006) has been
achieved - a cessation of hostilities. We are
concerned, of course, by reports of sporadic violence,
but we stress that resolution 1701 (2006) guarantees
Israel's right to defend itself and its forces.

Israel has said that the operation in the Bekaa
Valley this past weekend was targeted against arms
shipments to Hizbollah from Iran and Syria. Such arms
shipments are, of course, legally prohibited by the arms
embargo established by resolution 1701 (2006) unless
specifically authorized by the Government of Lebanon.
All States must comply with their obligations to

observe it. Failure to strictly observe that embargo will
significantly enhance the risk of future hostilities. The
burden of abiding by the arms embargo, and the
attention of the world, fall especially on Syria and Iran.

But resolution 1701 (2006) is not just about a
cessation of hostilities. It correctly emphasizes not
only the need for an end to Violence but "the need to
address urgently the causes that have given rise to the
current crisis, including the unconditional release of
the abducted Israeli soldiers". It is impossible -
indeed, dangerous - to divorce the two issues. If the
international community applies only a temporary
band-aid solution to the problem and allows Hizbollah
to regroup and rearm, then the suffering of the people
of Lebanon and Israel may very well intensify in the
near future.

We must keep in mind that responsibility for this
conflict rests squarely on the shoulders of Hizbollah.
As President Bush stated unequivocally last week, it
was an unprovoked attack by Hizbollah on Israel that
started this conflict. Hizbollah terrorists targeted Israeli
civilians with daily rocket attacks. Hizbollah terrorists
used Lebanese civilians as human shields, sacrificing
the innocent in an effort to protect themselves from
Israeli response.

If we are to achieve the goal of lasting peace in
the region, we must put an end to Hizbollah's operating
as a State within a State. To do that requires that we
address the backing of Hizbollah by Damascus and
Tehran. Their continued support to Hizbollah in the
form of financing and training and supplying
armaments does not just perpetuate this crisis; it
sustains it. Cutting off those supply lines, as mandated
in resolution 1701 (2006), is a matter than can no
longer be ignored. The United States calls again upon
Iran and Syria to comply immediately with that
resolution. The United States remains deeply
concerned at the attitude of Syria and Iran in this crisis.
The leaders of both States have called for the
destruction of Israel in recent days.

We recognize, as President Bush stated last week,
that the conflict in Lebanon is part of a broader
struggle between freedom and terror that is unfolding
across the region. We believe that full implementation
of resolution 1701 (2006) will lay the foundation on
which to achieve a lasting peace and realize the goals
outlined originally in resolution 1559 (2004) - a
sovereign and democratically elected Government in
Lebanon, free from coercion by all outside
Governments.

The United States also remains deeply concerned
by the ongoing crisis between Israel and the
Palestinians, instigated by the 25 June attack by Hamas
inside Israel, in which two Israeli soldiers were killed
and Corporal Gilad Shalit was kidnapped. The United
States is keenly aware of the humanitarian impact of
the current crisis, which has been caused by the refusal
of the Hamas-led Palestinian Authority Government to
govern responsibly. Indeed, the Hamas Government
has made a strategic decision to reject peace and to
continue to embrace terrorism. In order to ease the
hardships faced by the Palestinian people due to the
intransigent policies of the Hamas-led Palestinian
Authority Government, we have increased
humanitarian assistance to more than $270 million,
including more than $50 million in response to the
emergency appeal by the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency (UNRWA) for the West Bank and Gaza.
We have also substantially increased our support for
the promotion of democracy and civil society and the
development of the private sector.

In the days ahead we look forward to the
continued implementation of resolution 1701 (2006),
but we cannot stress enough the urgent need to move
quickly to implement fully the obligations imposed on
us in accordance with that resolution. The price of
failure in this case is to condemn the people of
Lebanon and Israel to further violence and tragedy.

