Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to take this opportunity to welcome His
Excellency Mr. Kay Rala Xanana Gusmao, President of
the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste, to this
Security Council meeting and to thank Mr. Sukehiro
Hasegawa, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Timor-Leste and Head of Mission of the
United Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL), for
his important briefing. I thank the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive progress report on the United
Nations Office in Timor-Leste for the period 16 August
2005 to 13 January 2006 (S/2006/24).

I congratulate the people and the Government of
Timor-Leste on the progress they have made in
achieving peace and stability and on their dedicated
efforts to strengthen democracy and build Government
institutions in order to bring about justice and promote
respect for human rights. In addition, I congratulate the
State of Timor-Leste and its neighbour Indonesia on
their serious efforts to normalize their relations - a
process being carried out with distinction through a
mutual demonstration of good faith. We salute the two
countries' courageous decision to establish the bilateral
Commission for Truth and Friendship and to sign The
Provisional Agreement on the Borderline between
Timor-Leste and Indonesia; a ceremony held at the
border village of Mota'ain marked the placement of the
first marker along their common land border. We hope
that efforts will continue to demarcate the 96 per cent
of the land border agreed to in the Provisional
Agreement on the Borderline, signed by the Foreign
Ministers of the two countries in April 2005.

Because of that development, the general
situation has remained calm, except for a few isolated
instances of a kind that could normally occur along any
stretch of common land border between States. We
note with appreciation the quick response by the
Timorese national police following incursions by
members of former militias, which led to a number of
arrests. That response was reassuring to the Timorese
living near border areas.

We pay tribute to Timor-Leste and commend the
progress it has made to date. In addition, we cannot fail
to commend the Security Council for the resolutions it
has adopted to support the State in its efforts. Among
those resolutions, one stands out: resolution 1599
(2005) of 28 April 2005, which established the United
Nations political mission - UNOTIL - with a clear
and enabling mandate for one year, ending on 20 May
2006. Here, we recall that it is essential that Timor-
Leste have a permanent, high-level United Nations
presence in the form of an office that will plan for the
smooth transition to a sustainable framework for
development assistance. Through such a framework,
the United Nations will assist the country in its
development efforts, in establishing general policies
and in coordinating assistance from the donor
community. Special attention will be devoted to
building the State's institutional capacity and to
promoting interaction among the State, civil society
organizations and the private sector in the fields of
education, health and human resources development.

We note with satisfaction that local elections
were held in a peaceful and orderly manner and that
several political parties participated in them by fielding
candidates, thus enabling democracy to take root in the
country. We also note with interest that presidential and
parliamentary elections will be held in 2007 and that
Timor-Leste is looking to the United Nations and the
international community for effective assistance in that
area.

The Timorese are resolved to build a solid
democracy and truly believe in good governance, the
rule of law, transparency and accountability. We hope
that the United Nations and its system of organizations,
including the specialized agencies, as well as the
Bretton Woods institutions and the international
community, will be able to support Timor-Leste's
efforts and to provide the country with the necessary
financial, human and logistical assistance. Given that
presidential and parliamentary elections will be held
for the first time since Timor-Leste assumed
independence, and that the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor was downsized to become a
United Nations special political mission, we hope that
every effort will be made to organize the elections in a
competent, fair and efficient manner.

In conclusion, we commend Timor-Leste and
Indonesia for the wisdom that they both demonstrated
when they agreed to establish the Commission for
Reception, Truth and Reconciliation, which worked
uninterruptedly for more than five years. The
Commission submitted its report to President Gusmao,
who in turn submitted it to the National Parliament on
28 November 2005 and to Prime Minister Alkatiri on
30 November. The State of Qatar welcomes the fact
that the report was officially submitted to Timor-
Leste's National Parliament and subsequently to the
Secretary-General. We agree with the Secretary-
General that it is an important milestone in the search
for truth and reconciliation. If national reconciliation is
to be achieved, the truth must be brought out.

