Mr. Schulz (Germany): I would like to thank
the President of the Security Council for initiating
today's open debate. I thank the briefers for their
informative statements.

We align ourselves with the statements delivered
by the observer of the European Union and the Chair of
the Group of Friends of Mediation.

Germany very much welcomes the President's
emphasis on the importance of mediation. Germany
believes that mediation is a key instrument during
all phases of conflict, from conflict prevention to
stabilization and peacebuilding. It is an integral part of
the Secretary-General's reform agenda, which focuses
on prevention and sustaining peace, and enjoys our full
support. As pressure on our global order intensifies,
the need to resolve conflicts peacefully is becoming
increasingly urgent. We need more dialogue instead
of more confrontation, and more prevention instead
of more intervention. Mediation is important to those
ends, and the Security Council has a decisive role to
play, not least in accordance with Article 33 of the
Charter of the United Nations. Germany therefore fully
subscribes to presidential statement (S/PRST/2018/1)
issued in January, and we encourage the Secretary-
General to continue those efforts in that regard.

When the Council decides to entrust the Secretary-
General, or another actor, with mediating a dispute, it
is important that it provides political support, while
providing the parties with adequate space to pursue
conflict resolution. Adherence to certain standards and
principles is critical when designing and conducting
mediation processes. The Secretariat, the Mediation
Support Unit and the Group of Friends have contributed
greatly to the promotion of such standards and
professional approaches in the area of mediation, which
we fully support. For Germany, mediation also plays
a key role in its national efforts to support peaceful
crisis resolution. That is why we have expanded our
engagement in mediation, for instance, by establishing
a mediation unit in the Federal Foreign Office and
increasing our mediation support significantly. We
are keen to work with other Member States and
regional organizations to promote mediation as a tool
for the peaceful settlement of disputes - a task at
the core of the United Nations mission. I will cite the
following examples.

Today, in Yemen, we are facing the world's worst
humanitarian crisis, and the situation on the ground is
rapidly deteriorating. What is needed most is obviously
a political solution. We therefore support the United
Nations efforts towards a political process that involves
all Yemeni groups. Germany continues to finance and
facilitate track-two dialogues, local mediation and
reconciliation, and, whenever possible, small-scale
stabilization measures. As another example, in Darfur
and the Sudan, we are also supporting the ongoing
mediation efforts of the Joint Special Representative
and Head of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur to reach a lasting political
agreement between the Sudanese Government and
armed rebel groups, as set out in the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur. In our mediation efforts in Yemen,
Darfur and elsewhere, we are focusing intensely on
strengthening civil society and fostering inclusiveness
by working on various tracks and ensuring that all
views are heard.

Experience has shown that the most successful
peace processes are supported by the population
and benefit from the buy-in of all groups concerned.
Crucially, that includes women as agents of change
within mediation and reconciliation processes. Crisis
prevention and stabilization can succeed only if women
have an active role in peace processes and their views
are respected. What makes a difference is not only
increasing the number ofwomen in mediation processes,
but ensuring their influence on their structure and
outcome. Germany is an active supporter of the women
and peace and security agenda, and will continue to be
as a non-permanent member on the Security Council.

