Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): We would like to extend a
warm welcome to you, Mr. President. Your presence in
presiding over this meeting testifies to your strong
commitment to the work of the Security Council and
the importance that we collectively attach to
strengthening international cooperation on counter-
terrorism. Let me therefore congratulate you and the
delegation of Azerbaijan on your initiative of holding
this meeting and on your sterling stewardship of the
Council. I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General for his briefing.

No country has suffered as much from terrorism
as Pakistan. Pakistan unequivocally condemns
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, whoever
commits it and wherever and against whomever it is
committed. We also condemn the killing of civilians
anywhere in the world, whether through terrorist
activity or the use of unlawful or disproportionate force.
All efforts to combat terrorism must respect the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States and
comply fully with international law. All of us also
agree that terrorism and extremism cannot and should
not be associated with any religion, race, ethnicity,
faith, value system, culture or society. No religious
tradition or doctrine encourages or inspires acts of
terrorism.

Pakistan reaffirms its commitment to strengthen
mutual cooperation in the fight against terrorism.
Coherence and coordination are necessary to the
international community to succeed in its fight against
terrorism. Towards that end, Pakistan supports a
comprehensive counter-terrorism strategy and its
balanced implementation. The international community
must address the root causes of terrorism, which
include prolonged, unresolved conflicts, aggression,
foreign occupation, denial of the right of peoples living
under foreign occupation to self-determination, social
and economic injustice, and political marginalization
and alienation. Continuing to remain in denial about
the conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism will
only be to our collective detriment. It is necessary to
eschew policies that alienate people and make them
vulnerable to extremism; it also necessary to tackle
unemployment and promote economic and social
development, particularly in regions challenged by
extremism.

Pakistan fully supports the observance of legal
principles in implementing counter-terrorism
resolutions. We support reform of the procedures of the
counter-terrorism-related committees of the Security
Council in order to ensure due process. We welcome
the recent efforts the Council has made in this regard
through its appointment of an Ombudsperson to the
Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities, and expect that the
process of reform will continue in order to further
improve procedures.

The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy has broadened the scope of counter-terrorism
to include the larger endeavour of countering
extremism through intercultural dialogue. It would help
implementation of the Strategy if there were greater
commitment to addressing the problem of defamation
of certain religions, as well as to combating intolerance,
negative stereotyping and discrimination based on
religion or belief. In this increasingly globalized world,
more than ever before we need better understanding,
harmony and bridge-building among all cultures and
peoples.

The United Nations has a special role to play in
promoting international cooperation in the field of
counter-terrorism. The Organization and its counter-
terrorism bodies need coherent policies and better
inter-agency coordination. We note that the Secretary-
General, in his latest report on the activities of the
United Nations system in implementing the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy (A/66/762), has
recommended that Member States consider appointing
a United Nations counter-terrorism coordinator. We are
ready and willing to analyse that recommendation in
the framework of the General Assembly during the
forthcoming review of the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy. While we support the institutional coherence
of the United Nations, we also emphasize the
importance of respecting the mandates of the
Organization's various organs, as outlined in the
Charter.

We appreciate the positive contribution of the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force (CTITF)
in improving the coordination of United Nations
activities in the field of counter-terrorism. We hope that
the United Nations Centre for Counter-Terrorism,
established through an initiative of Saudi Arabia, will
help the CTITF enhance its coordination efforts.

The promotion of international cooperation in the
field of counter-terrorism is indeed a noble goal.
Pakistan fulfils its international obligations,
particularly its commitment to implementing the
various counter-terrorism conventions, with great
responsibility. We have ratified 10 of 13 United
Nations conventions relating to terrorism, and are also
a signatory to the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime, adopted in 2000.
Pakistan is party to the International Convention for
the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism, and has
enacted a landmark anti-money-laundering bill. A
financial monitoring unit has been established in the
State Bank of Pakistan to monitor suspicious financial
transactions. Sixty-four bank accounts valued at
750 million Pakistani rupees have recently been frozen.
The international community has acknowledged
Pakistan's role and sacrifice in the struggle against
terrorism - a problem that has grown in intensity over
the years due to the decades-long conflict and
instability in Afghanistan. We need continued
cooperation and support for our counter-terrorism
efforts. Pakistan has deployed 160,000 troops on its
border with Afghanistan and set up 822 border posts to
interdict Al-Qaida and Taliban members. The
international community has an obligation to remain
committed to helping Afghanistan restore durable
peace and stability.

To conclude, countering terrorism is a collective
responsibility that should be discharged in a spirit of
cooperation, understanding and an unwavering sense of
our common humanity.

