The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Germany.

At the outset, I would like to warmly welcome
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan to the
Council, and to thank him very much for his statement.
I would also like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Jan Kubis, for his
briefing. He and his colleagues in the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the
country team can count on Germany's firm support in

their dedicated work in what are sometimes difficult
circumstances.

I would like to offer our condolences to the families
of the victims of the most recent attacks. In one of
them, eight South Africans were killed in a particularly
malicious attack in Kabul on Tuesday. They were
working closely with their colleagues from the German
police project team in Afghanistan.

Today I would like to focus on three key issues. The
first is that the Tokyo Conference has complemented
a series of international conferences on Afghanistan.
At those conferences - Bonn, Chicago, Kabul and
Tokyo - the Government of Afghanistan and the
international community agreed on a long-term
partnership and a framework for Afghanistan to assume
full responsibility for its security and development.
The challenge ahead is now achieving a swift and
comprehensive implementation of the decisions taken
at those conferences. Germany remains committed to
supporting Afghanistan in its efforts to do so and to
achieve stability, economic growth and development.

The Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework is
of paramount importance in achieving Afghanistan's
governance and development objectives. Germany
looks forward to sustained progress in the five
key areas agreed on in Tokyo. We encourage the
Afghan Government to finalize its national priority
programmes and to transform them into "vehicles for
tangible development results", to quote the Secretary-
General's report (S/2012/703). My country has
pledged $560 million annually in contributions to the
implementation of Afghan Government priorities.

Secondly, regional cooperation and support for
Afghanistan have been further strengthened by the
Kabul Heart ofAsia Ministerial Conference. Agreement
on seven concrete confidence-building measures has
been achieved, which will contribute to fostering
cooperation in the region and thus to stability and
prosperity. We look forward to supporting this process.
We are offering our specific expertise in the areas of
regional infrastructure and chambers of commerce.
We welcome the initiative taken by the Government of
Afghanistan to hold a meeting for senior officials here
in New York in the coming week to take this process a
step further.

Thirdly, the number of civilian casualties has been
reduced. We welcome this development, which is due
mainly to improved standards and measures taken by the
International Security Assistance Force and the Afghan
security forces. We encourage our Afghan partners to
further strengthen their efforts in that regard as they
progressively take over full responsibility for security.

Let me conclude by underlining that the United
Nations will continue to play a crucial role during the
transformation decade to come. The task for UNAMA
is a challenging one - to support preparations for the
upcoming elections; to protect and promote gains in the
human rights situation, particularly women's rights; and
to support the Afghan Government in ensuring effective
coordination among donors and other international
partners. Germany will therefore continue to lend its
full support to UNAMA in implementing its mandate.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Japan.

