Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I should
also like to begin by thanking Ambassadors Kamau,
Skoog and Rosenthal for their respective valuable
contributions to this debate.

Peacebuilding is an essential subject, and we all
agree on highlighting its importance. We are also in
full agreement that the United Nations needs to do
more in this area. In that regard, today's open debate
is a very relevant and timely topic. The report (see S/2015/490) of the Advisory Group of Experts on the
Review of the Peacebuilding Architecture, issued in
June 2015, includes a number of interesting proposals.
The draft resolution on the peacebuilding architecture
that is currently being debated in the General Assembly
is also an opportunity to improve United Nations action
in this area. For France, that improvement needs to be
structured around the following points.

First of all, we must ensure that the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) fully complements and supports
Security Council efforts. That is key to ensuring a
fully coherent message from the United Nations on
the different situations of which we are seized. For
example, the Peacebuilding Commission could play
an important role in maintaining political mobilization
on specific situations, and thus could assist in the
implementation of actions undertaken. In that regard,
the Peacebuilding Commission can help mobilize the
partners involved in implementing Council resolutions,
such as donors, the United Nations system and the
international organizations.

In addition, in some cases the Peacebuilding
Commission plays a much appreciated advisory role
vis-a-vis the Security Council, including through field
visits by its members. The work of the Commission
must be guided in that direction so that it can
effectively support the Council's work. For example,
we appreciate the role played by Morocco as Chair
of the Central African Republic country-specific
configuration and its efforts to support the financing of
elections and the Special Criminal Court. Such projects
are concrete and assist in the stabilization of the
Central African Republic, as decided by the Security
Council in coordination with transitional authorities,
but their implementation requires monitoring and
support that only the Central African Republic country
configuration can effectively provide. Similarly,
regular visits to the Great Lakes region organized by the
Swiss chairmanship of the Burundi configuration are
particularly useful and welcome, to the extent that they
operate in the framework of excellent complementarity
with initiatives taken by the Council to find a solution
to the crisis in Burundi.

It is equally important to ensure that the
Peacebuilding Commission organizes its work in the
most effective way possible to ensure flexibility in
reviewing records and also to focus in its meetings on
operational and concrete issues. From that point of view,
I would like to congratulate the Swedish Ambassador
for his work in that area during Sweden's chairmanship
of the Commission. I also congratulate the Ambassador
of Kenya on his election as head of the PBC and wish
him every success in his chairmanship.

Finally, with regard to financing, we welcome the
activities ofthe Peacebuilding Fund. It is also is essential
to maintain the voluntary nature of contributions to
continue to ensure genuine transparency and monitoring
of the commitments of the Fund. However, it must also
be acknowledged that the efficacy of peacebuilding is
not merely a financial issue. From that perspective, it
is important to emphasize efforts to coordinate on the
ground the work of the United Nations in the area of
peacebuilding, as well as with international financial
institutions. In that regard, the role of the Resident
Coordinator must be supported and strengthened.

France is particularly committed to strengthening
United Nations efforts in the area of peacebuilding.
We hope that today's debate and discussions on the
General Assembly draft resolution will contribute to
this objective shared by all.

