Ms. Coomaraswamy: I have the honour to
present the sixth annual report of the Secretary-General
on children and armed conflict (S/2006/826), in the
presence of Secretary-General Kofi Annan. One of his
most enduring legacies will be the measures that have
been taken in the past 10 years to protect children in
armed conflict. We are grateful for his leadership, his
vision and his encouragement.

(spoke in French)

Over the past several years, the Security Council
has taken unprecedented steps to help children affected
by armed conflict and has stepped up its efforts to
protect the most vulnerable. Resolution 1612 (2005),
which was adopted in July 2005, was an important
development, in that it established the Working Group
of the Security Council on Children and Armed
Conflict. That seminal resolution provided the Council
with a more effective framework for its work. The
Working Group meets every two months to consider
reports on situations of concern and to take concrete
steps in the interests of war-affected children.

(spoke in English)

Indeed, I am happy to report a number of
successes since the Secretary-General submitted his
report last year. As is attested in the Secretary-
General's sixth annual report, the United Nations
system in country situations of concern has increased
the flow of timely, accurate, objective and reliable
information to the Council. The United Nations
country teams in Burundi, Cote d'Ivoire, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Somalia, the
Sudan, Sri Lanka and Nepal have come together in
very short order to produce reports of quality which
have served as a starting point to the Security Council
3
Working Group's action on behalf of children in those
key situations of concern. The Council's Working
Group, under the capable chairmanship of the
Permanent Representative of France, has worked at an
impressive pace to outline a programme of action for
2006. It has also defined a working "tool kit" of
possible actions the Council can take to protect
children from the most grave abuses perpetrated
against them.

Furthermore, the Working Group, in cooperation
with concerned Member States, has undertaken a series
of very useful recommendations on country situation
reports on children and armed conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Sudan. I
would like to stress that the hallmark of the monitoring
and reporting exercise mandated by resolution 1612
(2005), as well as the annual reporting to the Council,
has been a constructive dialogue at all levels with the
Member States concerned for the benefit of
war-affected children.

In addition to the monitoring process under
resolution 1612 (2005), other successes have been
recorded in conflict situations. Many of the peace
agreements signed over the last few years, including in
Cote d'Ivoire, Burundi and the Sudan, have included
child protection provisions and a framework for child
demobilization. We hope that such provisions will be
standard paragraphs in all peace agreements in
situations where children have been combatants. In that
regard, I would like to raise my sincere hope to see
concerted attention to the immediate release of children
associated with fighting forces in the peace talks
currently under way in Nepal.

After the adoption of resolution 1612 (2005),
parties approached UNICEF and our office to enter
into action plans to demobilize child soldiers.
Commitments have been made by parties in Cote
d'Ivoire, Burundi, Myanmar and Uganda. We hope to
consolidate those gains by ensuring that we move
beyond good intentions to actually facilitating the
formulation of action plans and the timely release of
children so that they may be reintegrated into their
respective societies. We are also happy to report that
the Sudan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Lebanon, Israel and the occupied Palestinian territories
have extended invitations to me to visit their countries
in order to enter into a constructive dialogue regarding
issues relating to children and armed conflict. I hope to
conclude those visits in the first half of 2007.
Despite those progressive developments, many
challenges remain and more action has to be taken to
protect the interests of children trapped in situations of
armed conflict. Though a great deal has been done in
formulating standards and receiving commitments, the
actual implementation on the ground is far from
satisfactory. The issue needs to be properly
mainstreamed Within the United Nations system, in line
with the recommendations of the independent review
of the monitoring and reporting mechanism.
Furthermore, parties should be made aware of the
consequences if they do not live up to their
commitments. We therefore note with appreciation the
recommendations of the Security Council Working
Group and hope to monitor closely the follow-up
action of the parties concerned.

So far, the process of scrutiny and monitoring has
been selective and focused on only a few countries. It
is our belief, jointly shared with UNICEF and other
partners, that we must expand the focus to all situations
of armed conflict so that there is equal treatment of
children, regardless of where they live. That is
important for the process to be seen as legitimate and
fair, as well as in the interest of the children concerned.
We urge the Security Council Working Group to move
the agenda forward, in consultation with the countries
concerned.

The recruitment and use of child soldiers have
been the main concern of the Council and the gateway
to the annexed lists of the annual Secretary-General's
report. We feel that this was a great step forward for
the Council, and parties that continue to engage in that
serious crime must be put on notice that targeted
measures will be undertaken against persistent
violators.

However, there are five other grave violations
which also deserve our attention. In particular, we
would like to draw the attention of the Council to the
increasing number of reports of sexual violence as an
instrument of war. It is our belief that the gateway to
the annexed list of parties should include all the grave
violations. We are especially eager to reflect grave
sexual violence more fully in the annexed lists, as that
crime is of special gravity and the number of children
experiencing grave sexual abuse as a weapon of war
grows year by year. We urge the Council to consider
that measure as an important step forward in the
monitoring process in the coming years.
06-63086
As we watch the events unfold around the world,
there are new substantive issues that are also emerging
that have grave implications for the protection of
children in situations of armed conflict. Increasingly in
warfare around the world, the distinction between
civilians and combatants is not respected. In the recent
conflict in Lebanon, more children were killed than
combatants. It is important that the Security Council
and Member States reiterate their commitment to
actively upholding international humanitarian law.
Those laws and standards have been negotiated over
two centuries. The principles of protecting civilians, of
proportionality, of keeping military assets away from
civilian centres and of respecting safe zones, such as
schools and hospitals, have been the hallmarks of that
international consensus. It is equally important that
States and non-State actors respect those laws of war,
and it is important that the Security Council send a
clear message that deviations from those principles will
be condemned.

Another issue that concerns us is the migration of
child soldiers and the recycling of those children
within conflict zones. In many countries, after
demobilization, many child soldiers are remobilized
and, with the help of other parties and sometimes
mercenaries, often end up in neighbouring countries.
We know of cases of children who have been
demobilized in Sierra Leone and then resurfaced in
Cote d'Ivoire, and of similar movements of
demobilized children in the Great Lakes region of
Africa. For our work to be successful, it is essential
that the longer-term reintegration needs of child
soldiers and other children affected by war be given as
much importance as the punishment of perpetrators.
The effectiveness and sustainability of demobilization
and reintegration programmes run by national
Governments, United Nations agencies, and
international and local non-governmental organizations
will finally determine whether children scarred by war
will reap the benefits of a peaceful future.

At lunchtime today, our office will host an event.
We will bring together children of war who have seized
the opportunities available to them and who have made
a great success of their lives. They will speak to the
United Nations community of their experiences. Theirs
is the story of hope and the triumph of the human will.
It is their life story that tells us that, if we are
committed to the protection of children in those
conflict zones, we can help them to rebuild their lives

and to become outstanding citizens. The human spirit,
especially in children, is resilient. It is important that
we build on that resilience and give them all the
necessary support and protection.

