Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report submitted to the Council (S/2017/437). I would
also like to thank my friend the Assistant Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Wane, for
his briefing. He knows that we have long worked since
2004 in Aboja to consolidate peace and security in
Darfur.

Allow me to extend my sympathies to the people
and the Government of Nigeria in the light of the
killing of a Nigerian peacekeeper in Darfur. I offer my
condolences to his family.

Many reports of the Secretary-General on
Darfur - notably his most recent report of 18 May on the
strategic review of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), in addition
to reports issued by other United Nations entities
concerning the situation in Darfur, have affirmed
and noted the significant progress made in Darfur in
all areas, especially the security and humanitarian
situation following the efforts of the Government of
the Sudan to secure the five states of Darfur. This
has positively affected security and stability. We have
long pursued such positive, encouraging and natural
progress.

On 20 May, the Sudanese Liberation Army/Minni
Minawi from Libya and the Justice and Equality
Movement tried to infiltrate our borders from South
Sudan in a failed attempt to drag us back into war.
Therefore, the cooperation of neighbouring countries,
given the successful joint experience of the Sudan,
Chad and the Central African Republic in protecting
our shared borders and preventing armed groups from
infiltrating, is the only way to end the unrest that has
become part of our painful past. I note that the report
of the Panel of Experts appointed by the Council, which
was reviewed by the Council in February, as well as
the report presented today, reach the same conclusion
that the Justice and Equality Movement and Sudanese
Liberation Army/Minni Minawi have been conducting
mercenary activities, including banditry and human
trafficking, to finance their activities.

On the other hand, all recent reports note the
efforts and role of the Government to counter crime
and banditry in Darfur. We have made significant
progress in that regard. Further efforts are still being
made to promote security and judicial oversight with a
View to limiting the phenomenon and establishing State
authority. The Government of the Sudan has deployed
additional police personnel, with 29,314 officers now
deployed across the municipalities of the states of
Darfur. The Ministry of Justice has also implemented
a plan to appoint district attorneys in each of Darfur's
municipalities as a way of promoting the rule of law and
justice in urban and rural areas of the state, in addition
to achieving the principle of zero impunity and an
increase in the number of offices providing specialized
and general legal assistance.

Council members are aware that the main reason
for insecurity, criminality and tribal violance in Darfur
is the proliferation of weapons among civilians. The
Government has announced a plan to collect weapons
and limit their use to uniformed troops. Initiatives
to drive weapons-collection and non-proliferation
efforts obviously require large financial resources and
qualified and adequate personnel. We therefore expect
the donor States and the United Nations specialized
agencies to provide financial and technical assistance
to the Sudan so that sustained peace and security may
be achieved.
My delegation welcomes the recommendations
made by the recent meeting of the joint working group,
which were adopted by the Tripartite Coordination
Mechanism at the leadership-level meeting on 22 May,
which stipulate that UNAMID should withdraw from
14 regions in the state of Darfur. We welcome the
recommendations of the report of the strategic review
working group included in the joint report by the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission and the
Secretary-General, which stipulate that UNAMID's
military component should be drawn down by 44 per
cent, although we had hoped that the recommendations
would stipulate withdrawal from all areas on which
the joint working group has reached a concensus. In
that regard, we hope that the Council will adopt these
recommendations unanimously so that the competent
authorities can start the gradual drawdown and transfer
the tasks that were conducted by UNAMID to the
United Nations the country team in the Sudan.

My delegation wishes to underscore that the
Government of the Sudan is fully ready to continue
cooperating and positively engaging with UNAMID,
the African Union, the United Nations and all other
regional and international partners in order for the
Mission to be able to fully discharge its duties,
complete its departure in a smooth, phased and gradual
manner that could be a model for the drawdown of other
peacekeeping missions, and save financial resources
for preventive diplomacy and sustaining peace and
achieving comprehensive development.

We look forward to starting a new, serious phase,
which makes it incumbent upon us politically and
logistically to reconsider the sanctions that were
imposed on the Sudan 12 years ago, in 2005, pursuant
to resolution 1591 (2005), in clear recognition of the
situation on the ground in the country today. This is
an inevitable step. We are open to the ideas that the
Security Council and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations could put forward on this matter.

The humanitarian situation in Darfur remains of
interest to the Government of the Sudan, despite the
fact that increasing numbers of internally displaced
persons are voluntarily returning to their villages. Some
internally displaced persons camps are now no longer
needed, thanks to the current excellent situation of peace
and security, given that efforts made by peace partners
in Darfur to build villages for voluntary return, where
all basic services for citizens are available. Moreover,
security has been restored in the home villages of the
internally displaced persons.
All this makes it all the more necessary to pursue
domesticandinternationaleffortstoencouragevoluntary
return. On top of that, the Government of the Sudan has
put forward a plan to address the situation, comprising
three options. The first option consists of internally
displaced persons simply returning voluntarily to
their villages. The second involves integrating camps
for internally displaced persons into nearby cities and
doing the requisite planning to provide them with basic
services. Under the third option, internally displaced
persons will be able to choose an area to relocate that is
not their place of origin. Each of these options requires
financial resources. The assistance of the international
community is therefore needed. We commend the
support that has been provided by the State of Qatar,
which sponsored the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur and has financed many development projects
that have enabled us to achieve security and stability.
Other friendly countries, such as China, Japan and
Turkey, inter alia, have also offered their support within
the framework of the Doha Document.

As noted in the report, the most important priority
for the United Nations is the return of internally
displaced persons and access to the affected enclaves
by the remainder of Abdel Wahid's troops in some
areas of Western Marah Mountain, since we have
managed to preserve the Vision of the Government of
the Sudan arising from provisions contained in the
Doha Document. However, accuracy is essential when
counting the number of internally displaced persons in
Darfur. We have counted some 1.8 million internally
displaced persons, while the figure set by UNAMID
stands at 2.7 million.

With regard to access, we reiterate the assertation
made in the October joint report of the Government
of the Sudan and the United Nations agencies that
there is no problem in access. This jibes with the
assertion in the report before us that there has been
significant improvement in access to the populations
of the affected areas. We recall the statement made
by the Commissioner for Humanitarian Affairs of the
Government of the Sudan's to the effect that access to
92 per cent ofthe regions ofDarfur is accessible through
simple notification, which means that there is no need
for Government authorization. We maintain our call
for information on internally displaced persons to be
issued by a single body comprised of the Government
of the Sudan, the Office of the Special Representative
of the United Nations and the African Union.

We thank UNAMID for its efforts in all areas and
peacekeepers for their sacrifices of recent years. We
also thank the troop- and police-contributing countries
and reiterate our readiness to cooperate with all regional
and international partners in all matters related to
UNAMID until its last contingent leaves the country
and full and sustainable peace has been achieved.

