Mr. Mannan (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to join preceding speakers in
congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. We
are fully confident that your patience and wisdom will
ensure the success of the Council's work. I should also
like to congratulate Mr. Alvaro de Soto on his
appointment as Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process and Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General and to thank him for his lucid and
comprehensive briefing this morning.

The question of Palestine is truly at the centre of
the world's attention and at the core of the conflict in
the Middle East. The deterioration of the humanitarian
situation in that important part of the world is one of
the greatest challenges for the Security Council in
carrying out its responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security.

Notwithstanding the outcome of the February
2005 Sharm el-Sheikh summit, the situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem, continues to deteriorate in a harrowing
manner. The steadfast Palestinian people continue to
bear the brunt of Israel's unjust policies and practices.
Houses are being demolished over the heads of their
occupants, land is being confiscated, and unarmed
young people, elderly people, women and children
continue to be killed.

Even more grave is the fact that Israel continues
to build its illegal wall on usurped Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem. Israel carries out its unjust
aggression by demolishing buildings and confiscating
land for that purpose, in clear contravention and
violation of international law, humanitarian law and
conventions on human rights. Israel also persists in its
disregard and contempt for General Assembly
resolution ES-10/15 and for the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice concerning the wall.

The Court's advisory opinion on the wall of

injustice is now more than a year old. Its pages remain
open and in full view for the whole world to read if it
so wishes. The Court declared the wall to be illegal and
called upon Israel to desist forthwith from its
construction, to dismantle the sections already built, to
abrogate all laws pertaining to the wall's construction
and to make reparation for all damage resulting from
that construction. The Court also ruled that all States
are under an obligation not to recognize the illegal
situation resulting from the wall's construction and to
ensure compliance by Israel with international
humanitarian law as embodied in the Fourth Geneva
Convention.

Israel's withdrawal from the Gaza Strip must be a
genuine and complete withdrawal - that is, from land,
sea and air space. It must be followed by Israel's full
withdrawal from the rest of the occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem. That in turn must
be followed immediately by the commencement of
final-status negotiations with a view to the
establishment of an independent Palestinian State with
Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital.

In conclusion, I should like to reaffirm the
Sudan's complete solidarity with the Palestinian people
and our support for them in their cause, whose justness
has been recognized by the international community as
a whole. We call upon the Security Council to adopt a
firm position to compel Israel to comply with the
Charter of the United Nations, international law,
international humanitarian law, the relevant resolutions
of the General Assembly and the Security Council and
the advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice so that security and stability can prevail in this
important and vital part of the world, whose stability
forms the basis for peace, security and stability
throughout the rest of the world.

