Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I thank Mr. Farid Zarif,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), for his briefing. We
are also grateful to His Excellency Mr. Ivica Dacie,
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, and His Excellency
Deputy Prime Minister Hashim Thaci of Kosovo, for
their statements.

Malaysia joins other countries in welcoming
the positive developments in Kosovo following the
formation of a new Government in December 2014.
Malaysia is pleased in particular with the resumption
of the high-level dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina, facilitated by the European Union (EU). We
welcome the new level of cooperation between the
Prime Ministers of Serbia and Kosovo, as evidenced
by their first meeting, on 9 February in Brussels, since
they took office last year. The meeting proved fruitful
as both sides reached an agreement on the integration
of the judiciary in northern Kosovo into the Kosovo
judicial system. This represents another milestone in
implementing the 2013 Brussels Agrement to normalize
relations between Belgrade and Pristina. We hope to
see continuing dialogue and sustained momentum in
implementing the rest of the 15-point agreement. We
welcome the commitment shown by both sides to that
aim, as reflected in their statements today.

Malaysia takes note of the overall stable security
situation in Kosovo during the reporting period. Ijoin my
colleagues in reaffirming support for UNMIK, which
plays a key role in promoting security, stability and
respect for human rights in Kosovo. We also commend
the role of the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo in further strengthening the rule of law and
the judicial institutions in Kosovo. In that regard, we
welcome the steps taken by the Kosovo authorities to
establish a specialist court to try cases arising from the
findings of the EU Special Investigative Task Force.
We echo the call of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
in his report (S/2015/303) for the Kosovo authorities
to redouble their efforts towards that aim. We believe
that progress in establishing the specialist court to try
possible war crimes and crimes against humanity will
be crucial to bringing reconciliation and closure to the
communities of Kosovo. Malaysia also welcomes the
adoption of a law by the Assembly of Kosovo in March
to curtail the recruitment of terrorist fighters from
Kosovo to conflicts abroad.

We have heard from Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Zarif today about the political
and socioeconomic challenges faced by Kosovars. We
concur that there is a need for the new Government to
embark on comprehensive political and socioeconomic
reforms to improve the living standards of the people.

Malaysia is concerned about the eruptions of
violence in Pristina during the reporting period, which
reflected the fragility of inter-ethnic relations. We urge
all parties to refrain from violence and inflammatory
rhetoric that could further escalate tensions between
ethnic groups. We strongly condemn any attempt to
spread hatred and instigate inter-religious violence,
including by descrating cultural and religious sites. As
a multi-racial and multi-religious country, Malaysia
believes in the creation of a common space for all and
in the values of moderation in countering extremism
and ensuring mutual respect, acceptance, compromise
and understanding among various ethnic and religious
groups. We urge all parties in Kosovo to intensify their
efforts towards reconciliation, inclusive democracy and
development, as well as respect for human rights and
the rule of law, and to create the institutions necessary
to nation-building. We remain committed to supporting
Kosovo towards that end.

