Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): We became
aware only this morning of your seven-minute time
limit, Mr. President, but we have made every effort to
shorten our speech; a fuller version will be distributed
to members of the Council.

We View this meeting in conjunction with the
high-level meeting of the members of the Council of
one month ago and, of course, against the background
of the declaration adopted on that occasion, annexed to
resolution 1456 (2003). That declaration calls on all
States to take urgent action to prevent and suppress all
active and passive support for terrorism, and to comply
fully with the relevant resolutions of the Council, in
particular resolution 1373 (2001). We agree with the
Council that efforts at the national level have to be
redoubled. We also believe that such efforts have to
build on global leadership, as provided by the Security
Council and especially by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC).

The declaration annexed to resolution 1456
(2003) also states that the CTC must intensify its
efforts to promote the implementation by Member
States of all aspects of resolution 1373 (2001). After
almost a year and a half of effective and transparent
work under the most able guidance of Ambassador Sir
Jeremy Greenstock, the CTC today finds itself at a
crucial juncture. The vast majority of States have
cooperated with the Committee in its endeavour to
monitor the adoption of legislation covering all aspects
of the resolution, and to monitor national efforts in
preventing and suppressing the financing of terrorist
acts. Liechtenstein, by way of example, has already
submitted its third written report to the Committee,
thereby proving its commitment to a serious dialogue
with the CTC and its experts. As a further expression
of its willingness to contribute to the international fight
against terrorism, the Government has submitted to
Parliament a legislation package on countering
terrorism, which will be discussed shortly. That
package includes important amendments to the
criminal code and will lead to the ratification of the last
outstanding relevant international convention, the
International Convention for the Suppression of the
Financing of Terrorism.

It is clear that the CTC has been very successful
in helping States identify gaps and shortcomings in
their national legislation, thereby contributing to the
visibility and acceptance of global standards on
combating terrorism. The further the CTC goes in that
way, however, the more pressing the question of the
actual implementation of those standards becomes.
Combating terrorism does not end, of course, with the
universal ratification of all relevant conventions.
Legislation is a necessary tool, but it can never be
sufficient in itself. Therefore, the CTC must address
the issue of compliance enhancement, in order to
ensure a lowest common denominator of application,
and, to that end, it must identify benchmarks that all
States must meet.

Transparency has been an important feature of the
work of the CTC in the past and a crucial element of its
success. Consistent with that approach, the Committee
should therefore establish guidelines based on the
principle of equal treatment of all Member States,
which provide for a gradual and phased approach in
ensuring compliance. Such guidelines should also draw
from the experience of other international and regional
bodies active in the area. The forthcoming special CTC
meeting, on 7 March, with representatives of
international, regional and subregional organizations
will be an ideal occasion to exchange ideas and benefit
from the experience of others with regard to best
practices.

Liechtenstein stands ready to make its
contribution to such compliance-enhancement efforts
with our expertise in relevant areas. We would be
pleased to see the CTC further strengthen its role in the
United Nations system through the innovative and
dedicated work which thus far has granted the CTC
such an outstanding position in the fight against
terrorism.
The Security Council has declared that States
must ensure that any measure taken to combat
terrorism must comply with all their obligations under
international law, in particular human rights and
humanitarian law. The relationship between the fight
against terrorism and the observance of human rights
standards remains a high priority for us, and I wish to
reiterate our conviction that human rights must never
fall victim to the fight against terrorism. Since the
Council last met in an open format in October, the
General Assembly has pronounced itself on this very
matter by unanimously adopting its resolution 57/219,
on protecting human rights and fundamental freedoms
while countering terrorism.

That text was drafted under the able leadership of
the Mexican delegation, and we were very happy to
sponsor that important resolution. The resolution
recalls that certain human rights are recognized as non-
derogable under any circumstances and that measures
derogating from other rights must be exceptional and
temporary in nature. It also gives an important role to
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, who has already made a very important
contribution in his presentation to the CTC and also
through his strong overall commitment to this cause.

The balance that needs to be struck between the
enjoyment of human rights and security concerns is
certainly difficult to assess in each individual case and
is all the more delicate when it comes to dangers of
unprecedented magnitude. Nevertheless, it must be
borne in mind that there are existing legal standards
that address this dilemma and that there is even
extensive legal practice on questions of the protection
of human rights in times of terrorism.

As the recent past has made very clear, the United
Nations plays a unique role in upholding the rule of
law and in providing legitimacy to action taken with
regard to situations that threaten international peace
and security. Given the potential and actual dangers the
fight against terrorism poses to established human
rights, this Organization is called upon once again to
live up to its role in upholding the rule of law in this
common fight.

