Mr. Gasso Matoses (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank Mr. Farid Zarif, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his briefing
on the latest quarterly report of the Secretary-General
(S/2015/579) on the implementation of the mandate of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), as well as to join my colleagues in
taking this opportunity to express our gratitude to him
for all his efforts over the past few years as Head of
UNMIK, and to wish him all the best with his duties
in future. I would also like to thank the First Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Serbia, Mr. Ivica Dacie, and Mr. Hashim Thaci for their
statements.

During the previous debate on this subject, in
May (see S/PV.7448), Spain expressed its support
for a specialist court and called for its establishment
as soon as possible. We would therefore like to
congratulate those involved on passing the necessary
legal amendments so that the court can be set up and
undertake its functions. Now that that is in place, it is
vital that the Kosovo authorities demonstrate that their
commitment to the principles of accountability, the
rule of law, reconciliation and peaceful coexistence for
every community in Kosovo is a reality.

In that previous debate my delegation also expressed
our concern about the violent events we had witnessed
that same month, just before our meeting, and the
possible negative effects they might have in Kosovo.
In that regard, we noted with concern the details in the
report at the time (S/2015/303) about the involvement of
people with public responsibilities and representatives
ofpolitical parties in ways that at the least supported the
actions of others in those violent events. The authorities
and political parties in Pristina must demonstrate by
their actions that they have the political will to support
peaceful coexistence between communities and an
ongoing commitment to reconciliation and stability in
the region.

We have noted with satisfaction the continuing
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina facilitated by
the High Representative of the European Union, and
the progress that has been made in recent months.
However, it is essential that we continue to make
further and more robust headway in implementing the
agreements that have now been reached. In that regard,
the Security Council has made specific and repeated
calls for the effective establishment and launch of an
association of Serb municipalities. That is critical, and
Spain once again reiterates its call for that to be done.

Fulfilling that commitment is the cornerstone for
assessing the seriousness and political will ofthe various
stakeholders and the progress that has been made, all of
which has an unquestionable reflection on the current
security and stability situation in Kosovo. We welcome
the information in the Secretary-General's most recent
report on the fact that the situation is generally stable
across the board. However, we are concerned about the
fact that this claim contrasts with citations of a number
of situations that make it clear that this stability is still
fragile. In that context, we take a very positive view
of the significant role that UNMIK still has to play,
particularly through the concrete steps it has taken
to promote peaceful coexistence and reconciliation in
Kosovo. Spain therefore urges all the political actors
involved to continue to collaborate and cooperate with
UNMIK in that role.

I would like to conclude by reiterating that Spain
will continue its constructive support without prejudice
to its position of principle, and we hope that Kosovo's
regional and international stakeholders will do so too.

