Mr. Requeijo Gual (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I should like to express to you,
Mr. President, the satisfaction of the Cuban delegation
at your presence at today's Security Council meeting
and to join all those who have congratulated the
Argentine Republic on assuming the Council
presidency for this month.

Haiti, cradle of the liberation struggles against
colonialism in America and the first independent black
republic in the Western Hemisphere, is today a country
passed by and forgotten by the international
community. It suffers because of its poverty; it endures
chronic and structural underdevelopment; and it is
submerged in violence and the permanent political
crises not unfamiliar to foreign interests and the
continued interventionism that has characterized its
turbulent republican history. It is crumbling because of
the devastating effects of successive natural disasters
and the ecological damage to its deteriorated
environment. The year 2004 was particularly tragic for
the brotherly Haitian people.

Cuba, which feels united in its history and culture
with the destiny of the Haitian people, continues to
observe the developments in Haiti attentively and with
concern. Our country, which has made supportive and
unconditional cooperation a pillar of its relations with
the Haitian people, believes that a massive contribution
of financial and human resources to the economic and
social rehabilitation and national reconciliation of that
brotherly people is an inescapable duty of the
international community.

Haiti is undoubtedly one of the clearest examples
of the disastrous consequences of the current
international order for underdeveloped countries,
particularly in the case of a country that has had to
endure more than 200 years of the most flagrant
colonialism, exploitation and intervention.

My country supports all the efforts of the Haitian
people to overcome existing tensions and to move
forward a process of dialogue and national
reconciliation, as well as the efforts of the Caribbean
Community to find a peaceful and just solution to the
Haitian situation. Such a solution will be possible only
with the promotion of the economic and social
development of the country and the development of its
human resources and infrastructure. It is essential that
the international community and international
institutions increase their contributions and their
permanent commitment to this Caribbean country. We
hope that the United Nations and the international
community as a whole will unite their efforts to attain
that objective and that the pledges made at the
international donor conference will materialize.

The members of the Council also must work to
guarantee that we attain that objective. To focus
exclusively on the so-called security problems in Haiti,
without considering the fact that only development and
progress will lead to peace and stability in that
suffering Caribbean nation, would be a short-sighted
and unrealistic view that would soon lead to failure. It
is only through solidarity that the international
community's duty and commitment to the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of Haiti
will fully materialize.

The uninterrupted cooperation that Cuba has
maintained with Haiti for years shows how much can
be achieved for that country through cooperation and
development assistance. Cuba is cooperating with Haiti
in various sectors, placing top priority on the health
care sector. In more than five years of medical
cooperation, 1,909 Cuban health care specialists have
worked in Haiti. Their work has made it possible to
hold nearly 6 million consultations. They have
administered 756,000 vaccinations, assisted with
52,000 births and performed 75,000 surgical
interventions. All those actions have enabled us to save
more than 120,000 human lives.

Despite the critical situation in that country,
Cuban volunteers, resolutely adhering to the principle
of non-interference in Haitian internal affairs, have
remained at their posts. Our medical brigade in
particular, composed of 492 health-care workers and
posted throughout the country's 10 departments, has
been an example of disinterested cooperation, saving
lives in the most difficult conditions.

Cuban cooperation with Haiti goes beyond direct
medical assistance. It includes continuous training
aimed at capacity-building in the short and medium
term. More than 3,000 persons have participated in
those programmes, and today there 889 Haitian
students in Cuba, 606 of whom are attending our Latin
American School of Medicine.

We wish to reiterate once again the firm resolve
of the people and the Government of Cuba to continue
to contribute, with all the means at our disposal, to
achieving a peaceful, just and lasting solution to the
situation in Haiti.

