Mr. Gonzalez de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I thank you, Madam President, for convening
today's open meeting of the Security Council on the
issue of Yemen. It has been some time since we last
had an opportunity to address this crisis in the Council,
and with today's briefing we have avoided the trap
of overlooking and neglecting the grave situation
in that country. I thank the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Yemen, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the Assistant
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy
Emergency Relief Coordinator for their briefings.

The magnitude of the humanitarian catastrophe
in Yemen is highly alarming. Before March, half of
Yemen's population lived below the poverty threshold.
We can only imagine what the situation is like now. In
August, the President ofthe International Committee of
the Red Cross, Peter Maurer, visited Yemen, and upon
his return stated that Yemen, after five months, looks
like Syria after five years. Today, 14.5 million people
in Yemen are living in food insecurity, and we have
all seen the shocking photos in the media of children
suffering from malnutrition. We know what that will
mean over the coming years. Even if the war in Yemen
were to come to an end today, the future of the next
generation has already been jeopardized. Given the
situation, I would like to focus on three points

The first is the absolute and pressing need for
a ceasefire. The objective today must be for parties
to agree to a ceasefire, which must be put in place
immediately and be effective and, if at all possible,
permanent. We believe that a ceasefire is needed to
foster trust and allow negotiations to be resumed in
good faith. The war in Yemen has taught us that a
military solution is not a viable option. The progress
that we have seen on the ground over the past few
months is irregular and cannot be consolidated easily
from a military perspective, especially in a country like
Yemen, which has a plethora of militias with shifting
loyalties and terrorist groups, some of which are
extremely dangerous. It involves not only finding the
right humanitarian approach but also being pragmatic
in seeking a solution that is not military and that must
be embraced by all sides.

The second point that I wish to make is the need to
respect international humanitarian law. It is absolutely
essential that the core elements of international
humanitarian law be upheld at all times as hostilities
continue. Last week's ceasefire, despite its limitations,
was nonetheless very useful for humanitarian agencies
and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) in many
areas of the country. We also have positive information
from the past few months, as noted by Assistant
Secretary-General Kang in her briefing, about the
delivery of goods into the country, including fuel,
without which no basic services can be provided. But it
is clear that there are severe shortages, and we are still
a long way from a situation that could be considered
acceptable. The entry of goods into the country must be
stabilized and all ports along the Red Sea must be made
operational. We also recall yet again the importance of

preventing attacks on schools, hospitals, other health
infrastructures and, of course, medical staff.

The third point concerns the role of the region.
The war in Yemen is very closely linked to regional
dynamics. Throughout 2015, we have seen considerable
headway made in reducing tension in certain conflicts
in the Middle East. In July, we reached a historic
agreement on Iran's nuclear dossier. Last week, we
unanimously adopted resolution 2254 (2015), aimed
at laying the foundation for negotiations in Syria with
a clear and well-drafted road map. We need that same
strength and spirit of consensus with regard to Yemen.
We therefore call on all countries of the region to
exercise their influence upon the parties to that end.

We wish to express our support for the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, Ismail
Ould Cheikh Ahmed, whose skill, level-headedness
and discretion have enabled him to persuade the parties
to sit at the negotiating table and to extract from them
a promise to return to negotiations in January 2016. We
also commend the Secretary-General for the key role
he plays in keeping a watchful eye on the situation in
Yemen. He has become personally involved in the quest
for a solution to that crisis.

I wish to conclude by extending our profound
gratitude to all the humanitarian workers and staff of the
United Nations agencies, the International Committee
of the Red Cross and NGOs such as Medecins Sans
Frontieres, who have continued their work on the
ground in Yemen, who risk their lives every day to
mitigate the impact of this humanitarian catastrophe.

