Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I too should like to thank
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), for presenting her ninth report
on Libya to the Security Council. Since her last briefing
to the Council, in November 2014 (see S/PV.7306), the
political and security situation in Libya has continued
to deteriorate. Malaysia remains deeply concerned at
these developments.

The current, unstable situation in Libya has
proven to be a breeding ground for more crimes to be
committed every day by various militias and armed
groups in the country, in particular groups that have
pledges allegiance to the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham/Da'esh. Over the past few months, we have seen
brutal executions of civilians, unrestrained attacks
on public installations and indiscriminate bombings
of heavily populated areas, all of which have led to
senseless civilian casualties. At the same time, the
Prosecutor's report also pointed out the ongoing
abductions, unlawful detention, torture and execution
of combatants and civilians alike.

The perpetrators of these grave atrocities must be
held accountable. The culture of impunity, if allowed
to prevail any further, would only mean the loss of
further innocent life. Those who are fortunate enough
to escape the ill fate have fled and will continue to flee
their homes, resulting in mass displacement. Malaysia
is particularly alarmed by the total number of displaced
persons recorded by the end of December 2014, which
was reported to have increased eight-fold compared
to before the 2014 crisis. We were equally dismayed
to learn of the increasing number of migrants who
have perished trying to cross the Mediterranean in the
attempt to escape the conflicts in their home countries.

Malaysia is of the view that the efforts of the
Libyan authorities to demonstrate compliance with
the relevant Security Council resolutions would go
a long way towards building trust and confidence in
their commitment to holding to account individuals and
parties responsible for grave violations of international
human rights law and international humanitarian law.

Moving forward, we acknowledge that the ability of
the Libyan Government to continue its cooperation, as
well as the level and effectiveness of such cooperation,
will depend largely on the stability of Libya. Towards
that end, Malaysia reaffirms its commitment to
assisting and cooperating with all interested parties
and stakeholders in effecting improvements to the
current situation in Libya through the Security
Council. Malaysia takes this opportunity to reaffirm
its full support for the ongoing efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in promoting
an inclusive political process with all relevant parties
in Libya.

