Mr. Doubane (Central African Republic): As this
is the second time that I am taking the floor this June
to address the Council, allow me, Mr. President, to
commend you for the outstanding manner in which you
are guiding the work of the Council.

The presentation of the report (S/2012/421) of
the Secretary-General on the activities of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA)
and on areas affected by the Lord's Resistance
Army provides the delegation of the Central African
Republic, of which I am the head, a further opportunity
to first commend the Secretary-General for his clear
and concise depiction of the situation in Central Africa,
and, secondly, to thank his Special Representative,
Mr. Abou Moussa, for the dedicated manner in which
he is leading his mission in the subregion. I would like
also to convey my gratitude to Mr. Francisco Madeira,
Special Envoy of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission on Lord's Resistance Army issues, who
is also working tirelessly to eradicate the scourge of
the LRA in those countries that are the Victims of
the atrocities perpetrated by that group of bandits
and criminals. Finally, I should like to congratulate
Mr. Guelengdouksia Ouaidou on his election to the post
of Secretary-General of the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS), which is a subregional
partner.

The Central African Republic is addressing the
Council today so as to convey a message in its capacity
as, first, a country that is a victim of the LRA; secondly,
as a fragile country of the subregion that is racked by
increasing insecurity; and, thirdly, as a member of
the international community, in order to mobilize that
community to pay closer attention to the situation that
prevails there.

Since 2008 the LRA has been killing, robbing
and plundering, and recruiting women, children and
men in the east, south-east and north-east parts of my
country, the Central African Republic. We would recall
once again that we share no border with Uganda, nor
do we share any common history with that brotherly
State. The people of the Central African Republic
therefore continue to wonder what the real motives
for that aggression are. By way of illustration, in the
year 2012 alone the LRA has carried out 20 attacks,
and its actions have resulted in numerous deaths and
abductions, displaced 20,400 people and left in their
wake 5,000 refugees and 3,000 children kept out
of school - all of which is taking place against the
backdrop of a shredded socio-economic fabric.

That impoverished area, where life is precarious, is
profoundly destabilized, which further complicates the
delivery of assistance and other humanitarian efforts
intended for the benefit of the victims and the local host
populations. Today the greatest hope of these weary
people is to see this scourge ended once and for all, so
that peace - the prerequisite for development - can
return once and for all.

Mr. Kony and his band of barbarians must be
neutralized. They must be arrested and tried for their
countless unspeakable crimes perpetrated against
peaceful citizens. That will lead to the release of our
children, allowing them to return home to their families,
schools and games.

Allow me to take this opportunity to respond to the
many letters that we have received from schoolchildren
worldwide drawing the attention of the Government of
the Central African Republic to the alarming issue of
children abducted in conflict areas, in particular by the
LRA. Here and now, we reiterate to them - and in doing
so support the position of Germany - that we have heard
them, that the situation is being duly addressed and
that we will spare no effort in order to ensure that our
Government, international organizations - the United
Nations in particular - UNICEF and the International
Committee of the Red Cross work together to resolve
this issue. Let me say it once again: children belong
with their families, in school or on the playground.

In that way women, the pillars of our society, freed
from the yoke of the sexual servitude to which they
have been condemned, will also be able to rejoin their
families.
On the basis of those aspirations, the highest
authorities of my country are sparing no effort to end
this harsh rebellion, workingjointly and in a coordinated
manner with the defence and security forces of the
subregion.

Here we wish, on behalf of all the people of the
Central African Republic, to express our gratitude for
the efforts made by the United Nations, the African
Union, ECCAS, the European Union, France and the
United States Government, whose military advisers are
actively working side by side with us on the ground. We
wish also to thank the agencies of the United Nations
system and the non-governmental organizations, both
national and international, which every day are working
for the benefit of the local populations, displaced
persons, refugees and other victims.

In this struggling subregion, in a world that is
fraught with many dangers, closer attention should be
paid to this part of Africa, which is shaped like a gun,
with the trigger, unfortunately, at the very heart of the
continent. Supporting the peace process and helping to
stabilize the countries of the subregion is like taking
out life insurance for the stability of our continent;
supporting the efforts of the subregion is to lay the
foundations for holistic and long-lasting development.

The LRA is a terrorist movement. It is the perpetrator
of trans-border crimes. It impedes development, and for
all of those reasons it must be combated. Mr. Kony and
his men are vile criminals, and there can be no tolerance
for them. We therefore call with all our hearts for the
mobilization of the international community as a whole
so as to put an end to this mockery, which is an affront
to our civilized world.

Central Africa, and my country in particular, aspires
to and desires peace so to enable our development. The
Council's commitment to stand by our side is all the
more necessary as it is in keeping with the aspirations
and objectives of our Organization.

