Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): I have not been
present in this Chamber throughout the debate that
began this morning, but I have been watching and
listening to all the speeches on television in my office.
Having listened to the speeches all day long, I believe
that a very strong message has clearly come through
the debate and the discussion today. The strong
message is that the international community is deeply
concerned about the situation in the region, and that
we, the members of the Security Council, cannot and
should not underestimate the gravity of the situation
that we are facing.

Since the adoption of resolution 1402 (2002) in
the early hours of 30 March - it is barely five days old
now - the situation on the ground in the Middle East
has not improved. The parties have not moved
anywhere near to a meaningful ceasefire. Israeli troops
have not been withdrawn from Palestinian cities,
including Ramallah. While the United States Special
Envoy, Anthony Zinni, and others, including members
of the "quartet", continue to be engaged on the ground,
acts of violence continue, including acts of terror,
provocation and incitement. There have also been
worrying developments along the Blue Line - a
situation which bears careful watching.

The parties are, to quote the Secretary-General,
who briefed the Council members on Monday, "locked
into the logic of war". In mentioning the Secretary-
General, I think that it is important for us to recognize
that he has shown unusual leadership in telling the
Security Council that it cannot ignore the situation
there.

The consequences of being locked into that logic
of war is that the region, which is already poised at the
edge of an abyss, might tip over into it - although
some, of course, say that we have already fallen into it.
We might find the parties free-falling in that abyss, the
depth of which is not yet known. The international
community, including the Security Council, has been
toiling for months to find ways and means of
preventing the parties from tumbling into the abyss.
Resolutions 1397 (2002) and 1402 (2002) are two
lifelines that have been extended in good faith to both
parties for them to use to extract themselves from the
lose-lose situation in which they find themselves today.
They should be read together; resolution 1397 (2002)
provides the long-term vision - indeed, a clear long-
term vision - while resolution 1402 (2002) lays down
the immediate steps required.

However, at the end of the day, it will be up to the
parties to decide whether they will reach out for the
lifelines to pull themselves out of the abyss, and find a
win-win solution. But that can be done only on the
basis of a negotiated political settlement.

The focus of today's meeting is therefore to see
how those two resolutions - 1397 (2002) and 1402
(2002) - can be implemented. We listened carefully to
the views expressed earlier by non-members of the
Council. As for the Security Council, as a first step, the
Council presidency issued two press statements - one
of them on Monday, 1 April 2002 - demanding the
immediate implementation of those resolutions. As it is
ultimately the responsibility of the parties to implement
Security Council resolutions, the Council presidency
was tasked to meet with the parties to convey the
demand directly. That task was promptly carried out by
you, Mr. President.

In addition, the Security Council met separately
with the Permanent Representative of Israel and with
the Permanent Observer of Palestine in private
meetings yesterday, during which Council members
made it abundantly clear that resolutions 1397 (2002)
and 1402 (2002) offer the best instrument for the
parties to get out of the rut that they are in today.
Indeed, I might add that in some ways it may have been
unfortunate that non-members were not present to
listen to the discussions that we had yesterday in this
Chamber, because, truly, we had remarkably frank and
candid discussions. It is our hope that both parties
listened carefully to what was said to them in the
private meetings here, barely 24 hours ago. All of us
stressed that the actions required by paragraph 1 of
resolution 1402 (2002) are not sequential, and have to
be implemented immediately.

With that in mind, we would like to remind the
parties that, under Article 25 of the United Nations
Charter, Members of the United Nations agreed to
accept and carry out decisions of the Security Council.
That Article makes no distinction between decisions
adopted under Chapter VI and Chapter VII of the
Charter. We hope that these cumulative steps will make
it clear that the Council expects full and immediate
compliance with the resolutions by the parties. If the
parties need external help, members of the "quartet"
and other international mediators, and certainly the
good offices of the Secretary-General, stand ready,
either individually or collectively, to facilitate the
implementation.

Indeed, as we know, there is no lack of mediators
or of political initiatives, the most significant of which
is the Arab peace initiative adopted recently at the
Summit meeting of the League of Arab States in
Beirut. At this stage, what we need to do is to
consolidate these various initiatives and go back to
familiar ground, such as the Oslo peace agreement, the
more recent negotiations at Camp David in 2000 and
the subsequent discussions in Taba, as well as the Tenet
work plan and the Mitchell report.

In each of those agreements, Yasser Arafat, a
recipient of the Nobel Peace Prize together with the
late Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin and the elected
leader of the Palestinian people, has been a pivotal
player. Steps should be taken to allow him to take the
measures requested of him by the Security Council.
Clearly, leadership is required on both sides. In order to
bring the Middle East back to the path of peace, one
side should not be prevented from exercising its
leadership.

