Mr. Onodera (Japan): It is my honour,
Mr. Minister, to participate in today's open debate in
the Security Council under your presidency. The fact
that you are presiding over the debate demonstrates the
importance that your country attaches to this issue.
Unfortunately, my Foreign Minister could not come to
New York at this time, as you requested, but has
instructed me to join the debate on his behalf.

I wish to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Children and Armed
Conflict, Mr. Olara Otunnu, for presenting the
Secretary-General's report.

It is encouraging that the international
community is paying greater attention to the suffering
of children caught in armed conflict. This has resulted
in achieving positive developments in some situations,
yet the stark fact remains that in numerous cases
children are still facing dire conditions. This is
unacceptable, and the international community needs
to take more vigorous action to improve this
unconscionable situation.

However, to be effective in our action, we first
need to have a clearer grasp of what the reality is. As
the Secretary-General's report shows, we have only
limited information on the actual situations concerning
the recruitment and use of children for soldiers, as well
as other violations committed against children. Access
allowed to aid workers is often limited in conflict
situations. Communication with the outside world is
also difficult, as vital infrastructure is often destroyed.
Also, armed groups keep their activities secret. All
these factors make the gathering and assessment of
information extremely difficult.

That is why Security Council resolution 1539
(2004) requested the Secretary-General to devise an
action plan for a systematic and comprehensive
monitoring and reporting mechanism in order to
provide timely, objective, accurate and reliable
information on the recruitment and use of child
soldiers. My Government welcomes the Secretary-
General's action plan set out in his report and extends
its support to the establishment of a monitoring and
reporting mechanism. At the same time, my country
believes that it is important to take the following points
into account upon setting up such a mechanism.

First, a collaborative and coordinated approach
will be needed for such a mechanism to function
effectively. As stated in the Secretary-General's report,
there are many bodies and actors that possess relevant
information, ranging from United Nations entities -
such as peacekeeping missions, UNICEF, the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights- to national Governments, local authorities
and local and international non-governmental
organizations operating on the ground. Therefore, the
focal point of a monitoring and reporting mechanism
should ensure collaboration and coordination, utilizing
the resource base and the expertise of all these bodies
and actors concerned.

Secondly, such a mechanism will need to ensure
that the voices on the ground are adequately reflected
in the compilation of information and evaluation and
assessment of the situation. For example, we
understand that the Government of Myanmar has
established a committee for the prevention of military
recruitment of under-age children and has drawn up an
action plan to be implemented by the committee. That
is to be regarded as a positive step in itself. Therefore,
the mechanism should establish ways to reflect such
information, which is to be assessed and reflected in
the Secretary-General's future reports. In this process,
the United Nations country team's assessment of such
an action will also need to be reflected with regard to
its actual effectiveness in preventing the recruitment of
child soldiers.

Thirdly, a monitoring and reporting mechanism,
once established, should be continually improved. It
should be subjected to a full review after its first report
is submitted to examine the timeliness, accuracy,
objectiveness and reliability of the information
gathered and contained in the report and efforts should
be made to identify ways and means to further improve
the workings of such a mechanism.

Objective viewpoints and reliable information in
specific situations will prepare the basis for appropriate
actions that need to be taken. We share the view
expressed in the report that all relevant actors should
be encouraged to consider appropriate action to address
any given situation. However, in most cases, the most
important actor will be the national Government itself.
Among the United Nations bodies, the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council, as
well as the Security Council, should also come in, as
appropriate, to consider actions according to their
respective mandates.

In discussing the problem of children in armed
conflict, we must refer to the recent reported incidents
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where some
United Nations peacekeeping personnel actually
became abusers of children. This misconduct is
unacceptable and reprehensible. Needless to say, such
misconduct causes suffering to children and seriously
damages the credibility of the United Nations and its
entire effort, not only in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, but also elsewhere. My Government
strongly supports the United Nations zero-tolerance
policy with regard to sexual abuse and believes that
robust measures need to be taken to achieve genuine
compliance. We welcome the Secretary-General's
efforts to this end. In considering such measures,
Japan, as Chair of the Security Council Working Group
on Peacekeeping Operations, stands ready to work with
interested Member States.

Let me briefly mention some of the concrete
programmes in which Japan has recently participated
in helping children caught in armed conflict. Last
March, my Government contributed $3.64 million to
UNICEF to help implement its disarmament,
demobilization, rehabilitation and reintegration project
for child soldiers in Liberia. That project aims to help
return an estimated 15,000 children to their homes and
communities. We also supported the back-to-school
campaigns run by UNICEF in Afghanistan and Iraq,
which help to rehabilitate local communities while
alleviating the trauma of children affected by long-term
conflict.

All those programmes are based on the concept of
human security, which Japan upholds. We will continue
to work closely with the relevant United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes to promote the
welfare and empowerment of the general public based
on the concept of human security, with particular
emphasis on children and women.

In conclusion, we would like to underline the
importance of strengthening international cooperation
towards the shared goal of helping children in armed
conflict. As the theme of today's open debate suggests,
the suffering of child soldiers in Africa is particularly
grave and is of serious concern to all of us. Yet the
problem is not limited to Africa. We must change what
is a tragic reality around the world, that of twelve-year-
olds running around with Kalashnikovs, without any
access to education and without ever knowing that
there is a different lifestyle, to which they have a right.

For that reason I commend you, Mr. President,
for convening an open debate to hear the views of non-
Security Council members. Their views expressed
today should be duly taken into account in our
deliberations in the Council. I am confident that our
collective wisdom will help us find effective ways for
the United Nations to better address the issue of
children and armed conflict. The time for advocacy is
over, and the time is now upon us for concrete action.
We should all strive to implement concrete plans for
the benefit of our children around the world.

