Ms. Enge (Norway): With key deadlines and
expiration dates fast approaching, September seems set
to mark a critical juncture in the search for a negotiated
two-State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Our shared hope is that serious and substantive
negotiations on the permanent-status issues will be
under way before that decisive point in time. Direct
negotiations may also serve to lock in the modest
achievements of the past year and extend and expand
them in accordance with key Road Map obligations.

As chair of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
(AHLC), Norway has repeatedly stressed the need for a
clear political horizon in order to justify the high levels
of international donor support to the Palestinian State-
building project. Earnest negotiations, backed by good-
faith efforts to create a favourable environment on the
ground, are essential to keep the two-State solution
clearly in sight. A credible process for the political
track, within the time frame set by the Middle East
Quartet, will help to sustain the donor community's
commitment to the parallel effort to build a Palestinian
State from the bottom up. On the economic track, the
plan of the Fayyad Government to prepare for
Palestinian statehood within two years remains the
platform on which to centre our continued support.

Ultimately, Palestinian statehood cannot be
realized without Gaza as an integral part of the future
Palestinian State. The West Bank and Gaza must
sooner or later be reintegrated as one territorial,
political and economic unit. The recent Israeli decision
to ease the blockade of Gaza is a welcome step in the
right direction. Now the immediate challenge is to
ensure prompt and effective implementation of the
ensuing measures. We are confident that this can be
done without prejudice to legitimate Israeli security
concerns.
28

In line with Security Council resolution 1860
(2009), the AHLC is taking an active part in facilitating
those efforts. Through the Joint Liaison Committee -
a subcommittee of the AHLC - discussions are under
way between Israel, the Palestinian Authority and
international partners to work out the modalities for
implementation of the package.

The reopening of traffic in and out of Gaza is not
just a question of stocking the shelves with legally
imported goods, nor is it really an issue of letting in
construction materials, however important that is for
the reconstruction of Gaza. The overriding objective
must be to allow for inbound supplies and outbound
exports on a commercial scale that will foster the
reversal of the dramatic de-development of Gaza. That
requires strengthened capacity and more efficient
control procedures at the border crossings.

And let us not forget: it is just as Vital to lift the
blockade on people. The people of Gaza cannot be
fenced in indefinitely. They must be allowed to
exercise their right to freedom of movement. At the
end of the day, the impoverished people of Gaza should
have the opportunity to claim their rightful place in,
and make their indispensable contribution to, a future
Palestinian State, living side by side with Israel in
peace and security.

