The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Equatorial Guinea.

We thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Michel Kafando, for his updated briefing
on the situation in Burundi. We are also grateful for the
presence, participation and statement of Her Excellency
Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed, Permanent Observer
of the African Union to the United Nations, as well
as for the Chair of the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador Jiirg Lauber.

We appreciate the efforts and work of Mr. Benjamin
Mkapa, facilitator of the inter-Burundian dialogue,
whose final report was presented at the East African
Community regional summit, which coincided with
the end of his term of office. We hope that work will
be followed by His Excellency Mr. Yoweri Museveni,
President of Uganda, current Chair of the East African
Community, so as to continue supporting dialogue
among Burundians before the next elections, which are
scheduled for 2020.

As a member State of the African Union and a
non-permanent member of the Security Council, we
believe and are convinced that respect for the order and
constitution of each country defines and sustains what
modern States are today, which therefore guarantees
their stability and plurality.

We appreciate the efforts made by the stakeholders
involved, which led to the signing of the Kayanza road
map for the 2020 general elections and the appointment of
the new members of the National Independent Electoral
Commission. We encourage the Government and all
those involved to continue promoting inter-Burundian
dialogue, with a view to the Burundians themselves
taking the lead in the process.

In that context, we must acknowledge that today in
Burundi there is a return to normalcy after the tensions
that followed the 2015 elections. Presently, Burundi
has democratically elected institutions throughout the
country. They will be renewed in the same fashion in
the 2020 elections, the preparations of which are taking
place in an atmosphere of tranquillity and calm. We
should at this point express our satisfaction at the strong
political will the Government of Burundi has shown
by financing all the expenses of the 2020 elections,
thereby demonstrating its desire to take ownership of
the elections.

I should also like to point out that the 32nd Summit
of the Heads of State and Government of the African
Union, held recently in Addis Ababa, praised the efforts
of the Government of Burundi to prepare for free,
democratic and peaceful elections in 2020 by setting
up appropriate mechanisms in accordance with the
Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement. It also
commended President Nkurunziza's decision not to run
in the presidential elections of 2020, even though there
is no legal obstacles to his doing so.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea expresses its
appreciation for the spirit ofreconciliation and tolerance
that currently prevails in Burundi following the return
from exile of five political leaders, including former
President Sylvestre Ntibantunganya and former Second
Deputy President Alice Nzomukunda, among others, at
the invitation of the authorities and with guarantees for
their security and protection.

These facts, along with the release last year of
more than 2,000 prisoners, including insurgents who
took part in the violent demonstrations of 2015, the
contribution by Burundi of more than 6,000 troops
to the peacekeeping missions of the African Union
and the United Nations and the return of 210,000
refugees from 2016 to date, together represent real and
palpable demonstrations of the very positive evolution
of the situation is this Central African country. The
recognition of the National Congress for Freedom
political party led by Agathon Rwasa is another sign of
the unequivocally positive improvement of the situation
in Burundi.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea is greatly
encouraged by the current situation in Burundi. The
peace and calm that currently prevail in that country
should lead the Security Council to seriously consider
removing Burundi from its agenda.

Equatorial Guinea aligns itself with the efforts of
the international community to find a peaceful way
out of conflict situations by the commitment to the
establishment and consolidation of stable, peaceful
and prosperous societies, in which the national interest
and the internal coexistence of fair, transparent and
inclusive sociopolitical and cultural institutions are
paramount. Therefore, any initiative whose objective is
the consolidation of peace and the return to international
legality and that gives priority to a negotiated and
peaceful end to conflict will always have our support.

We take this opportunity to call on the international
community to continue providing strong support to
the Government and other concerned parties in the
development of confidence-building measures that will
guarantee an appropriate environment for peaceful
elections and in the commitment to the Constitution
and the road map for a peaceful transfer of power after
the elections in 2020 in an environment of peace and
national reconciliation.

In conclusion, the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea welcomes the launch of Burundi's national
development plan for the period from 2018 to 2027,
whose implementation is a crucial element for the
sustainable development of Burundi in the framework
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development of the
United Nations and the African Union's Agenda 2063.

We congratulate Burundi on its election as a
member of the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union at the 32nd Summit of the Heads of State
and Government of the African Union, held recently in
Addis Ababa.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Burundi.

