The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Germany.

I too would like to express our full support for
Special Envoy Geir Pedersen. We welcome his five
priorities and hope that when he briefs the Council
next time, he will be able to report on tangible results.
We are particularly concerned about the escalation of
violence, which runs counter to what he said, especially
in the north-west. With regard to the United Kingdom
representative's comments about the recent dropping of
barrel bombs, perhaps he can shed some light on the
reports he alluded to. We also support Mr. Pedersen's
efforts with regard to the detainees. It represents
some progress, but we need to see significantly
higher numbers. We also need to see a greater level of
mutual releases.

With regard to the refugees and all the refugee

camps, I need not repeat what we said in our last meeting
(see S/PV.8515), when we concentrated on humanitarian
issues. Where Rukban and other camps are concerned,
the return ofrefugees can take place only when it is safe,
well-informed, voluntary and dignified. Mr. Pedersen
is working to achieve a credible political settlement and
political support, and we need that and a balanced and
inclusive constitutional committee. I want to underline
and repeat what he said with regard to ensuring that it
includes 30 per cent women at a minimum. As other
colleagues have made clear, Germany will not consider
providing reconstruction support until a credible,
inclusive and genuine political process is under way.

I want to highlight one aspect that has been
somewhat ignored, which concerns prisoners and
crimes committed. The regime continues to arrest
people in the south-west, for instance, and Al-Assad's
prisons remain full, with 10,000 still incarcerated
under the flimsiest of accusations. We do not know
the numbers because so far the United Nations and the
International Committee of the Red Cross have not
had access to those prisons. I would like to urge the
representative of the Russian Federation to impress on
the Al-Assad regime that it should provide access to
all who are in detention facilities, in particular those
controlled by the intelligence agencies. I have said
before that the crimes and the unspeakable atrocities
that have been committed by all sides during the Syrian
conflict remain an issue. There are horrific accounts of
murders, torture and crimes of sexual violence against
children that must be investigated and their perpetrators
brought to justice.

While making sure that that happens is of course
a goal in itself, accountability is also a precondition
for peaceful development and sustainable peace. It is
needed for thejustice for the victims, but it is also needed
for national reconciliation, without which there can be
no peace in Syria. With regard to accountability and
impunity, I want to highlight the importance of making
use of the Impartial and Independent Mechanism to
Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under
International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011, which we support. We are
very grateful for the Secretary-General's commitment
to including sufficient means in his budget proposal for
the Mechanism to be able to do its job, which as I said
is key to achieving sustainable peace in Syria.

I also want to join others in asking Mr. Pedersen
about the constitutional committee, which I think is
key. I do not know if at this stage he can say anything
more with regard to the six or seven names still under
dispute. I would like to ask him if he could comment
further on the mandated timeline rules of procedure of
the constitutional committee. With regard to the point I
have highlighted, perhaps he could also say something
from his perspective on the importance ofaccountability
for reconciliation and peaceful development in Syria.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to Mr. Pedersen to respond to the
comments and questions that have been raised during
our discussion.

