Ms. Krisnamurthi (Indonesia): As it appears
that today's open debate on Palestine may be the last
in the Security Council for this year, I wish to take
this opportunity to express the appreciation of the
Government of Indonesia to the delegation of Bolivia
for its sincere and consistent support for the Palestinian
cause during its tenure.

Regrettably, rather than advancing our understanding
or making contributions to achieving peace and
resolution, this quarterly debate on the Middle East
has become a showcase for the occupying Power's
illegal activities and violence towards the territory it
occupies and the people there, including women and
children. We seem to be mere spectators of a series of
increasingly disturbing tragedies, without the capacity
or perhaps even the conscience to stop them. It seems
that we are becoming indifferent and emotionless, ready
to treat the situation as commonplace. It seems that at
every meeting now we are learning of new and more
ambitious illegal settlements, the demolition of houses
and property, restrictions and blockades. We hear of the
excessive use of force, of arbitrary detentions and other
illegalities, which also look like what we have seen
in previous reports. The report before us (S/2018/614)
on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) is yet
another. But the truth is that those reports are about
people, families and communities. They are about
human lives and human beings like us, whose only
desire is for a normal, peaceful life, but who are facing
those violent acts and denials of their rights every day.

Indonesia must repeat what it has been saying for
a long time, which is that the issue of the occupation
of Palestine has lasted too long. The responsibility
for it belongs to the Council, and we object to any
attempts to divert attention from it at this critical time.
While we are certainly aware that the Charter of the
United Nations does not provide the Council with an
enforcement mechanism for ensuring that its decisions
are honoured, we are hopeful that the Council realizes
that the Palestinians also deserve to live in peace, and
that this organ can do far more than it has done so far
in that regard.

We reaffirm the principles of the Charter, which
set clear parameters for the Council in areas such as
the equal rights of States, self-determination, respect
for human rights, the non-use of force and territorial
integrity. As a strong proponent of multilateralism,
Indonesia reiterates that the Council was and is meant
to be the main organ not simply for maintaining the
principle of world peace, but for preventing the
unilateral use of violence by any State against civilians
or other States. In effect, it is meant to be a force for
peace in the world by being a safeguard against injustice
and impunity anywhere in the world.
Indonesia wants to place on the record the
continuing carnage by Israeli forces since the Great
March of Return protests began in May. At least 198
Palestinians, including 31 children, three people with
disabilities, three paramedics and two journalists,
have been killed. In addition, more than 20,000
have been injured, some of them with life-changing
and paralysing injuries. On 28 September, seven
Palestinians, including two children, were killed in
one day during the demonstrations, and hundreds were
injured. According to the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, those numbers represent the
highest fatality toll in a single day since 14 May, when
42 Palestinians were killed. We condemn that senseless
violence and support the call for the protection of the
Palestinian people, including through the dispatch of an
international protection force.

On the question of Syria, we welcome the creation
of a demilitarized buffer zone in the governorate of
Idlib. It is proof that diplomacy has produced positive
progress in the effort to avoid civilian casualties. The
protection of civilians must be an absolute priority for
all stakeholders, and Indonesia believes that a political
settlement through dialogue and negotiation is the
best solution.

Finally, with regard to Yemen, Indonesia is
concerned about the serious deterioration in the
humanitarian situation, and we call on the international
community to take swift and concerted action to
prevent widespread famine. Steps must be taken to
resume a dialogue between the parties to address
urgent concerns and make progress towards a political
settlement of the conflict.

Let me end by calling on both parties in the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict to refrain from provocative
actions, incitement and inflammatory rhetoric, as
mandated by resolution 2334 (2016). In our View, that
call should also be addressed to other Member States.
We need to remind ourselves that our provocative
statements or actions will contribute nothing but an
escalation of the situation on the ground. We call on
Member States to create the conditions necessary for
promoting peace and rebuilding trust and confidence.
We also hope that the Council will refrain from
any double-standard practices that could erode its
credibility and authority. We call on it to implement its
binding resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016),
which is crucial to the advancement of peace.

