Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): The risk of weapons
of mass destruction getting into the hands of non-State
actors remains a constantly evolving threat that must
be countered by concerted international action, with
greater robustness, determination and vigilance and
with every State doing its part. Nowadays, terrorist
groups and illicit networks turn to indiscriminate
violence of unthinkable magnitude, and to achieve their
heinous aims they seek to acquire nuclear, chemical
and biological weapons.

In its presidential statement S/PRST/2014/7, the
Security Council reaffirmed its continuing support for
resolution 1540 (2004) and the Committee established
pursuant to it. It set out clear guidelines for the
Committee's future activities, including on developing
a strategy aimed at achieving the resolution's full
implementation and enhanced assistance to Member
States. It also called for enhanced cooperation among
relevant Council committees and for coordination of
its non-proliferation work with other international,
regional and subregional organizations. Furthermore,
it encouraged the Committee to draw on relevant
expertise, including from civil society, industry and the
private sector. All those elements, geared to improved
implementation of the resolution, should be key areas
in the Committee's focus in preparing for the 2016
comprehensive review.

Lithuania has been a constant and dedicated
supporter of resolution 1540 (2004) since its adoption.
We submitted our initial report on its implementation
in 2004 and have continued to provide comprehensive
regular updates, most recently in November 2013. In
September, in consultation with the Group of Experts,
we finalized a 1540 matrix aimed at further enhancing
national implementation. A number of workshops
were held in Lithuania with an emphasis on the main
elements of prevention and detection of and response
to illicit trafficking of chemical, biological and nuclear
materials.

As was again reaffirmed by the 2014 Nuclear
Security Summit in The Hague, strengthening nuclear
security and preventing terrorists, criminals and other
unauthorized actors from acquiring nuclear materials
will remain one of our most important challenges in
years to come. We look forward to a successful Summit
in Chicago in 2016. As part of its obligations assumed
at the Nuclear Security Summit in Seoul, Lithuania,
through its Nuclear Security Centre of Excellence,
is working to increase the capacities of national and
regional experts to counter nuclear smuggling and
improve the nuclear security culture. Nearly 700 experts
have been trained so far, including officials from
Georgia, Ukraine, Armenia and Moldova. Lithuania is
committed to expanding its international cooperation
in this field.

Lithuania recognizes the need for universal and
comprehensive reporting under the resolution, with the
aim of identifying shortcomings and challenges that
States may face while implementing it. Malawi's recent
submission of its first report and request for assistance
shows the importance ofdirect contacts and cooperation
with States. The Committee and its Group of Experts
should further ensure continued direct interaction with
all States in implementing the goals set out in resolution
1540 (2004). The Group of Experts of the 1540
Committee should continue specific country visits and
participate actively in non-proliferation-related events.

While further strengthening its role as a clearing
house in facilitating matchmaking between assistance
requests and assistance available, the 1540 Committee
should also seek to expand the base of assistance
providers, especially in the field of export controls,
which should be open to all assistance providers
expressing a wish to contribute to the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). Lithuania also encourages
the Committee to engage more actively with industry,
civil society, academia and the private sector. In that
regard, it is important that the Committee compile
effective practices and make them available to all
interested actors.

The Committee would also benefit from future
synergies with other Council bodies dealing with
issues related to the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction and their means of delivery. Lithuania
would therefore encourage closer interaction among
relevant Committees and their groups of experts, such as
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718
(2006) on the Democratic People's Republic of Korea,
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006) on the Islamic Republic of Iran, the Counter-
Terrorism Committee and the Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011)
concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals and
entities.

Finally, I would like to finish by expressing our great
appreciation for the efforts of the Republic of Korea as
Chair of the 1540 Committee, and to Ambassador Oh
Joon personally for his tireless work and commitment
to achieving universal and full implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004).
