The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation.

We would like to express our gratitude to the
High Representative for the Implementation of the
Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina, Lord
Ashdown, for the report he submitted to the Security
Council and for his comprehensive briefing, which has
given us a clear picture of developments in the
settlement process in Bosnia and Herzegovina and in
the current phase of implementation of the Peace
Agreement.

We commend the efforts of the High
Representative in advancing the peace process in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. During the almost four years
of his tenure in the post, a number of reforms have
been initiative aimed at increasing the effectiveness of
the central institutions of the country, and a great deal
of work has been done in particular in initiating
military and tax reforms. It is critically important that,
in the end, a compromise be reached with respect to a
reorganization of the Ministry of Internal Affairs.

Moreover, in fleshing out and further advancing
this very delicate reform, we must fully take into
account the interests of all the Bosnian parties. In the
near future, we will need also to resolve a number of
other issues that are key to the future of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, first and foremost the Constitution,
which is a pivotal element of the Dayton Agreement.
An important role must be played in that respect by the
Bosnians themselves in developing mutually
acceptable compromises. The sensitivity of this issue
and the far-reaching consequences of constitutional
reform require that every step be carefully weighed so
as to prevent any destabilization of the still-fragile
inter-ethnic relations in the country. The involvement
of members of the international community in this
process must take place within the strict parameters of
the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation
Council. In that regard, it is important to maintain the
principle of consensus within the international
community, as authoritarian decisions in that area
would do little to promote progress.

We endorse the key provisions that continue to be
the foundations of the peace process in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Just as timely today are the major
challenges enshrined in the very philosophy of the
Dayton Agreement, namely, strengthening the climate
of trust and constructive cooperation among the
peoples of Bosnia and the importance of achieving
consensus among all Bosnian parties with regard to
building a stable State in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In
that context, we must continue to focus our attention
on issues pertaining to the genuine equality of peoples
throughout the entire country, the problems of local
self-government and the return of refugees and
internally displaced persons.

We were pleased to note the progress made in
strengthening Bosnian institutions, as set out by Lord
Ashdown in his report. In that regard, we believe it is
critically important that the High Representative
continue to act in a spirit of partnership with Bosnian
parties, focusing efforts on the adoption of independent
consensual decisions. We must do our utmost to put in
place political and diplomatic mechanisms while
working with the Bosnian parties, including in the area
of their cooperation with the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia.

As we approach the tenth anniversary of the
Peace Agreement, and given the upcoming elections in
2006 and the conversion of the Office of the High
Representative into a mission of the European Union,
we call for prompt transfer to Bosnian parties of
responsibility for the fate of their country. We urge
Bosnian parties to carry out constructive dialogue and
to adopt decisions on the basis of consensus.

Russia intends to continue to play an active and
constructive role in the international facilitation of the
Bosnian settlement process within the mechanisms
established for that purpose, in particular within the
Peace Implementation Council in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and its Steering Board, as well as within
the Contact Group and in close contact with the High
Representative.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I call on the representative of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

