Mr. Konfourou (Mali) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to convey the regrets ost. Kamissa
Camara, Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Mali, who is unable to be with us this
morning because of schedule demands.

I am very pleased to convey to you, Madam
President, the warm congratulations of my delegation
on the accession of your beautiful country, the
Plurinational State of Bolivia, to the presidency of the
Council for the month of October. We assure you of our
full cooperation.

Let me also express to the delegation of the United
States of America our sincere appreciation for its
outstanding conduct of the Council's work last month.

The briefings on this item are always a good
opportunity to reiterate to Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres and to all United Nations personnel involved
in Mali the profound gratitude of President Ibrahim
Boubacar Keita, the Government and the people ofMali,
for their ongoing commitment to peace and stability in
Mali, the Sahel and the rest of the world.

The Government of Mali takes note of the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2018/866) before us, and
I thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, for introducing
it. I take note of the comments and strong expectations
that Council members expressed earlier. Let me now
share with the Council the remarks of the Government
of Mali on the report of the Secretary-General.

First, I welcome the fact that the report
recognizes the substantial progress made recently in
the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali, emanating from the Algiers
process. Among the developments that have been
noted, I wish to highlight the successful organization
on 29 July and 12 August of the election of the
President of the Republic Within the time prescribed
by the Constitution of Mali. The balloting, which took
place in conditions deemed satisfactory by national
and international observers, established the election of
President Ibrahim Boubacar Keita as Head of State for
a second five-year term.

The good preparation and the satisfactory conduct
of the electoral process, in a framework of unwavering
cooperation, were made possible thanks to the combined
efforts of all the actors of the Malian public sphere,
including members of civil society, as well as the
significant involvement of partners and friends of Mali.
I commend the role and immense contribution of United
Nations personnel and other national and international
forces in the successful organization of the electoral
process. I would make special mention here of the
remarkable work done by Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Mali and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).

I would also like to pay tribute to Belgian Major
General Jean-Paul Deconinck, whose deployment
ended on 2 October, for his exemplary leadership and
outstanding service as Force Commander of MINUSMA.
By the same token, I extend the warm congratulations
of the Government of Mali to his successor, Swedish
Lieutenant General Dennis Gyllensporre, for the
confidence placed in him by the Secretary-General. We
assure him of the full cooperation of the Government
of Mali.

This is also an opportunity to commend the
excellent work done over the past three years by
Mr. Koen Davidse of the Netherlands as Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Mali. I
welcome the appointment of Ms. Joanne Adamson of
the United Kingdom to that post and assure her of all
Malians. I know that Joanne is in the Chamber. She is
a great friend of Mali and Malians, and she can count
on our support.

I understand the Council's impatience with what
it considers to be delays in the implementation of the
agreement. However, I can assure the Council that
there is no ambivalence in the shared desire of the
signatory parties to honour the commitments made
in the irreplaceable instrument that is the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. The perfect
illustration of that has just been provided yet again
by the Malian parties with the signing on Monday,
15 October, of the pact for peace in Mali between
the Government and the United Nations, and the
solemn accession of the signatory movements, the
Coordination des mouvements de l'Azawad and the
Platform coalition of armed groups, through a written
declaration of acceptance of that instrument. Under the
terms of the pact, a copy of which I have provided to
Council members, the Malian parties reaffirm their
firm commitment to accelerating the diligent and full
implementation of the agreement, in accordance with
paragraph 5 of resolution 2423 (2018). However, the
pact for peace is by no means a new agreement in Mali.

It is true that the fulfilment of those commitments
has long suffered from the belated establishment
of relations of real trust among the various Malian
protagonists. Today, that prerequisite is now satisfied,
and the resulting positive effects are very telling. As
the Council is well aware, the establishment of interim
authorities and the ongoing operationalization of mixed
patrols, combined with the gradual redeployment of the
Malian armed forces, allow for the long-awaited return
of the administration and basic social services in many
localities previously held in the grip of terrorists and
armed gangs.

Secondly, the absence of belligerence and clashes
between the Malian armed forces and the signatory
movements is another illustration of the progress
achieved. The return of trust has also resulted in
the participation of the signatory movements in
safeguarding the electoral process. The Secretary-
General saw this positive and constructive momentum
during his visit to Mali in May.

In the same vein, 63 territorial collectivities
have been created in the new regions of Menaka and
Taoudenni, with a view to making them fully operational
so that they can fulfil their primary mission ofdelivering
basic social services to our populations. In that context,
I welcome the continuation of the preregistration
campaign for combatants, which is a major step forward
in the cantonment and disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process, the cornerstone of our national
strategy for stabilizing the country. On that point, I
note that the Malian parties agreed at the meeting of
the Agreement Monitoring Committee, on 15 October
in Bamako, to launch an accelerated disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process for the period
5 -30 November.

Still on the subject of our efforts to provide security
throughout our national territory, the process of security
sector reform is proceeding normally, according to the
criteria set, in particular with regard to ensuring that all
actors concerned are included.

As the Council can see, the Government remains
fully committed to playing its full part in the early
implementation of the agreement. However, it must
be acknowledged that the implementation of certain
provisions of the agreement requires considerable
financial commitments that, regrettably, Mali alone
cannot make. That is why I reiterate the Government's
call for the effective marshalling of the resources
pledged by our partners at the donor conference on
Mali held in Paris on 22 October 2015, which would
enable us to uphold the commitments outlined in the
road map of 22 March and the pact for peace that we
have just signed.

Today more than ever, the continued implementation
of the Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
emanating from the Algiers process, is one of the main
priorities of the President of the Republic and of the
Government of Mali. We have no other option, let
alone a plan B. That is the sovereign choice we have
made to build genuine and lasting reconciliation for our
people in a truly diverse Mali. That is why, in the new
governmental structure implemented on 9 September,
the Head of State created the important Ministry
for Ministry of National Reconciliation and Social
Cohesion so as to ensure the improved coordination
of State actions and financial resources to implement
the agreement.

The presence of several young people and women
in the Government is also part of that dynamic.
Women, for example, account for more than 30 per
cent of the total number of Government employees,
in accordance with legislation on the promotion of
gender in decision-making bodies in Mali. We are also
working on the charter for peace, unity and national
reconciliation, emanating from the work of the
Conference of National Understanding, which calls for
innovative and courageous measures to help the people
of Mali unite around a common future. At the same
time, the Government is resuming its immense work
on political and institutional reform with a view to
adapting our institutions to Mali's current realities and
enabling our governance system to respond effectively
to the legitimate demands of our people.

The centre of our country continues to be affected
by indiscriminate terrorist attacks that have resulted in
many casualties, including among members of Mali's
defence and security forces and innocent civilians.
Thanks to the operationalization of the integrated
security plan for the central regions, whose relevance
is noted by the Secretary-General in his report, several
State representatives and decentralized structures
have returned to the most remote areas, much to
people's relief. The school year has begun. The Head
of Government, Mr. Soumeylou Boubeye Maiga,
whose efforts have been lauded, visited those areas this
month to mark the State's return, attend the start of the
school year and distribute food aid in areas affected
by insecurity or natural disasters. However, given the
scale of the situation, it is necessary to maintain and
even strengthen aid programmes administered by the
specialized agencies of the United Nations and other
competent bodies.

We are concerned about the funding gap in the
2018 humanitarian response plan, whose requirements
total $330 million. Only 32 per cent of that sum has
been raised, as indicated in the Secretary-General's
report. That is why the Government of Mali joins the
Secretary-General and the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs in launching a strong appeal
to marshal additional financial resources to support
Government efforts to implement assistance plans in
response to multifaceted humanitarian crises, including
plans for the return of displaced persons, returnees and
basic social services.

I would like to turn now to the issue of human
rights. The Government of Mali remains very concerned
about respect for human rights in general, and human
rights in particular - a focus that is consistent with
our history and Mali's international commitments. The
State of Mali is aware of its primary responsibility to
protect people and their property, and the Government
remains determined to continue and even strengthen
the appropriate measures to ensure that human rights
are respected, in particular those of our people. That is
why all reported cases or allegations of violations are
systematically investigated by the competent national
structures. Disciplinary measures have already been
taken against those suspected of violating the rights
of individuals, even before investigations have been
completed. In that regard, we remain open to all forms
of cooperation in the areas of training, the sharing of
experience or technical or financial support. That said,
it should be recalled that, in accordance with paragraph
51 of the Secretary-General's report, most abuses are
perpetrated by violent extremist groups, which, in their
destructive fury, do not spare civilians or members of
Malian or foreign forces.

Moreover, the Government agrees with the
Secretary-General that any exit strategy must take into
account the regional dimension, which is, regrettably,
marked by an exponential increase in transnational
organized crime. That was the reason for establishing
the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel, which
seeks to unite the efforts and actions of the five countries
concerned in a comprehensive approach to effectively
combat terrorists and drug-trafficking groups that
have plagued our entire subregion, especially since
the collapse of the Libyan State in 2011. We take this
opportunity to request once again that the Council
provide the Joint Force with an adequate mandate and
sustainable resources, including through the United
Nations, to enable it to discharge its mission as it sees
fit, for the benefit ofthe people of the Sahel and the rest
of the world.

I would like to conclude as I began, by reiterating
the gratitude of the people of Mali to the United Nations
and all of our bilateral and multilateral partners for their
continued multifaceted support for the crisis-recovery
process in Mali. Above all, I would like to assure the
Council of the resolve of the President of the Republic
of Mali, the Government and signatory movements to be
relentless in the diligent and inclusive implementation
of the Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
emanating from the Algiers process. In that regard, we
attach particular importance to the relevant provisions
of resolution 2423 (2018), in particular paragraphs 4, 5
and 6.

Lastly, I again pay tribute to all victims 7 civilian
and military, Malian and non-Malian 7 who have lost

their lives in the line of duty in Mali. 1 would like to
spare a thought for the twenty»third French soldier to die
in Mali, only a few days ago. Iwish a speedy recovery
to the Chadian five soldiers who were wounded in Mali.
Of course, I cannot forget our own forces and civilians.

The meeting rose at 11.55 mm.
