Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank the Under-
Secretary-General and the Assistant Secretary-General
for briefing the Security Council today.

The United Kingdom is committed to Ukraine's
sovereignty and territorial integrity. We do not and will
not recognize Russia's illegal annexation of Crimea.
The illegal seizure of Crimea by Russia in March 2014
directly contravenes the Charter of the United Nations.
The action threatens international peace and security
and has global consequences.

IfI may, I will address the issue of the elections.
Like my European and American colleagues, we see
those so-called elections as illegitimate. They are the
latest example in the Russian campaign to destabilize
Ukraine. They are a clear breach of the Minsk
agreements. And they are illegal under Ukrainian law.
In plain speaking, they are a charade - and a grisly
one at that. That is why the United Kingdom, with other
members of the Council, called for this meeting today.
The international community must stand together to
condemn those illegal acts. Russia could demonstrate
its commitment to the rules-based international system
by using its considerable influence on the separatists
to ensure that the so-called elections do not take
place. To be clear: if the elections were free and fair
and with proper security conditions, as stated in the
Minsk agreements, that would be a different matter.
But the conditions for free and fair elections will never
exist as long as Russia continues to deny international
access to eastern Ukraine. Support for illegitimate
so-called elections is the latest attempt by Russia to
destabilize Ukraine.

As other representatives have done today, I
would now like to raise other recent actions that are
deeply concerning.

First, as recorded by the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe Special Monitoring Mission
to Ukraine, the increasing militarization of Crimea is
nothing short of alarming. We urge Russia to desist from
destabilizing transfers of weapon systems and troops
and to demonstrate its commitment to regional stability.

Secondly, opening the Kerch Strait Bridge is yet
another flagrant Violation of Ukraine's sovereignty.
Russia's systematic harassment and detention of both
Ukrainian and third-country-flagged vessels in the Sea
of Azov since April is yet another attempt to destabilize
Ukraine and its economy.

Thirdly, we are concerned by Russia's ongoing
cyberattacks on Ukraine, which attempt to interfere with
Ukraine's financial, energy and Government sectors.

I will now turn to humanitarian issues. As
the Assistant Secretary-General indicated in her
briefing, the conflict continues to have a devastating
humanitarian impact on those who live on both sides
of the contact line. What we heard about mines,
injuries and millions being at dire humanitarian risk
ought to shock us. The lack of access to humanitarian
organizations in non-Government-controlled areas is
greatly contributing to the escalation of the crisis. We
strongly urge the Russia-backed separatists to grant safe
and unhindered access so that essential humanitarian
assistance can be delivered to the 1.8 million people in
need within non-Government-controlled areas. We also
urge donors to respond to the United Nations annual
humanitarian response plan for Ukraine, which remains
woefully underfunded.

In conclusion, we urge all sides, particularly
the Russian-backed separatists, to commit to the
full implementation of the Minsk agreements,
beginning with a comprehensive ceasefire and the
withdrawal of heavy weaponry. That is the best way
to achieve stability in Ukraine and end the suffering
of the Ukrainian people. To be clear: it was Russian
aggression in 2014 that gave rise to this conflict - in
complete disregard for international law. Russia has a
responsibility, particularly as a permanent member of
the Council, to desist from destabilizing behaviour and
to use its considerable influence on the separatists to
ensure that the Minsk agreements are implemented and
the conflict brought to an end.

