Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): Permit me
at the outset to bid a warm welcome to President
Obasanjo and to thank him very much for having
kindly shared with us his vision and his message of
hope concerning developments on the African
continent and for having given us the opportunity to
listen to his valuable briefing on the negotiating
process in Abuja. We followed with great attention and
much hope the various stages described.

I should also like to take this opportunity to pay a
special tribute to President Obasanjo for his tireless
efforts since the beginning of his chairmanship of the
African Union (AU) to find a political and negotiated
solution to the wrenching crisis of Darfur and to
restore peace and security, which are so essential for
the well-being of all the Sudanese people.

Algeria, which is following the developments in
Darfur very carefully and at the highest level, has
every confidence in the work being done by the
African Union and fully supports President Obasanjo's
approach aimed at rallying both sides around an
agreement that will be a solution, not only for the
Sudan, but for the entire region. We are also making
our own contribution to support the efforts of the
Chairman of the African Union.

This commitment to peace and to a settlement of
conflicts through the wise and visionary use of
negotiations deserves the full support of the
international community. That is why Algeria
welcomes both the decision that has emerged within
the Council, which fully and clearly highlights the
AU's leading role, and the valuable political, material
and financial support that the international community
is providing for its efforts.

The current suspension of the Abuja talks is
cause for serious concern at a time when the untold
daily suffering of the people of Darfur makes us aware
of the urgent need to put an end as soon as possible to
the tragedy that has so severely affected their lives.

Algeria hopes that the Abuja talks, in which we
have great hope, will resume as soon as possible. We
therefore call on all parties to return to the negotiating
table in a spirit of cooperation and open-mindedness in
order finally to build the bridges leading to a return to
peace, which we sincerely hope for. The settlement of
the Darfur question is crucial for the people of the
Sudanese province, for the Sudan and for the peace and
the stability of the entire region, in which the Sudan
plays a major, strategic role.

Today, it is cliched to say that the Darfur crisis
has reached a crucial stage in its tragic course.
Although there is still room for hope, the attendant
fears that the crisis will continue or deteriorate grow at
each missed opportunity.

Fully cognizant of those risks, Algeria hopes that
our joint action in the Council and in the international
community will be one of a cooperation that adds
synergy to the dynamic created by the African Union,
which has led to indisputable progress in the ceasefire
maintained by the parties and the agreement on a
humanitarian protocol of manifest importance, which
we hope will be followed by a further agreement on the
crucial question of security.

We must reinforce and strengthen that promising
dynamic by supporting it positively until it reaches its
conclusion, all the while being vigilant not to disrupt
its course. It is in that spirit that Algeria believes that
there is no alternative to the active cooperation of the
Government of the Sudan, with the support and the
assistance of the African Union and the international
community, if we are to end that crisis, whose
humanitarian aspect is a call to all of us.

My delegation welcomes the offer by the Foreign
Minister of the Sudan to come before the Security
Council and share his vision for resolving the question
of Darfur. We hope that the Council will give him an
opportunity to do so as soon as possible.

