Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States of America):
It is great to see you here, Sir, with us today. I thank
the briefers for their very insightful and concrete
recommendations. It was good to have the Secretary-
General here, as always.

The birth of the United Nations delivered a powerful
message of peace to a world shattered by war. Since
1945, this institution has been the world's pre-eminent
multilateral forum for dialogue, debate and, perhaps
most importantly, reconciliation. These are initiatives
that the United States fully supports. We seek justice
for victims and accountability for those responsible for
atrocities. We create programming, provide technical
support and elevate the voices of those who are most
vulnerable, and we furnish significant funding for these
efforts. We also recognize the vital work of the United
Nations Special Representatives and Special Envoys,
as well as the United Nations fact-finding missions, to
bring greater reconciliation to communities battered by
conflict. We also recognize the role of women, as others
have this morning, in advancing lasting and sustained
reconciliation in peace agreements.

There are many specific opportunities for this body
to build towards reconciliation in our time, and I should
like to address just a few of them this morning.

In Syria, the United States firmly believes that the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
for Syria has a vital role to play in gathering information
on serious crimes committed in the country. We applaud
the progress that the Mechanism has achieved in the
last year, and we are proud to both provide an additional
$2 million this year and support efforts to fund the
Mechanism from the United Nations regular budget.

We honour the resiliency of Syrian civil-society
leaders who have risked their lives to document human
rights abuses and protect the victims of atrocities.
Their work is instrumental in promoting justice and
accountability in Syria, both of which will be critical to
any real solution to the conflict.

In Burma, addressing security-force abuses of
ethnic minority groups will be essential to meaningful
reconciliation. To that end, we welcome the United
Nations independent international fact-finding mission
on Myanmar's documentation of human rights abuses
committed in Myanmar since 2011, including against
the Rohingya in Rakhine state and against other
vulnerable communities in Kachin, Shan and elsewhere
across the country. I would also like to reiterate our
strong support for the Independent Investigative
Mechanism for Myanmar. As in Syria, the United States
is deeply appreciative of the Burmese civil-society
organizations that, under conditions of great danger,
continue to document human rights abuses and pursue
accountability for those responsible for atrocities.

In Iraq, we must not waver from holding the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) accountable
for the atrocities it has committed against all Iraqis. No
segment of Iraqi society, including those from diverse
faiths and communities, has escaped ISIS's terror. To
begin a process of healing and reconciliation, we must
develop a balanced and truthful account of events.
Supported by the Government of Iraq and unanimously
endorsed by the Security Council again this September,
the United States continues to be a strong supporter of
the mandate of the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant to collect,
store and preserve evidence of ISIS's atrocities, which
may amount to war crimes, crimes against humanity and
genocide. Also in Iraq, the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq is playing a pivotal role in partnering
with the Government and the people of Iraq to advance
inclusive political dialogue towards the aim of national
and community-level reconciliation.

In South Sudan, the United Nations Mission
there has engaged in peace talks and is empowering
communities to undertake similar dialogues, some of
which result in conflict resolution at the local level. But
while these efforts can help achieve some reconciliation,
they are insufficient without a larger, Government-led
effort to heal the wounds caused by the five-year war.

The United Nations has a unique ability to foster
peace and reconciliation around the world, and the United
States believes that through mediation, accountability
and justice for victims, the United Nations can make
proper use of this ability. The Council and the United
Nations can count on the United States to continue
supporting these efforts, for the work of reconciliation
in the name of human flourishing is nothing less than
our highest calling.

