The Secretary-General: I thank the Security
Council for this opportunity to brief its members at
their request on my visit to Myanmar from 3 to 4 July
2009 at the invitation of the Government of Myanmar.
I wish to thank all interested States members of this
Council and in the Group of Friends of the Secretary-
General on Myanmar for supporting my decision to
Visit Myanmar at this time, and also for supporting my
efforts in the context of my good offices.

Whereas the objective of my first visit, last year,
was to unblock the humanitarian situation caused by
Cyclone Nargis, my objective this time was to engage
Myanmar's senior leadership directly on a number of
serious and long-standing concerns that I believe
cannot be left unaddressed at this critical stage of
Myanmar's transition. At a time when there is much
attention to the ongoing trial of Daw Aung San Suu
Kyi, and on the eve of Myanmar's first elections in
20 years, it was necessary for me to raise those
concerns and offer the help of the United Nations in
2
advancing national reconciliation, democracy, respect
for human rights and sustainable development.

At the outset, let me say that the refusal of the
senior leadership to allow me to meet with Daw Aung
San Suu Kyi was not only a deep disappointment but
also a major lost opportunity for Myanmar. While this
should not define our efforts, allowing such a meeting
would have sent a constructive and conciliatory signal
both inside and outside Myanmar. However, the United
Nations engagement with Myanmar is broad and
complex, encompassing as it does a range of
fundamental issues of concern for the future of the
country, which I was able to address during this visit.

In my two meetings with Senior General Than
Shwe and an additional meeting with the Prime
Minister, General Thein Sein, I discussed extensively
the need for Myanmar to take meaningful steps on the
five-point agenda developed in the context of my good
offices, as well as in humanitarian areas. I made
specific proposals, with a particular focus on three
outstanding concerns that, if left unaddressed, could
undermine any confidence in Myanmar's political
process: first, the release of all political prisoners,
including Daw Aung San Suu Kyi; secondly, the
resumption of a substantive dialogue between the
Government and the opposition; and thirdly, the
creation of conditions conducive to credible and
legitimate elections.

From experience, the United Nations has learned
that elections can be unifying or divisive, depending on
the level of buy-in and the quality of the process.
Addressing these three concerns, including with the
support of the United Nations, is therefore essential to
ensuring that the political process is inclusive and
serves the interests of all the people of Myanmar in a
way that can be broadly accepted by the international
community.

Meeting with Myanmar's registered political
parties and ethnic ceasefire groups allowed me to listen
to their views and concerns in this regard, which I also
shared with the authorities. However, I also encouraged
the two groups to remain constructive in the political
process. Any successful transition will require
overcoming the country's twin legacies of political
deadlock and civil conflict. It is in the interests of all to
ensure that any gains made so far become irreversible.
While the Government has a primary obligation to
address the concerns of all stakeholders, every
09-40115
stakeholder has a role to play and a responsibility to
assume in the interests of the nation.

On the humanitarian front, I saw for myself the
progress made in one year in the recovery and
reconstruction of the cyclone-affected region, thanks to
unprecedented cooperation between Myanmar, the
United Nations and the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN). In all my meetings, I stressed the
need to consolidate and build on such efforts to ensure
that assistance in the Ayeyarwaddy Delta is expedited
and that humanitarian access is expanded to reach all
vulnerable groups across the country. Just as the
international community cannot hold humanitarian
assistance hostage to political considerations, there is
no justification for the Government's allowing
humanitarian access to some of its people but not to
others.

Furthermore, my visit also presented an occasion
to address Myanmar's development challenge. Here,
too, we know from experience that peace and security
can be affected by underlying socio-economic
conditions. Accordingly, I proposed to the senior
leadership that it enhance cooperation with the United
Nations in order to address, through a broad-based
process involving all sectors of society, the pressing
development needs facing the country. Empowering the
people to participate in their country's development is
equally important for stability, democracy and
prosperity, and for ensuring that Myanmar fully
benefits from and contributes to the regional and global
economy.

My visit offered the clearest signal of the United
Nations commitment to working with the Government
and people of Myanmar to address issues of
fundamental importance for the prospects of durable
peace, democracy and development. While I stand
ready to work to that end with all concerned, Myanmar
stands to gain much from engaging meaningfully with
the United Nations. To be able to convey this message
clearly and directly to the highest level of Myanmar's
leadership is a rare chance for the international
community to be heard.

Here, as has been observed, what is more
important is not so much What I came back with but
what I left behind with the authorities. I have made
clear my expectation and that of the international
community that the Government needs to deliver on
the promise to make the 2010 elections inclusive, free
09-40115

and fair and to take necessary steps on my specific
proposals in the very near future. In this connection,
Senior General Than Shwe has pledged to make the
elections free and fair. But I said then and reiterate
today that it is up to the Myanmar authorities to
translate this into concrete action, to ensure the
inclusiveness and credibility of the process and to
demonstrate Myanmar's commitment to cooperation
with the international community. Like all other
Member States, the more Myanmar works in
partnership with the United Nations, the more it
affirms its sovereignty.

Before leaving Myanmar, I had the chance to
publicly reiterate all my messages in a keynote speech
to a large and diverse audience in Yangon. This was an
unprecedented opportunity to ask openly the question
that is before Myanmar's stakeholders today: How
much longer can Myanmar afford to wait - and at
what cost - for national reconciliation, democratic
transition and full respect for human rights? My
message, addressed to the international community as
much as to the Government and people of Myanmar,
was twofold. First, while Myanmar has a unique and
complex history, the challenges it faces as a country in
transition are neither exceptional nor insurmountable.
Secondly, none of the challenges facing Myanmar
today - political, humanitarian or development - can
be addressed on their own, and failure to address them
with equal attention could undermine the prospects for
durable peace, democracy and prosperity.

This address was also an opportunity to stress my
commitment, and that of the international community
as a whole, to continued engagement. I clearly stated
that Myanmar was not alone. In Myanmar as
elsewhere, the United Nations works for the people -
their rights, their well-being and their dignity. It is not
an option; it is our responsibility. We cannot give up.
The continued support of United Nations Members for
my good offices efforts and their engagement -
particularly that of neighbouring countries and ASEAN
members - with the Myanmar authorities have
therefore become even more important and necessary.

I welcome the continued support given to my
efforts by the leaders of the G-8 last week, and their
statement that they are "prepared to respond positively
to substantive political progress undertaken by
Myanmar". I also welcome the reiterated strong
support extended to my good offices and personal
engagement by the Group of Friends on Myanmar.
3

Now that I have conveyed in the clearest terms
what is expected of Myanmar's leaders, it is up to them
to respond positively in their country's own interests.
As I mentioned in my speech, ultimately it is the
people of Myanmar who will bear the cost of any lack
of engagement and cooperation on the part of their
Government with the United Nations and the
international community. That is why Myanmar's
leaders have a responsibility not only to their own
people, but also to the members of the international
community, to respond to the proposals I made on their
behalf.

The choice for Myanmar's leaders in the coming
days and weeks will be between meeting that
responsibility in the interests of all concerned or failing
their own people and each member of the international
community. The world is now watching closely
whether they will choose to act in the best interests of
their country or to ignore our concerns and
expectations and the needs of their people.

