Mr. Atlassi (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council
this month and on your initiative to organize this
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question. I also take this opportunity
to congratulate the new members of the Council and to
wish them success.

We also congratulate the State of Palestine on its
election by acclamation to the chairmanship of the
Group of 77 and China this year and wish it success.

I thank Mr. Nikolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process and Personal
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
important briefing on this agenda item.
We were disappointed last year by the various
challenges, obstacles and frustrations that arose with
regard to the Palestinian question, hampering all efforts
to restore confidence and resume negotiations on the
peace process. The situation in occupied Palestine
continues to deteriorate as a result of the Judaization
policies, settlement-building and systematic oppression
of the Palestinian people by the Israeli occupying Power.
Those policies have obstructed the two-State solution,
exacerbated the situation and increased tensions, all
of which only hinders the peace process, which has
already been stalled for five years.

The use of force, the killing of unarmed civilians
and the ongoing construction of settlements are
all violations of United Nations resolutions and in
particular resolution 2334 (2016). They impede the
peace process and provoke the Palestinians and the
international community. The lack of a dignified life
does not help to create confidence or the appropriate
framework for launching the peace process.

The Kingdom ofMorocco, whose King His Majesty
Mohammed VI presides over the Al-Quds Committee,
underscores the importance of safeguarding the
historic, legal and political status of Jerusalem, while
calling the United Nations, especially the permanent
members of the Security Council and the Quartet, to
fully shoulder their responsibilities in order to prevent
any action that could undermine the situation or
impede international efforts to settle the Palestinian-
Israeli conflict. His Majesty has called many times
for restraint from undermining the current political
situation of Jerusalem, on the basis that Jerusalem is at
the core of the final-status issues.

The International Day of Solidarity with the
Palestinian People was another opportunity for His
Majesty King Mohammed VI to reiterate Morocco's
unwavering support for the historic and legitimate right
of the Palestinian people to have a viable, independent
State within the 4 June 1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, living side by side with Israel
in peace and security, in accordance with resolutions
of international legitimacy. In a letter of solidarity sent
by His Majesty in November 2018 to the Chair of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights
of the Palestinian People, and through him to the
Palestinian people led by President Abbas, His Majesty
noted that:

"The issue ofPalestine is crucial for the Middle

East and represents the core of the conflict in the
region. Achieving a just, lasting and comprehensive
peace as a part ofa two-State solution is a strategic
choice in accordance with Security Council
resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative, and not
simply a political tactic. The question of Palestine
is of crucial importance to the Arab and Islamic
nation, as the Al-Aqsa Mosque is located in
Jerusalem. It is therefore a symbol of tolerance
and coexistence among religions. The unilateral
measures that impact Jerusalem are completely
unacceptable, illegal and illegitimate. They are
gross violations of international law and United
Nations resolutions, including Security Council
resolutions 476 (1980) and 478 (1980) and General
Assembly resolution ES-10/20, adopted at its tenth
emergency special session.

"The settlement of the Palestinian question
in accordance with international resolutions
prevents terrorism and extremism from taking
any opportunity to prevail after investing in the
lack of prospects for a solution of the Palestinian
question and the issue of Jerusalem in order to
justify their criminal approach in the region. The
concern surrounding the illegal measures imposed
against Jerusalem evokes religious sentiments and
therefore takes the conflict along a path that is not
political, but rather religious. That would be an
extremely dangerous matter for international peace
and security and for the desired coexistence among
various civilizations and cultures."

In conclusion, Morocco's stance towards the
conflict is a steadfast one based on the Arab Peace
Initiative and the terms of reference for achieving peace
on the basis of the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
within the 4 June 1967 borders, living side by side with
Israel in peace, security and harmony.

