Mr. Duval (Canada) (spoke in French): Canada
welcomes the extension of the mandate of the United
Nations Peace-building Support Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNOGBIS) for another year. We thank Mr. Prendergast
for his briefing and, like him, believe that the Office can
build on the recent success of the democratic process and
on the formation of a broad-based Government to assist
civil society and government in the consolidation of peace
in the country.

We commend in particular the support given by the
Bissau Guinean military to the peace and democratization
processes and its commitment to transforming the armed
forces into a more professional army subordinate to civilian
authorities. The reaffirmation by military leaders of the
supremacy of the country's Constitution and their
non-interference in the recently completed electoral process
suggest an encouraging respect for civilian rule. We
encourage Council members and relevant regional
organizations to remain engaged in ensuring that the
transitional military authority does indeed relinquish all
powers to the elected civilian administration.

Relations between Guinea-Bissau and its neighbours
continue to improve, in large part due to the exemplary
work of the Secretary-General's Representative, Samuel
N ana-Sinkam, and of Alpha Oumar Konare, President of
Mali and current Chairman of the Economic Community
of West African States, who have overseen the
establishment of a joint monitoring mechanism along
Guinea-Bissau's borders with Senegal and Guinea, as well
as other confidence-building measures.

We are encouraged by reports from civil society
groups in Guinea-Bissau that the human rights situation
has improved substantially and by the Government's
decision to free a number of people detained following
the May 1999 coup. Some 50 remain, however, in what
the Secretary-General has described as deplorable
conditions. We also note the technical assistance provided
by United Nations bodies in strengthening local judicial
capacity, which has already helped to expedite trials in a
fair and transparent manner.

Finally, we are encouraged by the efforts of
UNOGBIS to promote the rights of women through
discussions with local women parliamentarians and by the
Government's commitment to creating an institute for
women and children.

