Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): France
associates itself fully with the statement made by the
Ambassador of Spain on behalf ofthe European Union.

The Israelis and Palestinians are now locked into
a perverse logic. Blood continues to flow every day.
Security Council resolutions 1402 (2002) and 1403
(2002) are still not being complied with. We are facing
a catastrophic impasse that is leading the two peoples
and the region towards the abyss.

In the name ofits fight against terrorism, Israel is
pursuing a repressive and security-based military logic
that leaves no prospect for a resumption of dialogue
and the humanitarian consequences of which are tragic
for the Palestinian people. The actions against the
Palestinian Authority and Palestinian towns - in
particular the repeated incursions into zone A, the
reoccupation of Ramallah, the de facto cantonization of
the West Bank and the restrictions on the movement of
people and goods - contravene the law and are
counterproductive. They must stop forthwith. The same
can be said of settlement activities, particularly in
Jerusalem, and of the destruction of administrative and
economic infrastructures, agricultural lands and homes.
These unilateral actions only exacerbate the people's
despair, hinder the implementation of the reforms
desired by all and obstruct the security efforts of the
Palestinian Authority. The fight against terrorism,
while perfectly legitimate, must be undertaken in
compliance with the law and, in particular, with
international humanitarian law and Israel's
international commitments. It cannot justify the
collective punishment and daily humiliation of an
entire people.

On the Palestinian side, certain groups and
individuals are pursuing a terrorist logic that is blind,
unacceptable and counterproductive. The extremists are
holding the entire population hostage. France has
vigorously condemned the recent attacks, which no
cause can justify. These attacks have also been
unconditionally condemned by the Palestinian
Authority and Yasser Arafat, its elected President. The
Palestinian leaders and a number of their fellow
citizens are aware of the destructive impact of these
attacks on the legitimate national cause of the
Palestinians. Beyond such condemnations, the
Palestinian Authority must use every means still at its
disposal to prevent and end these attacks.

The reforms announced by the Palestinian
Authority and the initial measures taken are steps in the
right direction. France has welcomed the publication of
the Judiciary Law and of the Basic Law, along with the
establishment of a new Government, the ongoing
process to rationalize and improve the security
apparatus and the announcement of local and
legislative elections. This effort must be pursued. It is
essential that the Palestinians be able to create
political, administrative, legal and security structures
that will form the framework of their future State. They
will be the guarantee of an effective, transparent and
democratic Administration responsive to the
aspirations of the Palestinian people. The international
community must support these reconstruction and
reform efforts, which are also in Israel's interest, which
would have everything to gain by facilitating them.
The international community has the urgent duty
to help the parties out of their current vicious circle.
Security and humanitarian imperatives must urgently
be reconciled. It is essential to resist the temptation to
indulge fatalism and to resign ourselves to the worst.
The worst is not ineluctable, but it will take courage
and a great sense of responsibility on the part of the
parties, their leaders and the international community
to avoid it.

We are at a critical and paradoxical crossroads. At
the international diplomatic level, we have never be so
close to a consensus on the specific shape of a final
solution to the conflict and a lasting peace; at the same
time, its implementation on the ground seems never to
have been so distant.

We agree on the objectives. The Israeli
occupation of 1967 must be put to an end on the basis
of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973). We must create an independent, democratic and
viable Palestinian State living side by side with Israel
within secure and recognized borders. Through
negotiation, we must find a just solution to all pending
questions related to the future Palestinian State, in
particular the questions of Jerusalem and the refugees.
Relations among all the countries of the region must be
normalized.

Now is the time to define the roadmap that will
lead us from the vision of a comprehensive, lasting and
just peace to its implementation. To that end, the
international conference on peace in the Middle East
proposed by Colin Powell and the "quartet" could be a
particularly useful instrument. We must therefore set
out without delay to define its objectives, terms of
reference, timetable and format precisely.

For France, the objectives are those that I have
just described. The terms of reference must be built on
the foundation that is now the bedrock of the
international consensus: Security Council resolutions
242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1397 (2002); the principles
of the Madrid Conference, and in particular the
principle of land for peace; the Oslo Accords; the
achievements of past negotiations; the Saudi peace
proposal endorsed by the Arab summit in Beirut and
reaffirmed by the tripartite summit in Sharm el-Sheikh;
and the American vision developed by President Bush
and Secretary of State Colin Powell.

The participants must include all parties,
including Syria and Lebanon, as well as the Arab
States most directly affected: Egypt, Jordan, Saudi
Arabia and Morocco. The timetable must be realistic,
but it is urgent that we move forward in a substantial
way. It is indeed urgent to restore the hopes of
Palestinians and Israelis through a genuine political
process. The security problems cannot be treated in
isolation. Their lasting solution necessarily entails
political and humanitarian measures: we must revive
the prospect of a viable Palestinian State and put an
end to the humanitarian tragedy and to the
unprecedented economic deterioration of the
Palestinian territories.

The recent statements of the United States
Secretary of State are encouraging and should be
supported. The efforts of the United States are essential
and decisive. France awaits with interest the new
proposals that the American authorities announced
would soon be presented. France is counting on the
"quartet" and on all of its members to make rapid
progress. The Security Council, whose resolutions must
be implemented, must continue to make its contribution
along the same lines.

