Mr. Ivanov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): First of all, I should like to associate myself
with the words of condolence expressed at this meeting
with regard to today's air disaster.

Our meeting today is profoundly symbolic. The
principal body of our Organization, entrusted with
primary responsibility for the maintenance of peace
and security, is demonstrating its central coordinating
role in uniting the efforts of the world community to
combat the most acute threat to global stability:
international terrorism.

I should like to recall that in 1999 - on the
initiative of Russia, which had suffered massive attacks
by international terrorists - the Council began to
comprehensively consider the problem of terrorism as a
threat to international peace and security.

The tragic events that took place in the United
States this year, as well as terrorist crimes in other
States, provide graphic evidence that in our
interdependent world, in this era of globalization, one
country's grief becomes the grief of the entire
international community. In response to the evil deeds
of the terrorists, there is a growing awareness of a
simple truth: solidarity and mutual support in
combating a common evil help to protect one's own
country and its citizens from it.

It is now time for us to discard the hesitations and
stereotypes of the past and clearly outline a strategy for
future steps in the common struggle against
international terrorism. The start of the international
anti-terrorist coalition was the first, very important step
in that direction.

Why do we need a global, comprehensive system
to counter new threats and challenges? We know very
well how dangerous international terrorism is in its
present form, and how far-flung its networks are
throughout the whole world. It is an insidious and
sometimes elusive enemy. It has no nationality or clear
territorial affiliation. In recent years, it has become
increasingly associated with drug-trafficking and
organized crime, and it manipulates enormous financial
flows.

The Security Council's adoption in recent months
of resolutions of unprecedented scope - and I am
referring primarily to resolution 1373 (2001) - lays
down a solid political and legal basis for the
neutralization of the terrorist threat. I am talking here
about concrete, effective measures. We believe that the
specially created Counter-Terrorism Committee of the
Security Council will facilitate the proper
implementation of those resolutions, which are binding
on all States. Russia has involved itself very actively in
the work of countering terrorism.

We have repeatedly made the point that there can
be no double standards. There can be no bad or good
terrorists, whatever slogans they hide behind. The war
against them in any part of the world must be waged
robustly and decisively. However, it would be an
unforgivable mistake to identify terrorism with any
religion, nationality or culture. We must establish a
dialogue and mutual understanding between different
civilizations on the basis of the common values of
protecting the life and dignity of human beings.

No less urgent a task is the creation of a single
international legal space in order to combat terrorism.
To this end, we need to ensure the speedy accession by
all countries to the existing international anti-terrorist
conventions. It is also very important to conclude the
work in the United Nations on the draft comprehensive
convention on combating terrorism. We are convinced
that the Security Council, which bears the primary
responsibility for stability in the world, should appeal
to the General Assembly to adopt at the current session
the draft international convention on the suppression of
acts of nuclear terrorism, the first treaty in the history
of the Organization aimed at combating terrorism
involving the use of weapons of mass destruction.

A comprehensive approach to eradicating
international terrorism means that we need to bring into
play the whole spectrum of financial, political and
humanitarian measures. Military means alone are not
enough to resolve this problem. Poverty, illiteracy,
unemployment and the lack of equal access to the
benefits of scientific and technological progress force
destitute people into the ranks of extremists. The
United Nations and the leading financial and economic
organizations and institutions of the world must
redouble their efforts in order to ensure more balanced
and less discriminatory conditions for global socio-
economic development.

Sometimes only a few hours or minutes is enough
to prevent a specific terrorist act. In order to eradicate
the phenomenon of terrorism from the future of
mankind we will require intensive multilateral work on
the part of all members of the international community.
No means should be spared to this end. After all, what
is at stake are the lives, freedom and security of our
citizens. Russia is with those who have involved
themselves in this work, and who will definitely finish
the job.

