Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, allow me to thank you, Sir, for your initiative
to convene this wrap-up session, the tenth this year and
the fifteenth public format of its kind. We hope that
this practice will continue in the future and become an
institutionalized practice of the Security Council, with
a View towards ensuring greater transparency to the
entire United Nations membership.

With your permission, Mr. President, since this
is the final wrap-up session in which Argentina will
participate as a non-permanent member of the Security
Council, I should like to briefly review how we believe
the entire Council should work in terms of dealing with
its agenda. Since Argentina assumed a non-permanent
seat in January 2013, we believe that we can draw useful
lessons for the future treatment of issues.

As we prepare to leave the Security Council, we
are committed to recognizing that we face a world with
more conflicts and with the exacerbation ofpre-existing
conflicts. We leave a world with greater violence, more
violations of human rights, and more people in urgent
need of humanitarian assistance, especially women and
children. In a world that is more violent than that of
January 2013, we believe that one element to note is
that on more than one occasion, when we have taken
decisions, we have been aware of the tension between
two valid principles.

On the one hand, we need to take decisions on the
understanding that sovereignty cannot be interpreted
in the twenty-first century as totally inviolable; that
is to say, it cannot be absolutely limitless. The United
Nations has sought to see sovereignty in terms of
strict respect, and not as though it extended beyond
all other norms of international law, human rights and
international humanitarian law. On the other hand,
the issue of human rights; there would seem to be a
conflict between sovereignty and the protection and
defence of human rights. I say "conflict" because,
with regard to the protection of peace, our thinking
has often been in terms of prioitizing one or another
of these two principles when the challenge is to find
harmony between them, while respecting the Charter
of the United Nations and international law.

Of course there are gaps. That is why we endeavour
to work better together as we move towards the future.
The gaps appear not only to the broader membership
but to the entire world as the unfulfilled promises
of an Organization that has established principles
and standards but failed to realize their reflection in
practice - in a reality that at times seems entirely yet
to be built.

In March 2013, the fall of the Bozize Government
in the Central African Republic, as a result of what
were doubtless long-standing causes, led to a conflict
claiming more than 5,000 lives and displacing
approximately one-quarter of the national population,
primarily women and children.

A year-and-a-half on from South Sudan's emergence
as an independent country in December 2013, the
blatant power struggle between President Kiir and his
ex-Vice-President Machar plunged the country into a
civil war that has already claimed more than 10,000
lives, displaced more than 1 million persons within
the country and more than 400,000 into neighbouring
countries, and put more than half of the population,
primarily women and children, at risk of famine.

The conflict in Syria has deteriorated sharply in
these years. Today Syria is a divided country where
terrorists thrive and where conservative estimates put
the death toll at approximately 200,000. Some 9 million
Syrians have been forced to leave their homes since the
conflict broke out in March 2011. The Syrian people
have been the victims of chemical weapon attacks.
I, like my colleagues, will never forget when, on
21 August 2013, we encountered a situation violating
the vow of "never again" - a situation in which an
attacker dared to use chemical weapons, in violation
of international law. Today the conflict has spilled over
into neighbouring countries, including, in particular,
Iraq, where the self-proclaimed Islamic State terrorist
group controls almost half of the national territory,
committing crimes reminiscent of those committed by
the Taliban in Afghanistan during its reign of terror.

Libya is another country divided between Islamist
forces and others allied to the Libyan Parliament and
the General Haftar, a division that can be traced back to
the fall of Al-Qadhafi in 2011 as a result of the NATO-
led operation.

The security situation in Yemen, which was
considered the success story of the Arab Spring, is
deteriorating, making the collapse of the State along
sectarian and tribal lines more likely and providing a
haven for Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula.

The prospect of an independent Palestinian State,
living in peace alongside Israel, seems ever more
elusive following the 50 days of extreme violence last
summer - the deadliest in recent years - and given
the inaction of the Security Council.

In Europe itself, the situation in Ukraine - where
the indirect consequences of the conflict included the
downing of a plane carrying 298 innocent people of 15
nationalities - has exacerbated tensions and differences
among the big Powers, which have manifest themselves
in the dynamics ofthe Security Council itself, on matters
beyond the situation in Ukraine specifically, such as the
situations in the Sudan, South Sudan, Afghanistan and
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, and cross-
cutting topics such as sanctions imposed by the Security
Council, the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
and the upholding and application of international
human rights and international humanitarian law.

Blaming the Security Council or the United
Nations in general for failing to prevent or solve
these and other conflicts would be unfair and naive.
The Security Council is by its institutional nature a
forum for political consultation among 15 countries,
including the major Powers, with different views and
interests, which, by one form of legitimacy or another,
the international community has entrusted with the
maintenance of international peace and security, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations. But
this should not lead us to forget that the United Nations
and the Security Council were created so as to replace
jus ad bellum withjus contra bellum, and, in this regard,
the achievements of the Security Council over the past
two years have been at best mixed.

I would like to make some brief observations
regarding the Council's handling of these situations and
others that it addressed in 2013 and 2014. A first lesson
learned is that the Council's work falls short when it
comes to prevention - preventing situations likely to
endanger international peace and security. It seems
clear that the Security Council did not foresee, never
mind prevent, the outbreak of the crises in the Central
African Republic, South Sudan, Iraq and Ukraine, or
prevent their escalation or help de-escalate them, while
it must be recognized that the Council did closely
monitor these crises from a relatively early stage.

A second lesson learned is that the Security
Council seems to remain tied to a logic belonging to
the twentieth century rather than the twenty-first,
which sees it motivated more by geopolitical and
security considerations than by the concept of an
ethical institution to which we all ascribe as Members
of the United Nations that freely undertake to respect
the Charter. Even in situations of mass, widespread
violations of human rights and of international
humanitarian law, there is disagreement on matters on
which there can be no difference of opinion!

It suffices to compare the attention the Council
devoted to the situations in Syria, South Sudan and the
Central African Republic, on the one hand, and to the
situation in Ukraine, on the other, in any month since
these conflicts broke out. I am not suggesting that the
crisis in Ukraine is not serious, even very serious; I
am simply observing that, beyond the troubling reports
of violations of minority rights, by no measure are we
faced there with the sort of humanitarian tragedy we
are seeing in Syria, the Central African Republic or
South Sudan.

The third lesson learned is that the Security
Council seems to work in fits and starts, generally
compelled by a reflex mechanism, in the spirit of a
volunteer firefighter or medical emergency rather than
preventative medicine. When a conflict breaks out,
the first reaction is to meet immediately in order to
get more information, send messages to the world, or
simply exchange views to determine how we can tackle
a given situation and prevent its deterioration. However,
as time goes by, it seems that we are becoming used
to some horrors of the sort to which we should never
become used. And so what in the past would be deemed
a tragedy that the Security Council should never allow
is now becoming business as usual, and not only
because some new conflict has arisen that demands our
attention meaning we can no longer devote the same
time and dedication to the others as we did in the past.

The fourth lesson learned, which is perhaps the
most worrisome for my country, is the difficulty we
have observed over the past two years in translating
principles into concrete achievements, as if certain
ends justified the means.

The aim of eradicating the scourge of international
terrorism is one to which Argentina is fully committed.
But the pursuit of that objective, even though it
contributes to the realization of other goals deemed
important by the Security Council, has served to justify
decisions to deprive, in large or small part, persons
included on Sanctions Committees' lists of their due
process rights.

The objective of ending impunity for crimes against
humanity, as in the case of Syria, has served to justify
actions that undermine the Rome Statute through
referrals made in inappropriate terms that are likely
to affect the validity, credibility and effectiveness of
the International Criminal Court. The objective of
ensuring the protection of the human rights of innocent
people and of depriving the parties of the means to
continue hostilities has served to justify the imposition
of unilateral sanctions at odds with the principles of
sovereignty and non-intervention in the internal affairs
of States.
The objective of neutralizing armed groups that
attack innocent civilians has served tojustify departing,
without an extensive consultation with the expanded
membership at a minimum, from the principles that
have for decades informed peacekeeping operations,
such as the consent of the parties, impartiality and the
non-use of force except in self-defence or in defence
of the peacekeepers' mandate, as has been the case
with the Force Invention Brigade of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

The urgency of addressing acute situations or
emerging crisis situations with limited human and
financial resources has served to justify accelerating
the drawdown of forces in other situations where peace
is not fully consolidated and where we face the risk
that there will be a return to conflict. The violence
unleashed in the context of the recent political crisis
in Haiti makes us fear that we are facing one of those
situations there. Argentina warned of that trend during
the negotiations on and in the context of the adoption
of latest renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (resolution 2180 (2014)).

The need to deal with problems that alarm us all
and that are even increasing in their severity has served
to justify the Security Council's encroaching on the
competency of other organs of the United Nations,
notably the General Assembly, as has been the case
with climate change and in some ways, more recently,
the Ebola outbreak in West Africa.

Finally and paradoxically, the goals of exporting
democracy and universalizing the enjoyment of human
rights have served to justify the sending of weapons
to the parties in conflict to achieve peace. I will only
reaffirm that, for Argentina and for many Member
States, normalizing arbitrariness, the phasing out of
legal rights, and unprincipled pragmatism are not valid
options. Not just any means justifies the end sought
after.

In one of my early days in the Council, I said that I
not only had the honour of being the representative of
Argentina but that, as a matter of personal conviction,
I define myself as a feminist. Equality really is a
good objective to achieve between men and women. I
recalled that Alva Myrdal said in 1982, when she won
the Nobel Peace Prize, that women are not so ambitious

as to believe that we will find eternal peace in the world
or solve all disputes between nations. The economic
and political conflicts that we are witnessing are very
deep. We do not lay claim to an angelic state of perfect
harmony. Ours is a more modest goal: women believe
that we can do more in concrete terms.

People often speak of increasing devastation,
which is why I believe that we must change the mindset
in order to transform the way we act. When we face
conflict, we keep repeating a false idea. We respond with
militarization, weaponization and violence - those
things do not lead to victory. How could it be possible
that such a path could lead to victory when it is so
costly, when such a victory, if it even existed, would
be built on the destruction of another, who, with
luck, has been destroyed right down to their dignity?
I therefore believe that not only the Council, but our
entire Organization - and all of our time - has to be
dedicated to seeking and thinking otherwise in order to
act differently.

I wish every success to Angola, Spain, Malaysia,
New Zealand and Venezuela, who willjoin the Security
Council as members. I would advise them not to think
small or be daunted. The challenges are enormous, as
are the obstacles, but also, as a colleague said, the five
permanent members are not our enemies, not even our
adversaries. We are 15 countries working together,
agreeing sometimes and having differences at other
times, but working together, even though we may make
mistakes, as I mentioned. We can make many mistakes,
and we will continue to do so. But where we cannot
go wrong is with respect to the principles that we have
committed to uphold.

As to the current permanent and non-permanent
members, those that are remaining and those that are
departing, it has been an honour for Argentina to learn
and work with them, each and every one of them, where
we have agreed and where we have differed, in the
conviction that beyond our individual visions we have
worked more or less successfully with great effort and
honesty.

We thank the Secretariat, in the person of Mr. Movses
Abelian and the staff who assisted the Argentine
delegation in its two presidencies of the Council and
in leading the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1591 (2005) concerning the Sudan and the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions, for their support and advice.

Former Secretary-General Hammarskjold
challenged us when he said that the United Nations
was at a landmark moment in its time, for its future.
The members have to choose between two concepts of
the United Nations - as a static machine for having
meetings or as a dynamic instrument through which
nations can organize a dignified, peaceful, just,
egalitarian and free global community.

