Mr. Ayebare (Uganda): At the outset, my delegation
would like to express its gratitude and appreciation to the
People's Republic of China for organizing today's open
debate, which is very important to Africa. We greatly
appreciate the briefings this morning by the Secretary-
General and Mr. Smail Chergui, Commissioner for
Peace and Security of the African Union.

While the primary responsibility for the
maintenance ofinternational peace and security belongs
to the Security Council, Africa has been playing an
increasingly central role in those efforts on the African
continent, based on Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations. That requires an effective partnership
between the African Union (AU) and the United
Nations, and in particular between the AU Peace and
Security Council and the Security Council. The annual
joint meetings between the two Councils are clear
testimony to the importance that the United Nations
attaches to peace and security in Africa.

My country has actively supported and participated
in African Union-led peace support operations and other
peace initiatives in the region. Uganda was the first
and largest troop-contributing country in the African
Union Mission in Somalia, where through our joint
work with our sister countries of Burundi, Ethiopia,
Kenya and Djibouti we have contributed to liberating
Somalia from the terrorists of Al-Shabaab and helped to
establish a security situation that has enabled Somalia
to hold successful successive national elections.

It is important to note that regional mechanisms and
subregional organizations in Africa have also played a
critical role in maintaining peace and security there, and
that they are indeed the building blocks of the African
peace and security architecture. For example, through
the East African Community, Uganda continues to
play a leading role in encouraging all Burundian
stakeholders to engage in an all-inclusive political
dialogue in support of President Mkapa as facilitator.
Under the auspices of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, Uganda continues to work with other
Member States to address the current conflict in South
Sudan, particularly on reconciling the various factions
of the ruling Sudan People's Liberation Movement,
which we believe will ultimately lead to the restoration
of peace and security in that country.

We cannot talk about building capacities for peace
and security in Africa without addressing issues that
directly threaten some of our member States. In that
regard, I should single out the situation in the eastern
part of the Democratic Republic of Congo, where the
United Nations has one of the largest peacekeeping
missions in Africa and where negative forces continue
to threaten Member States. I should specifically
mention the Allied Democratic Forces, which are
directly threatening our country. If Africa and the
United Nations do not address this urgent situation, it
will undermine the entire peacekeeping enterprise in
Africa generally, and thus our capacity to maintain
peace and security there.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2017/454) on
options for authorization and support for African Union
peace support operations, submitted to the Council on
26 May, is a welcome development, and we look forward
to hearing about the Council's specific commitments
to addressing Africa's concerns with regard to the
provision of adequate, predictable and sustainable
sources of funding for AU-led peace operations.

As you correctly indicated in your concept note
(S/2017/574, annex), Mr. President, respecting African
countries' ownership in solving African security
problems is a precondition and foundation for support
to African-led peace operations. My delegation joins
other Member States in stressing how vital it is to
ensure that the Security Council listens to Africa in
addressing the security challenges facing the continent.

