Mrs. Gregoire-Van-Haaren (Netherlands): I thank
you for this opportunity to speak in this debate on behalf
of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, Mr. President.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands aligns itself with
the statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union,

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
detailed and thorough report (S/2017/189). I would also
like to thank Special Representative Yamamoto and
Ms. Sima Samar for their briefings.

Today I will focus on three issues - reconciliation
and regional cooperation, the security and humanitarian
situation, and the role of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).

Reconciliation is key to achieving a truly stable
Afghanistan and, to that end, the countries of the region
have a critical and positive role to play in support of
Afghanistan. A regional approach is crucial to achieving
structural security and stability, and requires all
partners to be genuinely engaged and working together.
However, the peace process should be Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned. Moreover, the meaningful participation
of women in any peace process remains essential to
achieving durable and inclusive peace. President Ghani
has stated that peace talks are a clear objective for the
Afghan Government. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
welcomes the peace deal that has been reached between
the Government and Hizb-i-Islami and considers it to
be an important step in the reconciliation process. We
hope for its smooth implementation so that the deal
can function as an encouragement to other insurgency
groups, such as the Taliban, to abandon violence and
engage seriously in peace talks.

In the past few months, unfortunately, the armed
clashes between Afghan security forces and the Taliban
have continued. Only two days ago, an attack in Kabul
for which local affiliates of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant claimed responsibility left more than 120
people killed or injured, and I would like to express
my condolences to Ambassador Saikal in that regard.
While we commend the Afghan National Defence and
Security Forces (ANDSF) for their continued efforts to
counter the Taliban and other insurgents, international
support remains necessary. The international
community, including the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
has supported the ANDSF for more than a decade now,
and we continue to do so through our contribution to
the Resolute Support Mission.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands is particularly
concerned about children's disproportionate suffering
in the deteriorating security situation, as well as about
the steep rise in the numbers of internally displaced
persons (IDPs). Afghanistan's limited capacity to
absorb the vast increase in IDPs and returnees has the
potential to lead to growing numbers with no prospects
of steady jobs or incomes and at risk of joining
insurgency groups. In response to last year's United
Nations flash appeal, the Netherlands contributed
€4.5 million to provide humanitarian assistance to the
most vulnerable groups in Afghanistan.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands commends
UNAMA for its role in supporting the Afghan
Government in fulfilling its commitments in the area
of reform, and we therefore support the continuation of
its mandate. We would particularly like to emphasize
our appreciation for its coordinating efforts among
international partners, as well as the thorough UNAMA
human rights reports. As Ms. Samar just underlined,
while much progress has been made in recent years,
human rights, including women's rights, continue to
be a matter for significant concern in Afghanistan, and
we applaud United Nations efforts to work with the
Afghan Government and civil society in enhancing the
position of women there. We would like to emphasize
our appreciation for the broad United Nations presence
throughout the country and to stress how important
we believe it is to ensure that UNAMA continues to
operate throughout Afghanistan rather than retreating
to Kabul alone. A presence in the field is crucial to the
Mission's success.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands has been a long-
term partner of Afghanistan and has contributed
significant aid to it in the areas of peace, justice and
development. At the Brussels Conference on 5 October,
our Minister for Foreign Trade and Development
Cooperation pledged €230 million to continue our
support for Afghanistan's reconstruction. In that spirit
of partnership, the Kingdom of the Netherlands remains
committed to supporting Afghanistan throughout the
transformation decade, a decade of increasing Afghan
ownership and leadership.

