Ms. Grynspan: On behalf of Kemal Dervis,
Administrator of the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) and Chairman of the United
Nations Development Group, I want to thank you, Mr.
President, for the opportunity to address the Security
Council on the work of the United Nations Country
Team in support of recovery, reconciliation and
development in Haiti.

The successful presidential election of 7 February
presents Haiti with an historic opportunity to break the
cycle of crisis and underdevelopment that has afflicted
the country for so long. Nevertheless, we also know
how fragile such transition periods can be. In such
transitions, humanitarian and development actions are
crucial contributions to political and security
achievements. I believe that Haitians can agree on
sustained humanitarian and development strategies,
coupled with vigorous efforts in the immediate post-
electoral period. To implement that approach, the
continued commitment of the international community
is critical.

A framework to guarantee and sustain effective
support for Haiti must build upon the accomplishments
and lessons of the Interim Cooperation Framework
(ICF), which has guided international cooperation in
Haiti since 2004. Under the Framework, $780 million
has already been disbursed - $80 million of it through
the United Nations. Some achievements are notable
and have been documented. For example, with regard
to HIV/AIDS, the rate of transmission has fallen. There
has also been progress in controlling disease and
malnutrition. But the challenges remain substantial.

The latest meeting of the Haiti donor contact
group, last February, confirmed the proposal to extend
the ICF until December 2007, in order to provide a
continuous cooperation framework for the new
Government. Importantly, the group also decided that it
would work with the newly elected authorities to take
stock of the ICF's performance to date and to conduct
an independent evaluation.

I would like to stress our commitment to work
together with the elected Government on those review
processes, which will guide the extension of the ICF
that is to be proposed at a pledging conference in
September 2006, at the latest. The donor conference
will muster support for Haiti during the critical
transition period. Maintaining funding levels for the
ICF's extension will be decisive for Haiti's
development.

Today, over 76 per cent of Haitians live on less
than $2 a day, and 56 per cent live on less than $1 a
day. Long-term commitment by the international
community therefore entails rapidly launching an
inclusive and nationally owned process to develop a
strategy against poverty based on the attainment of the
Millennium Development Goals. That strategy would
then serve as Haiti's cooperation framework from 2008
onwards. The Country Team is committed to
supporting that endeavour. In that context, it will also
be a priority to identify and enact, together with
donors, innovative solutions to tackle the complex
problem of capacity building, particularly that of State
institutions.
Yet, achieving success against poverty and
attaining the Millennium Development Goals also
require sustainable and equitable economic growth. For
that reason, the Country Team has agreed to support
President-elect Preval's proposal to organize a forum
on international private investment in Haiti.

Given the particular risks associated with
transitions from crisis, the Country Team and the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) have developed a post-electoral
stabilization strategy within the structure of the ICF.
That four-pronged strategy is focused on critical and
catalytic areas for a successful transition. The first
component will develop a coherent and streamlined
package of high-impact and high-visibility
programmes, including rapid employment. The second
will support key democratic institutions, specifically
the Parliament, as well as the creation of a permanent
electoral council and the strengthening of local
governments. The strategy also includes a continued
effort to promote political dialogue and social
cohesion, and the necessary inputs to launch the
preparation of a long-term poverty-reduction strategy.
The Country Team will play a fundamental role in each
of those components.

The magnitude of post-electoral needs, especially
with regard to the first two components, calls for the
immediate implementation of the post-electoral
stabilization strategy. The Country Team is now
engaging donor countries for support.

As the security situation improves, the country
team has accelerated the delivery of humanitarian
assistance. For example, UNICEF and the Pan-
American Health Organization recently conducted a
successful vaccination campaign in Cite' Soleil, the
World Food Programme has fed 1 million Haitians and
the United Nations Population Fund is leading
programmes to fight AIDS and gender-based violence.
Furthermore, preparing for the upcoming hurricane
season requires immediate attention and planning.
Haiti can count on the full willingness of the Country
Team to respond to humanitarian requirements,
especially as regards the basic needs of women,
children, young people and disabled and elderly
persons.

With regard to its humanitarian response, the
Country Team continues to be committed to supporting
development solutions, including an island-wide
approach with the neighbouring Dominican Republic. I
believe that the situation in Haiti demonstrates how
development and humanitarian work can contribute to
security and embolden political gains. During the
continuing transition, those synergies will be more
important than ever - for example, by assuring that
the Country Team and MINUSTAH work strategically
and integrally in the areas of police reform,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and the
reform of the justice system, on basis of the work
achieved as part of the integrated mission.

Haiti and the international community face an
historic opportunity to set the country on the path of
reconciliation and sustained development. For the sake
of Haitians, we must seize the occasion with
determination.

