The annual report of the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict (S/2020/525) reflects the tragic reality of children around the world who, living in situations of armed conflict, continue to be subjected to shocking human rights violations and abuses and to violations of international humanitarian law. Despite strong laws in place, implementation and accountability remain largely absent. As a result, the number of children who are at risk of being killed, maimed, recruited, subject to sexual violence or abductions, and of suffering from attacks on schools and hospitals and the denial of humanitarian access continues to rise. This same lack of implementation and absence of accountability has caused exponentially growing suffering for generations of Palestinian children living under Israeli occupation in the occupied State of Palestine, including East Jerusalem. Tragically, the situation of Palestinian children is very relevant as we discuss the importance of the monitoring and reporting mechanism established by the Security Council in 2005 pursuant to resolution 1612 (2005), for its purpose was not only to gather and document evidence on the six grave violations but also to provide a mechanism for accountability. Unfortunately, despite the creation of the monitoring and reporting mechanism and Member States' support for it, and despite continual reports of grave violations against Palestinian children by Israel, the occupying Power, the children and armed conflict framework has grossly failed to foster accountability or the compliance by the Israeli occupying forces with international child-protection standards. Unquestionably, the international community's unwillingness to enforce international law when it comes to Israel has only fuelled and emboldened its lawlessness and the culture of impunity in the Government and the occupying forces. We reiterate that, according to the established criteria and the thorough documentation available to the Security Council, the perpetration of such violations and crimes warrants that Israel, its army and its settlers be put on the list of parties that commit grave violations against children. The absence of such inclusion has not only perpetuated an environment of impunity leading to the loss of more Palestinian children's lives, but it has also undermined the credibility of the list, exposing it to the criticism of politicization. Similar criticism can be lodged against the report of the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict. In the section on Israel and the State of Palestine, the report continues to blatantly ignore the prevailing context of military occupation. We continue to appeal to the Secretary-General and the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General to rectify this omission in future reports. The State of Palestine will continue to exert all efforts aimed at protecting Palestinian children as we wait for the international community, including the Security Council, to finally carry out its obligations under international humanitarian law and international human rights law, respect the relevant United Nations resolutions and muster the political will to act immediately and without selectivity in order to stop precluding the protection of Palestinian children under Israeli occupation. This starts and ends with holding Israel accountable.
