Mr. Neculaescu: I wish to thank you, Mr. President,
for the opportunity to brief the Security Council at
today's important meeting and for providing a concept
note (S/2018/325, annex) that captures key priorities for
peacebuilding and sustaining peace.

I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for
his report on peacebuilding and sustaining peace
(S/2018/43). I welcome his emphasis on the importance
of enhancing the coherence and the effectiveness of
the United Nations system, while respecting existing
mandates in supporting Member State-led efforts to
build and sustain peace, and on the significance of
partnerships across the United Nations system and with
other relevant key partners and stakeholders. I thank
him for providing options for adequate resourcing of
peacebuilding activities.

The resolutions to be adopted by General Assembly
and the Security Council are important steps that
demonstrate the commitment of Member States to
peacebuilding and sustaining peace. The resolutions
will provide opportunities for Member States to
discuss the recommendations and options contained
in the Secretary-General's report on peacebuilding
and sustaining peace and enable the continuation
of our discussions about how we can better support
countries in their efforts to build and sustain peace.
In that connection, I reaffirm the readiness of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) to provide a forum
for those discussions in the follow-up to the high-level
meeting and ahead of the envisaged 2020 review.

Two years ago, the General Assembly and Security
Council adopted by consensus twin resolutions
(Security Council resolution 2282 (2016) and General
Assembly resolution 70/262) on the review of the
peacebuilding architecture. The resolutions reiterated
the commitment of Member States to supporting
countries at all stages of conflict. They emphasized
that sustaining peace requires coherence, sustained
engagement and coordination between the General
Assembly, the Security Council and the Economic and
Social Council, consistent with their mandates as set
out in the Charter of the United Nations. They also
contained a crucial message for the work of the United
Nations that an integrated and coherent approach of all
relevant actors, within and outside the United Nations,
is critical to sustaining country-led peacebuilding
and peace efforts. I am pleased to see that the same
message represents the foundation of the report of the
Secretary-General, as well as an important aspect of
today's meeting.

One of the main objectives of the Peacebuilding
Commission is to help strengthen its bridging role,
especially including as a forum for all relevant
stakeholders, and to enhance partnerships with
actors beyond the United Nations, such as regional
organizations, international financial institutions, civil
society, including women's and youth groups, and,
where relevant, the private sector. Allow me to reflect
on a few regional and country-specific situations where
the Commission has supported more coherence in the
work of the United Nations.

First, I will speak on the Sahel. In response to
presidential statement of S/PRST/2017/2, adopted in
January 2017, which emphasized the importance of the
convening role of the PBC in peacebuilding efforts,
the Commission has worked, in collaboration with the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS), to mobilize deeper commitment and
partnership among the United Nations, the countries
of Sahel and other international and regional partners
to advance the implementation of the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel. Since the adoption
of the presidential statement, the PBC has convened
a number of meetings, including a joint event with
the Economic and Social Council, which brought
together the countries of the Sahel, the United Nations
and key partners to discuss the challenges facing the
region and efforts within the United Nations system
to enhance coordination in the implementation of
the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel.
In S/PRST/2018/3, adopted in January, the Security
Council reiterated the convening role of the PBC in
support of UNOWAS.

With its ability to go beyond country-specific
discussions and focus on cross-border and regional
issues, with the consent ofthe countries concerned, and
with its capacity to convene national authorities, regional
organizations, international financial institutions, civil
society and other relevant partners, the PBC is playing
an important role in promoting an integrated, strategic
and coherent approach to peacebuilding and sustaining
peace in that important region.

Secondly, I will turn to Liberia. The resolutions on
the review of the peacebuilding architecture, several
presidential statements of the Security Council and the
report of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding and
sustaining peace all recognize the important role the
PBC plays in advising the Security Council, upon its
request, during the formation, review and drawdown
of peacekeeping operations and special political
mission mandates.

In the case of Liberia, where the long-standing
peacekeeping mission came to an end only a few weeks
ago, the PBC actively assisted national authorities
and engaged with civil society, the United Nations
leadership on the ground and relevant partners to
support the development of a national peacebuilding
plan. The Commission also convened meetings to
discuss preparations for the elections and the United
Nations transition, including hearing from the United
Nations system on capacity resource mapping to
support national peacebuilding needs. The PBC stands
ready to continue fostering international support to
Liberia that is sustained and coordinated, including in
the country's development of a national development
plan that fully integrates peacebuilding priorities.
That is a true example of PBC support to building and
sustaining peace in practice.

Thirdly, I will now address The Gambia. Since last
year, the Commission has convened several meetings,
the latest of which was held the day before yesterday
with the participation of the President of The Gambia.
Our discussions focused on assisting the country, upon
its request, at a critical time of its transition. It brought
together senior officials of the Gambian Government,
Member States, relevant parts of the United Nations
system, international financial institutions and civil
society, with a view to enhancing cooperation.

Those brief examples show how the Peacebuilding
Commission, serving as a bridge between the three
relevant principal organs of the United Nations
and through its important convening role, not only
fosters coherence at the intergovernmental level but,
ultimately, also supports the United Nations in being
more valuable, strategic and effective in the field,
where it matters.

Since we are marking the second anniversary of
the adoption of the resolutions on the review of the
peacebuilding architecture, allow me to raise one final
point on how the PBC has been working towards more
flexible and effective working methods. Besides the
important work long being done by the existing country-
specific configurations for Burundi, the Central African
Republic, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia and Sierra Leone,
over the past two years the Commission - always
acting in consultation with and upon the request of
the countries concerned - has considered situations
spanning from Burkina Faso to Colombia, Burundi to
Kyrgyzstan and Liberia to Sri Lanka.

The Commission has strengthened its focus on
regional and subregional situations and on thematic
issues, such as financing for peacebuilding and
institution-building. It has built stronger links with
key partners, such as the African Union and the World
Bank. It has also strengthened its synergies with
the Peacebuilding Fund. I look forward to further
improving the work of the Commission and its advisory
role to the Security Council.

