Mr. Heusgen (Federal Republic of Germany): I
would first like to subscribe to what my French colleague
said earlier. Considering that our time is limited in
the Council, I find these long initial interventions
lasting 20 minutes or half an hour unacceptable. My
advice to future Presidents is that they either obtain a
commitment from the speakers limiting themselves to
five minutes or that they be asked to speak at the end,
after all Council members have spoken.

In terms of substance, I agree with what my
colleagues from the United Kingdom and France have
said previously, and I would like to highlight a few points,
starting with the elections. Of course I listened carefully
to what my Russian colleague had to say about the state
of affairs and democracy in the country. I just want to
say, and to point out, that in Kosovo the opposition was
actually able to conduct a campaign. No parties were
prevented from participating, there were free and fair
elections in most areas, and a change of Government
was possible. Therefore, in the words of my Russian
colleague, it is a young, beautiful democracy. The only
problems we witnessed were in the areas with a Kosovo
Serb majority, which were marred by the intimidation
and targeting of non-Serbian List candidates and their
supporters. Although the statement delivered by the
Serbian Foreign Minister was very long, I did not hear
him mention that part of the elections. Perhaps next
time he could explain what happened in the Kosovo
Serb-majority areas.

I should like to reiterate that we need to ensure a
swift formation of Government. The new Government
will need to pursue reforms and abide by the rule of law.
We also need to ensure the continuation of dialogue
between Kosovo and Serbia. In that regard, I subscribe
to what my Russian colleague said - dialogue has to
continue. I would not go as far as to say the dialogue
is in a coma, but I would say that it is urgent that
the dialogue continue. I am hopeful that with a
new European Commission in place, the European
Union-facilitated dialogue will continue and we may see
constructive negotiations; too much time has already
been lost in that regard. Both Serbia and Kosovo share
responsibilities, and I can only reiterate what we said
last time (see S/PV.8541). We call on the Government of
Kosovo to revoke the tariffs imposed on products from
Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina. At the same time,
we urge the Serbian Government to end its efforts to
persuade other countries to withdraw their recognition
of Kosovo. I know the Serbian Foreign Minister likes
to travel to Pacific islands and the Caribbean, among
other destinations, but I think that Serbian taxpayers'
money can be put to better use than for travelling to
persuade other countries to withdraw their recognition
of Kosovo.

With regard to the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), I would
like to thank Special Representative Tanin for his
briefing and work. Twenty years after UNMIK was
first mandated, we still believe that the Mission needs
to adapt to the new reality. The situation in Kosovo
has drastically changed, including the operating
environment. We therefore believe that it is time for a
formal transition of many of UNMIK's tasks either to
Kosovar institutions or other international institutions
that have taken over UNMIK's role. Having listened to
Mr. Tanin's briefing, I note that he expressed support
for the launching of a Serbian-Albanian dictionary.
While that is fantastic, I believe that country embassies
or other organizations could do that - with all due
respect, we do not need UNMIK for that. With regard
to the Kosovar authorities, we need to keep working
with UNMIK on the ground in a spirit of trust and
collaboration regarding the incident on 28 May. We can
only repeat what our colleagues have said on the need
to ensure respect for international law. I heard the plea
of my Russian colleague and his call for respect for
international law. I listened very carefully to that, and
I hope our Russian colleague also insists on respect for
international humanitarian law.

I would like to make two further points. First, we
continue to support the efforts of Kosovo in its survivor-
centred approach to addressing conflict-related sexual
violence. We welcome the ongoing work on the
Kosovo Government commission responsible for the
verification and recognition of the status of survivors
of conflict-related sexual violence. We note that 406
applicants have already been granted survivor status,
and we ask the Government to pursue that work in order
to empower women, enable them to overcome isolation,
contribute to the well-being of their families and
elevate their status and role within their communities.
I heard our colleague from Serbia mention that he
was requesting indictments against the perpetrators
of sexual crimes. Perhaps next time in his briefing he
could inform us of how many indictments have been
launched in Serbia for sexual crimes committed.
Let me conclude with a practical example of the
necessity and benefit of closer regional cooperation.
Together with our French partners, we have initiated a
regional road map for the Western Balkans with a view
to strengthening the control of small arms, which are all
too readily available in the region. We are encouraged
by the progress achieved so far, and we are working
towards a ministerial review conference in Berlin on
31 January 2020.

