Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): Last week, we
sat in this Chamber and heard about the many ways
that North Korea has violated multiple United Nations
resolutions and the will of the Security Council (see S/PV.8137): the illegal nuclear programme; multiple
launches ofballistic missiles; the appalling human right
violations. We condemned, in the strongest possible
terms, these reckless acts by North Korea and we
called on the regime to stop immediately all activity in
defiance of the Council. We also offered Kim Jong Un
a clear choice - different path that leads to prosperity
and security. However, last Friday, the Permanent
Representative of the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea defiantly made clear that North Korea has
no intention of changing its path. It has no intention of
abandoning their nuclear programme.

Instead, unbelievably, it claims that it will be
a responsible nuclear Power. It shows no sense of
responsibility to its neighbours - over whom it fires
their ballistic missiles - and it shows no sense of
responsibility to the people it forces into modern slavery.
As North Korea's missile capabilities advance, so do
the contempt and disregard it shows for the Council.
It has repeatedly and wilfully rebuffed our unanimous
will. It continues to act in brazen violation of its legal
obligations, and it seeks to undermine our systems and
our collective values.

Last week, we all confirmed that we must use all
the diplomatic and economic tools at our disposal to
deliver the uncompromising message that this path is
unacceptable. Today, we are doingjust that. Through the
adoption of resolution 2397 (2017), we are showing the
regime that our will is strong and that these provocative
actions have severe consequences.

Today, we have banned the import of nearly 90 per
cent of refined petroleum products into North Korea.
These products are used by the regime to resource its
illegal nuclear and ballistic missile programmes. By
cutting off this supply, we will restrict its ability to
develop and deploy these weapons. We have also banned
North Korean exports of food products, machinery and
industrial and electrical equipment. We have taken
another important step towards ending the exploitation
of North Korean workers sent overseas with the sole
aim of generating earnings for the regime.

We have taken these steps to restrict the income
that the Democratic People's Republic of Korea uses
to fund its prohibited nuclear and ballistic missile
programmes. I congratulate the United States on this
diplomatic achievement and we join it in leaving no
stone unturned in pursuit of a diplomatic solution.
We call on all States to implement this and previous
resolutions fully. It is only by all of us doing this that
they will have the intended impact.
These measures are not designed to hurt the North
Koreanpeople. We are not targeting the ordinary citizens
of North Korea. There are humanitarian exemptions
and protections in place to protect the people who
already suffer so much at the hands of the Government.
It is the regime that bears full responsibility for the
measures we have enacted today. Any consequences
the people suffer are because of the regime's reckless
choices - its choice to develop its nuclear programme
over providing for its people.

We must stand united and be clear that we are
adopting these measures today to force Kim Jong Un to
see that he has the choice of two paths. The current path
does not advance the prosperity and security of North
Korea; instead, it poses a very real threat to the entire
international community. We therefore call on North
Korea once again to change course. Let us all call on
that regime once again to prioritize the well-being of its
people over its illegal pursuit of nuclear weapons. Let
us call on it once again to engage meaningfully with the
international community.

The United Kingdom will continue to work with
the members of the Council, our allies and our partners
to increase diplomatic pressure. The resolution just
adopted gives us an opportunity to do just that. We
must all enforce these new measures and work together,
using all the diplomatic and economic tools at our
disposal to deliver this clear, uncompromising message
to the Kim regime.

