The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Algeria, Argentina, Australia,
Belarus, Brazil, Canada, Croatia, Egypt, Japan,
Namibia, Pakistan, Peru and Sweden, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Baali
(Algeria), Mr. Listre (Argentina), Ms. Wensley
(Australia), Mr. Laptenok (Belarus), Mr. Fonseca
(Brazil), Mr. Duval (Canada), Mr. Simonovic'
(Croatia), Mr. Aboulgheit (Egypt), Mr. Kobayashi
(Japan), Mr. Anjaba (Namibia), Mr. Khalid
(Pakistan), Mr. Picasso (Peru) and Mr. Schori
(Sweden) took the seats reserved for them at the
side ofthe Council Chamber.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document 8/2001/185, which contains the text of a
letter dated 28 February 2001 from the Acting
Permanent Representative of Ukraine to the United
Nations addressed to the Secretary-General.

At the outset, I should like sincerely to welcome
the Secretary-General, and all the other participants, to
the Security Council Chamber today. Their presence
here testifies to the importance of our meeting, as well
as of the subject matter to be addressed. Today, we
mark six months since the Security Council held its
Summit, entitled "Ensuring an effective role for the
Security Council in the maintenance of international
peace and security, particularly in Africa". That
meeting, held during the course of the Millennium
Summit, assembled the leaders of the States members
of the Council to reaffirm their responsibilities in
upholding the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter. It brought about a number of
important commitments by the Security Council to
enhance United Nations effectiveness in addressing
challenges to peace and security, which were recorded
in its unanimously adopted declaration.

Giving special importance to the decisions taken
at the Summit, Ukraine, having assumed the presidency
of the Security Council, proposed convening an open
debate aimed at evaluating concrete results in the
implementation of those decisions. This debate
proceeds from the assumption that there is a need to
conduct regular reviews of the practical
implementation of the decisions taken and to explore
further ways of ensuring an effective role for the
Security Council in the maintenance of international
peace and security. In this context, I should like to
draw particular attention to the decision taken by the
Security Council to invite non-members of the Council
to speak first at this open debate. I hope that our broad
and frank exchange of views will strengthen the efforts
aimed at increasing the effectiveness of current and
future activities of the Security Council.

I now invite the Secretary-General to address the
Council.


