Mr. Lambertini (Italy): At the outset, allow me
to congratulate the Kingdom of the Netherlands on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council.
We are very proud of the close collaboration between
our two countries in the framework of our split term.
Allow me to say that it is a personal pleasure to see you
in that position, Madam.

Italy aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
by the observer of the European Union. I wish to add
some points in my national capacity.

We also welcome today's unanimous adoption of
resolution 2405 (2018), on the renewal of the mandate of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). The Mission plays a vital role in the
partnership between Afghanistan and the international
community in the face of extremely complex challenges
and difficult conditions on the ground. From its efforts
to facilitate the peace process to the delicate issues
revolving around electoral processes and reforms, we
strongly appreciate and support UNAMA's contribution.

We condemn in the strongest terms the terrorist
attacks that have taken place in Afghanistan and its
capital in the past weeks. We extend our heartfelt
condolences to the Afghan Government and to the
families of the victims. The intensity of the conflict
remains worryingly high, with tragic effects on the
population, as UNAMA's regular reporting on civilian
casualties continues to assess. In this difficult context,
we welcome President Ghani's courageous peace
offer, as presented at the second conference of the
Kabul Process, which took place last week. This offer
represents a tangible demonstration that the Afghan
authorities are determined to pursue the objective of
peace through dialogue with insurgent groups.

The National Unity Government's proposal opens
a political window of opportunity for the peace and
reconciliation process, which must be explored and
pursued to its fullest potential. We therefore hope that
the Taliban will grasp the significance of this opening
by accepting the Government's invitation to come to the
table in the spirit of sincere dialogue, with the shared
objective of putting an end to the conflict and thereby
opening the way to a future of peace and prosperity for
Afghanistan and its people.

We are aware that bringing about the conditions for
a meaningful peace process is not an easy task. Every
effort must be made in order to give substance to the
road map. To further this objective, it will be crucial to
generate a broad national consensus in support of the
peace process. We therefore appreciate and encourage
the commitment of the Government and its relevant
institutions to maintaining and strengthening its efforts
to reach out to all components of Afghan society on the
basis of a truly inclusive approach.

In this context, it is essential that Afghan women
be given the opportunity to play a primary and active
role, first and foremost in order to ensure that the rights
enshrined in the Constitution and the broader civil and
social gains made in the past 16 years are protected and
promoted. We strongly appreciate the Government's
commitment in this regard, which should be reflected
in its road map for peace.

The support of the Afghan people for the peace
process will also be strengthened by the necessary
cohesion between various political groups, as well as
the ability of the Government to meet the needs of the
population by enacting the necessary reforms. Ensuring
that the upcoming parliamentary and presidential
elections are held in a timely, transparent and inclusive
manner will certainly provide an important contribution
to this goal.

Terrorism and violent extremism continue to pose
a formidable obstacle on the road to peace. A decisive,
common effort against this grave threat to the security
and stability of Afghanistan remains a key factor. Italy
continues to play its part in this regard in the framework
of the Resolute Support Mission by providing a
significant contribution to strengthen the capacities of
the Afghan National Security and Defence Forces.

To be fully successful in defeating terrorist groups,
however, it is also necessary to bring about a close and
genuine collaboration between regional stakeholders.
This also applies to the fight against transnational
criminal networks and drug trafficking. We therefore
encourage all efforts geared towards making concrete
progress in terms of a constructive dialogue and
effective cooperation between neighbouring countries
on the basis of a common understanding that this kind
of win-win cooperation can bring tangible benefits to
all parties.

