Ms. Loj: As Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, I would like to review the Committee's
activities since my last report to the Council in May
2006. I will inform members about the Committee's
twentieth work programme for the current six-month
period ending 31 December 2006.
Before I begin, I would like to thank the head of
the Committee's Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate (CTED), Mr. Javier Ruperez, and his team,
as well as the Secretariat staff, for their valuable
support.

On 14 September 2005, the Security Council
adopted resolution 1624 (2005). That resolution called
upon States to take a number of steps broadly
connected to the need to address the problem of
incitement to terrorism. The Security Council also
directed the Counter-Terrorism Committee to "include
in its dialogue with Member States their efforts to
implement this resolution" and to

"work with Member States to help build capacity,
including through spreading best legal practice
and promoting exchange of information in this
regard" (resolution 1624 (2005), para. 6 (a) and
(b))~

Finally, it tasked the Committee to report back to the
Council in twelve months on the implementation of
that resolution. In accordance with that mandate
therefore, on 14 September 2006, the Committee
submitted its report to the Council on the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1624
(2005). That report is before the Council.

The Committee's report aims to present a factual
account of steps that have been taken by States to
implement resolution 1624 (2005). At the outset of the
report, we note that, as of 7 September 2006, the
Committee had received reports from only 69 States on
implementation of the resolution. While that total
includes States from all regional groups, the limited
number of responses from Member States has
inevitably restricted the scope of the Committee's
report on the implementation of the resolution. Let me
nonetheless present the conclusions that the Committee
has been able to draw on the basis of the information
available.

The Committee's report first addresses the
provision in resolution 1624 (2005) calling upon all
States

"to adopt such measures as may be necessary and
appropriate and in accordance with their
obligations under international law" (para. 1)

in order to prohibit by law and to prevent incitement to
commit a terrorist act or acts. We observed that the
reports received by the Committee so far showed that
States have a range of understandings of the steps that
may be taken to prohibit and prevent incitement.

In that connection, 21 of the 69 reporting States
informed the Committee that incitement to commit a
terrorist act or acts was expressly prohibited in their
criminal laws. Thirteen others reported that they were
considering adopting similar legislation. Most of the
States which reported expressly prohibiting incitement
provided additional information to the Committee - as
reflected in the report - on issues such as the type of
conduct that was considered to fall within the scope of
the crime of incitement, and the legal criteria that
needed to be satisfied in order for conviction to result.
A smaller number of States provided the Committee
with information on the prohibition within their laws of
the justification, glorification or apology of acts of
terrorism.

Many States also informed the Committee about
provisions in their laws that prohibit an array of
widely-recognized accessory offences committed in
connection with any serious crime. Accessory offences
might include, for instance, such activities as aiding,
counselling and solicitation. Those provisions would
apply, therefore, in cases relating to the commission or
attempted commission of terrorist acts, where such acts
are defined in a State's criminal laws. Thus, those
States consider that the inclusion of such offences in
their criminal codes serves to implement, at least in
part, the call upon States in resolution 1624 (2005) to
prohibit by law incitement to commit a terrorist act or
acts.

Resolution 1624 (2005) contains several other
important provisions. It calls upon all States to deny
safe haven to any persons suspected of incitement to
commit a terrorist act or acts. It also calls upon all
States to cooperate to strengthen the security of their
international borders. The Committee's report reflects a
range of steps that States have taken in those respects,
in areas such as the processing of claims to refugee
status, the handling of extradition requests, the
strengthening of international cooperation, and the
adoption of new technologies to prevent travel
document fraud.

The resolution also calls upon all States to

"continue international efforts to enhance
dialogue and broaden understanding among
civilizations, in an effort to prevent the
5
indiscriminate targeting of different religions and
cultures" (para. 3).

On that issue, the Committee's report describes various
steps that States reported taking, including initiatives at
the United Nations, other international initiatives and
measures taken at the national level.

The report also contains information on steps
taken by States to implement the resolution's call on
them

"to take all measures as may be necessary and
appropriate and in accordance with their
obligations under international law to counter
incitement of terrorist acts motivated by
extremism and intolerance and to prevent the
subversion of educational, cultural, and religious
institutions by terrorists and their supporters"
(ibid)

Finally, the report provides information on steps
taken by States to implement paragraph 4 of the
resolution, which stresses the need, in implementing
resolution 1624 (2005), for States to comply with all of
their obligations under international law, in particular
international human rights law, refugee law and
humanitarian law. The report recounts a number of
international obligations by which States considered
themselves bound, in many cases relating to the right
to freedom of expression as well as the right to seek
and enjoy asylum.

As the report indicates, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee will continue its efforts to fulfil the
mandate given to it by the Security Council in
resolution 1624 (2005). To that end - and as is the
case in all aspects of the Committee's work - the
Committee will, along with its Executive Directorate,
continue to engage actively and constructively with
Member States. In that regard, I strongly encourage
States that have not yet done so to report to the
Committee in order to ensure that the Committee has
the best possible basis for discussing with States their
implementation of the resolution. Furthermore,
reporting from more States will strengthen the
Committee's foundation for fulfilling the task of
spreading best legal practice and promoting exchange
of information.

Before I conclude, I would like to add a few
words about the Committee's other activities in order
to enhance States' implementation of resolution 1373

(2001). The guidepost for the Committee's work in that
regard remains the comprehensive review of December
2005, in which some priority areas were highlighted.
Therefore, the Committee continues to focus its work
on enhancing its tools, including by revising the
reporting regime; on how to enhance the facilitation of
technical assistance for States in need; and on how to
deepen relations with the international, regional and
subregional organizations.

Since I reported last, the Committee has reached
agreement on an update of its web page with
indications of best practices. I encourage States to use
the information contained there as a source of
inspiration in their continuous efforts to implement the
provisions of resolution 1373 (2001).

Also, the Committee is continuing its visits to
Member States upon their consent. In all, the
Committee has now visited 10 States and is working on
ensuring that the necessary follow-up to those visits
takes place, in order to ensure that they lead to as many
concrete measurable results as possible. I would like to
thank the Governments of the States that have hosted
visits for their hospitality and cooperation.

Moreover, the Committee has continued
coordination of its activities with the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) and with
the 1540 Committee through, inter alia, maximizing
synergies among relevant activities of experts.

We have just passed the fifth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1373 (2001), and the
implementation of that resolution remains as crucial as
ever in the international community's fight against
terrorism. Developments since I last reported have
shown, once again, that the Committee's main task
remains vital and urgent. I also welcome the recently
adopted United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy (General Assembly resolution 60/288), which
reiterates our strong determination to fight against
terrorism. Support from, and cooperation with,
Member States remains invaluable. I would therefore
like to thank Member States for their important
contribution in that regard.

