Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I thank you, Sir, for coming to New York to
preside over this important meeting of the Security
Council. Your interest in this matter is typical of your
friendly country, South Africa, which suffered decades
of injustice, racial discrimination, repression and
persecution by a minority that claimed superiority over
your genuine and sterling people merely because it was
of European descent.

When Syria courageously defended the struggle
of the African National Congress, under the leadership
of Nelson Mandela from his apartheid prison cell,
some who were entrusted with the maintenance of
international peace and security in the Security Council
considered him to be a terrorist. I should therefore like
to reiterate my thanks to you, Sir, for attending this
meeting and for demonstrating your friendly country's
considerable interest in the situation in the Middle
East.

Since today's topic, "The situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question", was first
inscribed on the Security Council's agenda, some have
sought to make the Council's deliberations on this
issue a matter of the mere delivery of speeches serving
unrelated political ends. We meet today once again to
call on the Security Council to take serious action to
end Israel's occupation of Arab lands, inhumane racial
policies, and violations of international instruments
and norms, and to hold Israel to account for its feverish
settlement campaigns and systematic murder of
civilians in the occupied Palestinian and Arab
territories.

We call on the Council to help the Palestinian
people to regain all its legitimate rights, including its
right to establish its independent Palestinian State
within the borders of 4 June 1967, with its capital in
Jerusalem, and the right of Palestinian refugees to
return to their homes, in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 194 (III) of 1948. That is the heart
of this agenda item; any other issue injected by other
delegations serves merely to distract the Council with
manoeuvres and tricks that do not serve but undermine
the interests of international peace and security.

We have listened closely to many statements this
morning, and were surprised to see some speakers
eagerly discover that the topic under discussion was no
longer the situation in the Middle East, which, as all
know, is directly related to ending Israel's occupation
of Arab territories; preventing Israel, the occupying
Power, from undermining the peace process; and
drawing international attention to Israel's
warmongering in the region, in blatant coordination
with some Council members and States of our region.
Some speakers have found that the agenda item on the
situation in the Middle East has nothing to do with
Israel and its occupation of Arab territories, but is in
fact related to Syria, while others have come to the
illusory conclusion that the matter is related to Iran.

Others still may have come to the conclusion that
the item on the Middle East no longer belongs on the
Council's agenda because they are under the
impression that Israel actually implemented the
resolutions of international legitimacy by squelching
the question of Palestine and the principles of
international law, even though it has not yet withdrawn
from the occupied territories in the Golan, southern
Lebanon and Palestine; shut down its machinery of
repression, settlement activities, assassination and
persecution in the occupied Arab territories; or
implemented General Assembly resolution 194 (III),
which stipulates the return of Palestinian refugees to
the cities, villages and homes from which they were
evicted in 1948 and 1967. This was the grand
discovery made by some speakers this morning.

Despite all international demands and resolutions
regarding the termination of Israel's occupation of
Arab territories and the establishment of the
Palestinian State, unfortunately the Security Council
has not risen to its responsibilities under the Charter.
No visible progress whatsoever has been made; on the
contrary, the situation is deteriorating under Israel's
aggressive escalation of its unbridled settlement
activities, which in 2011 reached their highest level in
10 years. The construction of settlements increased by
20 per cent in 2011. These disturbing statistics,
compiled by the Israeli organization Peace Now, also
reflect an increase of some 50 per cent this year in
settler aggression against Palestinian civilians and
Christian and Islamic holy sites over the previous year.
In addition, Israel, the occupying Power, is criminally
obsessed with cutting down olive trees.

All of those attacks take place either pursuant to
decisions of the Israeli Government or under the direct
protection of the Israeli authorities. Recently, Israeli
authorities evacuated 90,000 people in the Negev
desert from their homes and villages. We state time and
again that this adversarial situation presages disastrous
consequences for the region and will bring about war at
the expense of peace.

It is disconcerting that the Israeli escalation
enjoys unqualified financial, military and political
backing by some States that are basically responsible
for all of the tensions and conflicts in our region since
the Sykes-Picot Agreement of 1916 and the Balfour
Declaration of 1917. Historical, in-depth research has
recently shown that the confidential 1916 Sykes-Picot
Agreement between the two colonial Powers, France
and the United Kingdom, was designed to prepare for
the Balfour Declaration, which came a year later.

Today, those States falsely arrogate to themselves
the right to defend human rights - rights that they
have nothing to do with - and civilians and claim that
they oppose settlement activities and support the
establishment of two States. Those States have never
taken any action to stem or stop the settlement
activities that would lead to the establishment of a
Palestinian State and bring peace. Those States have
never tried to criticize Israel or apply any serious
pressure on that country. Rather, they prevent the
Security Council from taking any action on that score.

Similarly, we remind the Security Council here
that the United States has prevented the issuance of a
press statement condemning the settlements, giving
Israel illegitimate immunity for all the crimes it has
perpetrated in the occupied Palestinian territory.

In that connection, we would like to note that the
League of Arab States has warned of the continued
flow of funds from Europe and the United States to
radical Israeli organizations that support settlement
activity in Palestine and the occupied Syrian Golan.
There are so many questions, since none of the States I
just mentioned has paid heed to that warning, just as all
resolutions, statements and appeals made by the Arab
League over long decades - all calling for measures
to halt the Israeli massacres and violations in the
occupied Arab territories - have been ignored.

Yet those States themselves hastened to receive
anything issuing from the League of Arab States with
regard to Syria while Syria is absent from the
deliberations taking place within the Arab League,
even if the position arrived at is not consensual. The
purpose of that approach is to use the matter
negatively, as a weapon or Trojan horse against Syria,
in order to widen the crisis and internationalize the
situation in the country in implementation of their
agendas of flagrant interference. This was mentioned in
some of the statements delivered of my colleagues this
morning - and that despite the fact that a number of
members of the League of Arab States reject making
the League a device for calling for aggressive external
interference after the failure of its mission. Therefore,
the credibility of the Arab observers is being targeted
and their reports torpedoed, in order to justify future
aggression against Syria in all forms - military,
diplomatic, political, economic and in the media -
regardless of the cost.

Israel, defying international legitimacy, continues
to refuse to return the occupied Syrian Golan to Syria
and abide by the resolutions of international
legitimacy, particularly resolution 497 (1981), which
considered the annexation of the Syrian Golan null and
void and with no legal effect. Israel continues its
settlement activities in the occupied Syrian Golan, as
well as acts of terrorism and a policy of apartheid and
oppression against Syrian citizens chafing under the
yoke of its occupation. It also continues inhuman,
coercive detention practices that are contrary to United
Nations standards for the treatment of prisoners.

Further, the Israeli occupation authorities'
attempts to dismember the occupied Syrian Golan by
building a separation apartheid wall east of Majd
al-Shams have not been enough for Israel. It continues
its aggressive policy in the Golan, tightening the grip
on Syrian citizens and the environment, burning land,
destroying crops and engaging in the unfair distribution
of water by drawing water from Mas'adah Lake in the
occupied Golan for the exclusive use of the settlers,
which has caused grave and considerable harm to the
environment.

We tried to convey to the Secretary-General and
the members of the Security Council our official
complaints on that point. Regrettably, those complaints
were not heeded. Rather, the representatives of the
Secretary-General have not referred to those grave
Israeli violations in their monthly briefings to the
Security Council under the agenda item entitled "The
situation in the Middle East". Israel has thus been
emboldened to persist in its pursuit of aggressive
policies and gross violations, which raises questions
about the credibility of the Secretariat's ability to deal
objectively with our legitimate issues.

I would like to express here our dissatisfaction
with the disregard shown by Mr. Fernandez-Taranco
this morning when he failed to mention the terrible
situation in the occupied Syrian Golan. That disregard
can no longer be glossed over, given that the officials
of the Secretariat have had their attention drawn to the
situation on dozens of occasions and since they are
compelled to include a paragraph on Israeli practices in
the Syrian Golan in their briefings. Despite our
acceptance of the very few references in previous
briefings, what happened today is egregious and makes
it clear that the Secretariat must reconsider its position.

In conclusion, I would like to welcome the new
members of the Council - Morocco, Pakistan,
Azerbaijan, Guatemala and Togo - and to wish them
every success as they uphold the issues and principles
of justice and equity and reject hegemony.

