The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have the following documents
before them: S/ 1995/722, letter dated 17 August 1995 from
the Prime Minister of the Republic of Zaire addressed to
the Secretary-General; and S/ 1995/723, letter dated 18
August 1995 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
Prime Minister of the Republic of Zaire.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council views with deep concern
the forcible repatriation of Rwandan and Burundian
refugees by the Government of Zaire and the
increasingly tense situation in the region.

"The Security Council takes note of the recent
letter from the Government of Zaire to the
Secretary-General (S/ 1995/722) and the Secretary-
General's reply (S/1995/723) in which he urges the
Government of Zaire to continue to provide assistance
to Rwandan and Burundian refugees.

"The Security Council considers that Zaire and
the other States which have accepted refugees from
Rwanda and Burundi make an important
contribution, in spite of the considerable difficulties
created for them thereby, to peace and stability in
the region. Their contribution is of special
importance in view of the genocide which took place
in Rwanda and the possibility of further bloodshed
in Burundi. The Council also notes the commitment
of the Government of Rwanda to take the necessary
steps to facilitate the safe return of its nationals as
soon as possible and encourages it to continue its
efforts in order to implement its undertakings in this
respect.

"The Security Council calls on the Government
of Zaire to stand by its humanitarian obligations
regarding refugees, including, inter alia, those under
the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees of
1951, and to reconsider and halt its declared policy
of the forcible repatriation of refugees to Rwanda
and Burundi.

"The Security Council supports the decision by
the Secretary-General to send the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees to the region to
engage in urgent discussions with the Government of
Zaire and neighbouring States with a view to
resolving the situation. It encourages all
Governments in the region to cooperate with the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to
achieve the voluntary and orderly repatriation of
refugees. It also calls on the international community
to provide all possible assistance to help care for the
refugees."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1995/41.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda. The

Security Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 1.25 p.m.
