Mr. Heinbecker (Canada) (spoke in French): Our
debate takes place at a time of great change and great
hope for the Afghan people. Over the last five months,
the Afghans have finally greatly proven their
commitment to putting an end to several decades of
conflict and to rebuilding their country and their lives.
It is clear that they want to build a country that is not a
haven for terrorists.

Canada is ready to help re-establish a stable
Government and society in Afghanistan so that the
aspirations of the Afghan people can be realized. We
must not and cannot abandon them. We owe it to them,
as we owe it to the victims who perished on 11
September and in other terrorist attacks, to ensure that
extremism does not find fertile soil to cultivate its evil.
We must therefore make a long-term commitment.

The progress achieved since the fall of the
Taliban regime attests to the tenacity, determination
and optimism of the Afghan people. Barely six months
ago, we could not have imagined that millions of
Afghan boys and girls would return to school, that
Afghan warlords would watch as their fields of opium
poppies burned and that hundreds of thousands of
Afghan refugees would return to their homeland to
begin rebuilding it.

(spoke in English)

We also would not have imagined that six months
ago a traditional Afghan administration would win by
its effective leadership, under the most difficult
circumstances, the confidence of the international
community. Yet all these things have happened. We
applaud the work of the Afghan Interim
Administration. We also applaud the very effective
help provided to the Afghans by United Nations
Special Representative Brahimi and his team in the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA).

These welcome developments have prompted
Canada to reaffirm its longstanding commitment to the
people of Afghanistan with new, concrete support.
Canada provided some $100 million in humanitarian
assistance to Afghanistan between 1990 and 2001. We
have also now committed a further $70 million in
humanitarian and reconstruction aid for the biennium
2002-2003. Of this amount $30 million has already
been disbursed, focusing on humanitarian assistance to
address urgent needs and demining and victim
assistance programmes to mitigate the consequences of
decades of landmine use by parties to the conflicts. We
note with concern United Nations reports that show
that shortfalls in humanitarian assistance still exist.

The basic needs of the Afghan people must be
met before reconstruction can be realized. We therefore
urge the international community to take all possible
steps to meet the goals of their Tokyo pledges as soon
as possible.

Canada is also contributing to the security of
Afghanistan through our participation in the coalition
force. Some 2,000 Canadian Forces personnel are
deployed as part of Operation Apollo in the coalition
campaign against terrorism and are tasked with
multiple missions, including force protection, demining
assistance and combat operations against remaining
pockets of Taliban and Al Qaeda resistance. Earlier this
year, Canada deployed a battle group to Kandahar for a
six-month mission. Those troops will remain in place
until midsummer.

Canada will continue to contribute to the
coalition campaign through special forces and through
a sizeable sea and air presence. We agree with Under-
Secretary-General Prendergast that security is an
absolute prerequisite for the success of the political
process and the reconstruction effort. The Group of
Eight, which Canada chairs this year, has been working
with the Afghan Administration and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) to
develop strategies and to marshal resources to help the
Afghan people create a national army and a national
police force, rebuild the justice sector, assist in a
demobilization of ex-combatants and address illicit
opium production.

Our collective goal has been and must continue to
be a sustainable and comprehensive strategy to restore
stability and security to the people of Afghanistan.

Within the context of the United Nations, the
deployment of the International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF) in Kabul, under the auspices of the
Council, has been one of the most visible examples of
the international community's commitment to the
people of Afghanistan.

Under the strong leadership of the United
Kingdom, the International Security Assistance Force
has proven to be an important stabilizing influence in
Afghanistan during a critical time. Coalition and ISAF
forces have complementary missions to help create the
conditions necessary for Afghanistan's long-term
stability and security. We strongly support ISAF's
continuing presence in Afghanistan and are pleased
that Turkey has agreed to lead this Force into its
second mandate.

We believe that the renewal of the ISAF mandate
will permit ISAF to play its part effectively in ensuring
that delegates to the loya jirga in a few weeks' time are
free to express their views and to represent the interests
of their constituents. The loya jirga represents the first
opportunity the Afghan people have had in decades to
set their own course towards multi-ethnic
representation and democratic governance.

We hope that the loya jirga will prove to be a
turning point, where the people of Afghanistan,
building on the tremendous progress they have
achieved recently, can lay the groundwork for the
country's own future peace and prosperity. We urge the
Afghan authorities to ensure that the loya jirga process
accommodates wide-ranging ethnic and tribal interests.

We are pleased to note that the level of female
participation in the loya jirga process to date has been
encouraging. We are particularly pleased that female
delegates have not only been named, but have also
been elected. We hope that this trend continues and that
Afghan women and men continue to be included at
every level of decision-making.

Respect for human rights is fundamental to the
success of Afghanistan. We urge both the Interim
Administration and the international community not
only to support the human rights of all ethnic groups in
all areas of Afghanistan, but also to seek accountability
for those who would abuse these rights.

We believe that the people of Afghanistan want to
be heard and to be governed by leaders of their own
choosing.

This is indeed a hopeful time for Afghanistan and
a rare opportunity. It must not be missed.

Canada looks forward to working with the new
Afghan authorities, and we will continue to support the
people of Afghanistan in their efforts to rebuild their
nation.

