Mr. Sandoval Cojull'ln (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): Guatemala welcomes the convening
of today's open debate and aligns itself with the
statement to be delivered by the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

Guatemala thanks France for the concept note
that was circulated in preparation for this open debate
(S/2016/503, annex) and agrees with its contents,
namely, that 2016 should be a year of opportunity for
Member States to evaluate United Nations efforts and
the contribution of peacekeeping operations towards
protecting civilians, while identifying ways forward
and improving its work in this area.

We recognize that the protection of civilians is
an integral part of several peacekeeping operations
mandates. However, it is important to understand that
such protection remains primarily the responsibility
of the receiving State. In that regard, peacekeeping
operations with a mandate to protect civilians should
not assume the role and responsibilities of the host
Government, but act in support of its efforts, that is,
work together with the country concerned.

From our perspective as a troop-contributing
country, the use of force must always be the last
resort, especially when acting on behalf of the United
Nations. While we fully understand the reasons for
which mandates calling for more robust peacekeeping
operations have been developed, especially when the
protection of civilians is at stake, it is our opinion
that forceful action undertaken under the banner of
the United Nations should be carefully considered by
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations,
which is the forum to negotiate everything related to
peacekeeping operations.

It is of grave concern to Guatemala that there
are persistent problems in peacekeeping operations
in terms of sexual exploitation and abuse committed
against the civilian population. Such acts tarnish the
reputation of all staff of the Organization and should not
be tolerated. Guatemala reiterates its call, which it has
made at various times, for improving the effectiveness
with which the Secretariat follows up with Member
States on the disciplinary or legal measures adopted for
these purposes, be it for civilian or military personnel.
In that regard, we believe that timely, comprehensive
investigations are essential in responding to any incident
that might constitute criminal conduct. It is important
to strengthen the rapid response capacity in order to
respond quickly and effectively to all complaints with
impartiality. We understand that this should apply
throughout the United Nations system.

Guatemala highlights the Council's need to

strengthen implementation of the zero-tolerance policy
regarding sexual abuse or exploitation in the context
of the various mandates of peacekeeping missions. We
emphasize the importance of integrating such missions
with the United Nations system as a whole, with full
respect for the human rights of civilians as a priority. At
the same time, we urge improved communication with
regard to the situation on the ground and administrative
decision-making, in order to prevent the recurrence
of any incidents such as those that took place in the
Central African Republic.

We emphasize the need to improve and strengthen
triangular cooperation among the Security Council,
the Secretariat and the troop- and police-contributing
countries in the decision-making process and
implementation of mandates, with a view to
strengthening the protection of civilians on the ground.

Finally, Guatemala has carefully studied the
various initiatives that have been developed aimed
at the protection of civilians and mandated under
peacekeeping operations, such as the Kigali Principles
on the Protection of Civilians. While the latter is a
positive initiative, we believe it is important that they
be discussed in the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations in order to promote transparency, and
included in discussions among all the States Member
of the Organization, especially the troop-contributing
countries.

While States have the primary responsibility to
protect their civilians, the international community
and the Council have an obligation to prevent atrocities
committed in the context of peacekeeping operations.
In that regard, we welcome initiatives such as the
Security Council code of conduct on limiting the use of
the veto, proposed jointy by Mexico and France.

