Mr. Garcia Moritan (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, Mr. President, I should like to
thank you for having invited us to participate in this
open debate on an issue that the Council has long been
discussing but whose importance has not diminished.

I shall deliver an abbreviated version of my
statement, the full text of which will be provided to
the Secretariat.

Argentina firmly supports all efforts aimed at
achieving peace and stability in the Middle East. It
is imperative that all parties play a constructive role,
including regional actors and the major Powers, so as
to move towards a resolution of differences through
negotiations. Argentina calls on the parties to refrain
from unilateral and provocative actions and condemns
all incitement to violence, religious intolerance
and racism.

With regard to the question of Palestine, Argentina
wishes to reaffirm its support for a peaceful, definitive
and comprehensive settlement on the basis of the two-
State solution and the 1967 borders as well as the
decisions reached by the parties during the negotiation
process, as set out in the relevant General Assembly
and Security Council resolutions, the road map and the
Arab Peace Initiative.

Argentina reaffirms the inalienable right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination and to an
independent, viable State recognized by all nations,
as well as the right of the State of Israel to live in
peace alongside its neighbours within secure and
internationally recognized borders.

Argentina also reiterates its concern at the
persistent and continued growth of illegal Israeli
settlements in occupied Palestinian territory and
urges that their expansion be halted. The settlements
run counter to international law, are an obstacle to
peace and undermine prospects for the solution of two
States living in peace and security, thus perpetuating
an unsustainable status quo. At the same time, we
strongly condemn the actions carried out by Hamas
against Israel, including the launching of rockets and
incendiary devices from the Gaza Strip, which must
end immediately.

Palestinian leaders must address Israeli security
concerns in a spirit of sincerity, and we urge Israel,
in cases where it exercises its inalienable right to
legitimate defence, to take into account its obligations
under international humanitarian law and international
human rights law, refraining from any actions that
would make resumption of dialogue more difficult.
In this regard, Argentina notes with concern the
continuing excessive use of force by the military and
condemns acts of settler violence.

Argentina reaffirms the special status of Jerusalem
pursuant to the relevant General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions and in this regard rejects any
unilateral attempt to modify it. Argentina believes that
the holy city must be a place of meeting and peace and
that it must guarantee Jews, Muslims and Christians
free access to holy sites. Any attempt to deny or
diminish the profound meaning of those sites or their
historical ties to the three great monotheistic religions
would be totally unacceptable and only stand in the way
of finding a solution to the conflict.

Concerning the situation in the Syrian Arab
Republic, Argentina supports the reaching of a political
solution through dialogue and diplomacy, in compliance
with international law and with full respect for the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
the Syrian Arab Republic. Argentina attaches particular
importance to the Geneva talks held under the auspices
of Staffan de Mistura, Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for Syria. We therefore have renewed hope that
tangible results can be achieved that will result in a
Syrian solution to Syrian problems, in keeping with the
provisions of resolution 2254 (2015).

Argentina firmly condemns terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations, and emphatically rejects the
terrorist acts carried out by the so-called Islamic State
as well as by the Al-Nusra Front and other terrorist
groups recognized as such by the Security Council. Our
country also reaffirms its conviction that the combat
against terrorism must be waged within the framework
of international law, with full respect for human rights
and international humanitarian law.

To conclude, allow me to reaffirm that diplomacy
and dialogue are the only path to peace in the Middle
East. The Council must spare no effort to urge the
parties to move in this direction, based at all times on the
parameters recognized by the international community
in keeping with the relevant United Nations resolutions.

