Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
President Carmel Agius and Prosecutor Serge
Brammertz for their comprehensive briefings.
Let me express our appreciation for their firm
commitment to, and skilful leadership of, efforts to
ensure accountability, contributing to the efficient
functioning of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals.

Poland is encouraged by the priorities identified.
We commend the focus on the expeditious completion
of judicial proceedings while maintaining the highest
due-process and fair-trial standards. We also appreciate
the activities aimed at harmonizing practices and
procedures between the Mechanism's two branches,
thereby optimizing its efficiency and fostering high
staff morale and performance, which are crucial given
the heavy workload and downsizing. Moreover, there
is a need to recognize the work undertaken to locate
and arrest the eight remaining fugitives indicted by the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
and in providing capacity-building and assistance to
national jurisdictions prosecuting international crimes
committed in the former Yugoslavia and in Rwanda.
We must also acknowledge the steps taken to provide
protection and support to victims and witnesses
and allow for the enforcement of sentences and the
resettlement of the acquitted and released persons
currently living in Arusha.

We welcome the significant progress that the
Mechanism has achieved, thanks to the dedicated
efforts ofits President, Prosecutor and staff, in carrying
out the essential residual functions of the ICTR and
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia. We also welcome the prospects for further
progress. We note with appreciation the President's
direction to Mechanism staff to cooperate fully with the
evaluation of the Office of Internal Oversight Services.
Consequently, we agree with the positive assessment of
the Mechanism's functioning in the reporting period
and look forward to its further achievements.

Poland acknowledges the challenges that the
Mechanism faces, including those related to the
availability of resources, cooperation with regard
to locating, arresting and surrendering the fugitives
and the relocation of acquitted and released persons
residing in Arusha. We would like to reiterate the
Security Council's repeated call upon all States to
intensify cooperation with, and render all necessary
assistance to, the Mechanism. There is a need for full
cooperation with the Mechanism in the arrest and
transfer of fugitives and the enforcement of sentences,
as well as in finding a permanent solution in order to
relocate the acquitted and released persons residing in
Arusha. We call on States to demonstrate their support
for accountability and reconciliation by providing
support for the processes leading towards those goals,
countering the denial of crimes and the glorification of
convicted criminals and increasing judicial cooperation
with other States. We also urge States to show support
for international criminal justice by stepping up
cooperation with the Mechanism and approving its
budget, which would allow it to conclude most of its
existingjudicial work in 2020 and focus on carrying out
its mandated remaining residual functions thereafter.
Let me reiterate that international criminal
justice institutions, including the Mechanism, often
play a crucial role in fighting impunity, which can
contribute to the deterrence of the most serious crimes
of international concern and to the maintenance of
an international rules-based order. Poland remains
committed to all of the aforementioned and continues to
support the Mechanism and stands ready to cooperate
with it. We reiterate our call on others to adopt the
same stance.

