Mr. Wetland (Norway): The Security Council
has a particular role to play in promoting international
law, both by observing it - by adhering to it - and by
promoting it.

I would like to make a few brief points in this
timely debate. First, I want to underline the need to
fight impunity. Norway remains a strong supporter of
efforts to curb impunity for international crimes. Over
the past few decades, one of the most significant
developments in international law, and in international
relations in general, was the establishment of the
international criminal tribunals. Of course, the most
prominent of those is the International Criminal Court
(ICC).

We are encouraged to note that the number of
States parties to the Rome Statute continues to grow.
More and more States consider the Court to be an
important tool in maintaining international peace and
justice. However, we remain concerned over reports, as
well as judicial findings of the Court itself, that give
clear evidence of failures to deliver mandatory
cooperation with the ICC in the Darfur situation. We
therefore continue to encourage the Security Council to
assess and adopt measures that help to ensure
compliance with resolution 1593 (2005), which
referred the Darfur situation to the Court.

It goes without saying that international courts
can deal with only a tiny fraction of all cases of serious
crime. Efforts to fight impunity must therefore first and
foremost be rooted at the national level. In an
increasingly globalized world, the successful
prosecution of a criminal case frequently requires the
legal cooperation of several States. States should
establish and exercise jurisdiction over transnational
criminal acts, so that those suspected of such crimes
cannot evade legal proceedings.

It is contrary to the rule of law and creates a
profound sense of injustice when a person suspected of a
serious crime is perceived as being granted impunity -
outside the reach of a competent criminal prosecution.
All States must abide by their obligation either to carry
out a prosecution themselves or extradite the accused
to another jurisdiction that is willing to do so. That
must apply irrespective of personal background, family
connections or wealth. There are still countries which
uphold the best criminal justice systems that money
can buy. They have a name, and they have shame.

Secondly, Norway welcomes the progress made
in enhancing the transparency and fairness of listing
and delisting procedures here in the Council. It is clear
from the number of delisting requests that the
Ombudsperson has received, and the number of
persons and entities removed from the list, that there is
a genuine need for the Ombudsperson's mandate. In
our view, the procedures for listing and delisting
should be kept under constant review, and the Council
should remain open to further procedural
improvements in the regime, such as the establishment
of an independent review panel.

Thirdly, with respect to the promotion of
women's rights in conflict and post-conflict situations,
there can be no democracy without the participation of
all citizens, and there can be no rule of law unless the
law applies equally to all. The women involved in the
Arab Spring have impressed us. Across the region,
women have been present and vocal in the protest
movements. Yet they are now facing exclusion from
political processes and from constitution-building and
legal reform. That is, of course, unacceptable.

The United Nations must uphold universal values
and call for the inclusion of women in Government in
the process of transition and constitution-making.
Through the political mission in Libya, the United
Nations is well placed to be proactive in implementing
its responsibilities under the resolution 1325 (2000)
agenda. Modern constitutions that do not provide for
equal rights and opportunities for men and women are
not modern constitutions.

