Mr. Wittig (Germany): Germany aligns itself
with the statement of the European Union.

Nigeria is to be commended for having convened
this important debate on conflict prevention with a
special focus on Africa. Conflict prevention is one of
the main challenges we face today, and the active
engagement of the Security Council is crucial.

My Government welcomes the commitment of
African nations to greater efforts to prevent conflicts
from breaking out in the first place as well as to their
resolution. The solving of the long-running dispute
between Nigeria and Cameroon over the Bakassi
peninsula and the Abyei Arbitration on border
delimitation in Sudan are models in this regard. The
African Union Border Programme aiming at conflict
prevention through solving border issues is another
success story, and Germany is pleased to be associated
with it and actively supporting it.

Only last week, members of the Security Council
and the African Union (AU) Peace and Security
Council held their annual consultative meeting.
Strengthening the partnership for prevention between
the United Nations, the African Union and subregional
organizations in Africa should remain high on the
agenda.

My Government has been encouraged by the
spirit of cooperation between the United Nations, the
AU and the Inter-Governmental Authority on
Development in preparing for the referendum in Sudan.
As a troop and police contributor to both the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan and the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq, Germany attaches high
importance to an early resolution of the Darfur conflict
and full implementation of the comprehensive peace
agreement. Germany stands ready to continue to
provide assistance in constitution-building in Sudan.

The United Nations, in particular its Secretariat,
has a wide range of preventive diplomacy tools at its
disposal. Mediation, good offices, the use of special
envoys, fact-finding missions and commissions of
inquiry are instruments that have been used in the
recent past. We have welcomed the creation of the
Mediation Support Unit within the Department of
Political Affairs and contributed to its activities
through the relevant trust fund.

The creation of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) was an important step in enhancing the United
Nations ability to better deal with practical conflict
prevention. Too many times in the past, "after the
conflict" meant "before the conflict". Countries have
emerged from and re-entered into conflict numerous
times, often over a period of decades. The PBC now
deals with various situations where there is a risk of
lapsing and re-lapsing into conflict and has done
valuable work since its creation in 2005.

During our chairmanship of the PBC, we pay
special attention to the role of women in peacebuilding
and to the cooperation with regional organizations such
as the AU. Last week, the PBC and the AU Peace and
Security Council met for the first time to discuss how
they could further strengthen their cooperation. They
agreed to support national efforts in conflict
prevention.

Early engagement and cooperation between
various actors are key to conflict prevention, but there
is a wider dimension as well. As we all agreed in 2005,
peace and security, human rights and sustainable
development are interlinked and mutually reinforcing.
We commend the African Union's New Partnership for
Africa's Development for its promotion of sustainable
growth and development based on the commitment to
good governance, democracy, human rights and
conflict resolution.

"Greater investment in prevention could save us
considerable pain and expense." This is what the
Secretary-General stated during one of the Council's
latest meetings on the issue of conflict prevention
(5735th meeting). It remains true. The Security
Council, the international community as a whole and,
of course, the individual Member States all have to
shoulder their responsibility.
