Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Indonesia thanks the
Swedish presidency for having convened this open
debate on a highly important topic and wishes to
congratulate the new non-permanent members of
the Council.

We associate ourselves with the statements
made by the representative of Thailand on behalf of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the
representative of Norway on behalf of UN70, as well as
by the representative of Finland on behalf of the Group
of Friends of Mediation. We also welcome many of the
points to which the Secretary-General alluded at the
beginning of this open debate.

Today there are more peacekeepers on the ground
than ever before, and they increasingly operate in
contexts where the United Nations is being asked
to manage conflict rather than restore or keep the
peace. We must ask ourselves why. One of the reasons
is that "we the peoples of the United Nations" have
not invested enough in addressing the root causes of
conflict or in prevention.

Allow me to share some key points on how to
put forward the agenda on conflict prevention and
sustaining peace within the work of the United Nations.

The first aspect is partnership. The United Nations
cannot single-handedly solve the challenges. A stronger
global-regional peace and security partnership,
particularly in the area of conflict prevention, is
essential. In that light, conflict prevention needs to
be undertaken by the Security Council by engaging
earlier; this should be done in partnership with regional
and subregional organizations, in line with Chapter VI,
as well as with civil-society groups.

The second aspect is institutionalization. Indonesia
supports the recommendation of the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations requiring the
Secretary-General to develop options for restructuring
the Secretariat's peace and security architecture so
as to strengthen leadership and management and to
put an end to the silo mindset in the United Nations.
Synergy between the Security Council, the General
Assembly and the main committees, the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Economic and Social Council and the
Secretariat should be a prerequisite. We should develop
a system-wide approach to conflict prevention and
sustaining peace.

We are also happy to note that the new Secretary-
General will have conflict prevention as one of his top
priorities and will take a leading role in promoting this
agenda. His unique insights into the workings of the
United Nations, his credibility and the use of his good
offices can bring parties together to enable peace, and
thus the Security Council should heed his early analysis
and advice.

The third aspect is adequate resources. Prevention
and mediation should be reinforced through a significant
increase and more reliable resourcing through the
regular budget and a single peace and operations
account for the concept of sustaining peace. We need
to also endorse a single peace operations account to
finance all peace operations, including special political
missions and related backstopping activities. We should
also explore how peacekeeping operations can more
explicitly integrate conflict prevention and sustaining
peace into the implementation of the mandates.

The fourth aspect is a nationally driven process.
We believe that United Nations entities should support
in particular those Member States lacking the capacity
to integrate prevention into national governance and
development functions. There shouldbe a comprehensive
approach in which socioeconomic development and
the security challenges facing ordinary people are
addressed by their national authorities effectively.
A nationally driven process should also encourage
women and youth to play a greater role in fostering
reconciliation and building the basis of a collective
national vision of peace and prosperity.

The fifth and last aspect is trust. Trust and
confidence amiong all parties is an important element
in ensuring implementation with respect to the nexus of
conflict prevention and sustaining peace.

In conclusion, in the light of today's discussion, my

delegation, which is also a member of the Peacebuilding
Commission, is of the View that the annual session
of the Commission should be reinvigorated as an
international forum that enables cross-sectoral
stakeholders to create synergies and develop concrete
initiatives on sustaining peace. Such a forum will help
move everyone from rhetoric to practice, and help
countries prioritize political and financial resources for
conflict prevention proactively.

