Mr. Barbalie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, we would like to thank you, Mr. President, and
Her Excellency Ms. Patricia Espinosa Cantellano for
convening this debate, thus showing that Mexico
attaches special interest to the issue of children in
armed conflict. As a country with critical experience,
Bosnia and Herzegovina feels particularly strongly
about this topic, and we consider that giving high
priority to protection of children in armed conflict is of
vital importance. I would like to reiterate Bosnia and
Herzegovina's appreciation for Mexico's tireless
efforts and for chairing the Security Council Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict.

Allow me also to express our appreciation to
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, the Assistant Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Atul Khare,
and the Deputy Director of UNICEF, Ms. Hilde
Frafjord Johnson, for their briefings. We are grateful to
Manju Gurung for sharing her story with us today. We
really feel and respect her courage, and I believe we all
heard very important messages that we have to
consider in future.

Bosnia and Herzegovina highly appreciates and
supports the work of Ms. Coomaraswamy, whose
outreach activities and field visits contributed
significantly to improving the situation of children in
armed conflict. The pragmatic and cooperative
approach, with a humanitarian emphasis aimed at
ensuring broad and effective protection for children
exposed to and affected by conflict in situations of
concern, is of key importance.
We also align ourselves with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of the European Union
later today.

Bosnia and Herzegovina takes positive note of
the Secretary-General's report (S/2010/181) and the
recommendations contained therein. Significant
progress has been made with regard to the signing of
action plans to end the recruitment and use of child
soldiers and to secure their release from armed forces
and groups.

We are encouraged by the fact that some parties
to armed conflict have made progress in releasing child
soldiers. Nevertheless, we are deeply concerned that
the practice of recruiting and using children has
continued in the past year. While stressing the primary
role of national Governments in providing protection
and relief to all children affected by armed conflicts,
we urge all parties to conflicts to fully comply with
international humanitarian law and human rights law
with regard to protecting the civilian population. All
countries and groups must place the protection of
children in situations of armed conflict above politics.

Furthermore, we urge the parties to conflict listed
in the annexes in the Secretary-General's report to
engage in constructive dialogue in order to prepare and
implement the time-bound action plans to stop
recruitment and use of children, sexual violence
against children and killing and maiming of children.
This process should be conducted through efficient
coordination among different actors in the field,
including the host Government, United Nations
entities, donors and non-governmental organizations.

We would encourage donors to ensure sufficient,
timely and adequate funding for the implementation of
action plans. In this context, education packages and
access with regard to basic needs such as nutrition,
health and water, as well as psychological support for
reintegration of child soldiers into their families and
communities, should be ensured and all barriers to
access removed.

Recognizing the important role of education, we
are deeply concerned about the growing number of
attacks against schools, educational facilities, teachers
and pupils. In times of conflict all steps should be
taken to safeguard the right to education. All parties to
conflict should keep schools as protected areas and
zones of peace for boys and girls.
Bosnia and Herzegovina considers that targeted,
gradual and more vigorous measures against those
groups and individuals who persistently commit grave
violations against children should be undertaken. In
order to end impunity for violations against children,
Member States must uphold existing international
standards and operationalize their obligations through
accelerated national legislative reform and systematic
implementation and monitoring. Perpetrators should be
brought to justice in compliance with international
justice mechanisms, criminal courts and tribunals.

The Paris Principles and Guidelines on Children
Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups
advocate a comprehensive approach to reintegrating
children into their communities. Including children in
peacebuilding activities is one of the key elements of
each peacebuilding strategy. Special attention should
be given to refugee and displaced children, children
with disabilities and those who have been subjected to
sexual violence. We believe that their participation in
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
processes is critical. It is of utmost importance to
continue including specific provisions for the
protection of children in the mandates of all relevant
United Nations peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
political missions; Child Protection Advisers should be
deployed in those missions.

Many positive developments with regard to
monitoring and reporting have been seen since the
adoption of resolutions 1539 (2004) and 1612 (2005).
However, much more remains to be done. We are of the
View that the monitoring and reporting system should
be strengthened and its capacities developed for
effective and timely response to all violations and
abuses committed against children, in particular with
regard to collecting reliable and verifiable information
on acts of rape and acts of sexual violence. It is crucial
that country task forces on monitoring and reporting
follow up developments and the implementation of
recommendations of the Security Council Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict.

Cooperation and exchange of information
between the Security Council Working Group on
Children in Armed Conflict, the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children in
Armed Conflict and relevant sanctions committees
should be improved. Sanctions committees should
consider inviting the Office of the Special
Representative, as was the case in May with regard to
the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
to brief them more regularly on specific
recommendations in the Secretary-General's reports.
We believe that such cooperation can add value to the
efforts of the Working Group and, at the same time,
contribute significantly towards more efficient use of
the Working Group's recommendations.

Finally, Bosnia and Herzegovina fully supports
the adoption by the Security Council of an action-
oriented presidential statement, convinced that more
positive examples will follow.

