Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): At the outset, I would
like to thank Mr. Jan Kubis, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for briefing the council via
video teleconference and for his leadership of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan,
especially at this very important juncture in my
country's history. I thank him in particular for his
continued commitment to Afghanistan throughout its
transition. I also welcome the presence here today of
Mr. Fedotov, Executive Director of the United Nations
Office of Drugs and Crime. I am grateful to Australia,
in particular to Ambassador Quinlan, for its continued
leadership on Afghanistan in the Council. I would also
like to take this opportunity to welcome the Secretary-
General's recent report (S/2014/420) on the situation in
Afghanistan.

This is a pivotal moment for Afghanistan. We are
at the last stage of our country's historic presidential
elections. The democratic transition is the cornerstone
of the Afghan-led and Afghan-owned progression to
peace, stability and prosperity.

The Presidential elections on 5 April and on 14 June
generated an unprecedented surge of democratic spirit
in Afghanistan. After decades of conflict, it is
remarkable to witness my country emerging as a
vibrant young democracy characterized by widespread
engagement in the political process. That has been
demonstrated by rallies attended by thousands, debates
that were broadcast and viewed throughout the country,
media coverage and information exchange via phones,
computers and television screens, and candidates'
public outreach, not only in the capital but, significantly,
country-wide.

In an exceptional show of faith in democracy,
Afghans cast their ballots despite intimidation by the
Taliban and other extremist and terrorist groups so that
they could have a say in the country's political destiny.
They dipped their fingers in ink, boldly asserting their
right to choose a leader in defiance of threats to their
lives and safety. In doing so they voted not only for a
candidate but also for peace, for the advancement of the
gains made in the past 12 years and for a better future.

They did so by the millions, in numbers that
exceeded expectations in both the first and second
rounds. All segments of the population participated,
including women and all ethnic groups, in all provinces
of the country, in the cities and in the rural areas and in
the south, north, east and west.

Dozens of national institutions and thousands of
citizens played a role in ensuring the administration,
integrity and legitimacy of the first entirely Afghan-
managed electoral process. Thousands of independent
domestic and international observers and candidate
monitors covered the polling stations and continue to
oversee the entire electoral cycle.

We are grateful to the international community
for standing with the Afghan people and for providing
technical, financial and logistical resources to enable
Afghan institutions to successfully hold elections. We
appreciate the support of the United Nations, including
the United Nations Development Programme, to
national electoral institutions in their management of a
peaceful democratic transition.

We note with pride the professionalism and
competence exhibited by Afghan security institutions
during the elections period. Their dedication allowed
elections to take place despite serious security threats.
Moreover, careful planning including through the
training of hundreds of female police and more than
2,000 civilians and the recruitment of more than 13,000
female searchers, allowed for the active participation of
diverse segments of the population on polling day.

We were deeply saddened by the tragic loss and
injury of civilians, election personnel, observers and
Afghan security forces who put their lives at risk to
protect the future of the country. We deplore the attacks
against the infrastructure of election institutions,
including the central office of the Independent Election
Commission in Kabul and even attacks on candidates
and their supporters. However, the Afghan people's
near-blanket defiance of extremist threats sends a strong
message that the Taliban no longer have the ability
to destabilize the country. Despite the tragic losses
suffered during the elections, peace and democracy
have clearly triumphed in Afghanistan.

We note the steps that have been taken by the
Independent Election Commission and the Independent
Electoral Complaints Commission to detect fraudulent
votes and manage complaints in the first round,
including through the blacklisting of electoral workers
liable for infractions. Attempting to avoid potential
crisis and protect the legitimacy of our historic
elections, the election bodies are again managing
issues raised with regard to the electoral process in the
second round. Their efforts aim to ensure the integrity
and transparency of the electoral process and uphold
constitutional and electoral law.
We appreciate the readiness of the United Nations
to stand up for the interests of the Afghan people by
supporting the integrity of the Afghan-led, Afghan-
managed electoral process, which will lead to the
establishment of a new Government that legitimately
reflects the will of the Afghan people. We see United
Nations support ofthe Afghan process as a positive step
towards addressing the political concerns of the second
round.

As Afghanistan makes the transition for the first
time from one democratically elected president to the
next, we continue to focus on the steps necessary for
the country to move decisively towards full ownership
and leadership in the transformation decade. Afghan
security institutions are assuming full responsibility
throughout the country as combat operations by the
international forces near their conclusion. The future
elected President of Afghanistan will continue to make
a constructive relationship with our international
partners a priority, starting by signing a bilateral
security agreement with the United States and followed
by the finalization ofthe agreement on NATO's training,
advising and assistance role in post-2014 Afghanistan.
In that regard, we look forward to the upcoming NATO
summit in Cardiff on 4 September.

The country's progress towards sustainability
and self-sufficiency depends upon the ability of
Afghan institutions to perform key governance and
service-delivery functions and promote economic
development. That will require the continued support
and assistance of the international community, as set
out in the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework
adopted in Tokyo in 2012. We welcome the next
ministerial meeting under the Framework, to be held
in London in November 2014, as a forum for renewing
and reinvigorating the mutual commitments necessary
for Afghanistan's long-term prosperity.

As Afghanistan moves towards a new beginning,
the interlinked challenges of achieving security, peace,
good governance and development will continue to
loom large. We were reminded of long-term challenges
to development last month by the devastating floods
in Badakhshan province. In addition, we recognize
that illegal drugs and narcotics continue to undercut
our legitimate development path. For that reason, we
will continue to implement our National Drug Control
Strategy and call on our regional and international
partners to focus on solutions that reduce demand and
combat regional and global illicit networks.

Understanding that terrorism and extremism
continue to be the greatest impediment to development
in Afghanistan and the region, we will continue to focus
on peace and reconciliation efforts with the Taliban
and on other measures, including the Anti-Money
Laundering law recently passed by the upper house of
the Afghan National Parliament. The active role of all
citizens - women, men and children - will be vital
for overcoming our shared challenges in that regard.

Regional engagement will continue to be critical to
the peace, stability and success of the transformation
decade. We believe that it is important to build upon the
achievements of the last decade to solidify and expand
a workable framework of bilateral and multilateral
mechanisms with our neighbours and the wider region
and to strengthen relations with the Islamic world.
To that end, we look forward to the upcoming Heart
of Asia Ministerial Conference to be held in Tianjin,
China, on 29 August.

As Afghanistan expands its multifaceted
cooperation with our regional partners, we expect
our neighbours to continue to work towards regional
stability. The recent operation of Pakistani forces in
North Waziristan, which led to the displacement of
thousands of families to Afghanistan's Khost province
and the associated loss of life, is a serious source of
concern for the Government of Afghanistan. We urge
the Islamic Republic of Pakistan to give high priority
to the greater security of Afghanistan and the region at
this crucial time.

The Afghan Government is committed to a
swift and successful conclusion of the electoral
process. Preparations are well under way for the
first ever democratic and peaceful transfer of
power in Afghanistan. All Government institutions
have commenced their transition planning, and an
interministerial committee has been assigned to prepare
for the official inauguration of our incoming president.
We look forward to welcoming the dignitaries of all our
international and regional partners to that occasion.

When we do so, we will remember that Afghanistan
and our international partners have made tremendous
sacrifices to ensure that war remains a relic of the past.
It is essential that the country not return to the days
when bullets rather than ballots decided the country's
political fate. In post-Taliban Afghanistan, no tenet has
been more cherished than the idea that stability and
legitimacy are a profound necessity. That principle has
motivated considerable investment in terms of dollars
spent and lives lost, and its curtailment would carry
damaging consequences for the country and its people.
It is our fundamental responsibility to ensure that
peace and democracy are secure in Afghanistan today,
tomorrow and throughout the transformation decade.

