Ms. Soderberg (United States of America):
Today the Security Council takes a strong stand against
terrorism and for the maintenance of international
peace and security. As we speak, the Taliban leadership
harbours the world's most wanted terrorist, Usama bin
Laden.

Over a year ago, this body enacted sanctions with
a single, simple demand to the Taliban leadership: turn
over Usama bin Laden, without further delay, to
appropriate authorities in a country where he will be
arrested and effectively brought to justice. Yet to date
the terrorists remain in Afghanistan, and let no one
misunderstand: they remain a continuing threat to us
all.

The Taliban cannot continue to flout the will of
the international community and support and shelter
terrorists without repercussions. As long as the Taliban
leadership continues to harbour terrorists, in particular
Usama bin Laden, and to promote terrorism, it remains
a threat to international peace and security. We must be
mindful that terrorists are criminals, whatever their
ethnic, religious or other affiliations. We oppose their
crimes, not any religious or moral cause they purport to
represent. It is in the common interest of all nations to
fight terrorism. Any country that provides refuge or
other support to terrorists operates outside the values
of the international community.

These sanctions are tough, but they are targeted.
They do not cut off trade with Afghanistan. We have
taken care to ensure that trade in food and medicine is
not affected. These sanctions are targeted at the
leadership of the Taliban, and not at the Afghan people.
We all share a deep concern over the deplorable plight
of the Afghan people, but it is important to remember
that the cause of that misery is war, drought and the
draconian policies of the leadership, not a ban on
Taliban aircraft and assets.

The Taliban policies have aggravated the already
abysmal economic and social conditions of the people
of Afghanistan. The Taliban violates international
humanitarian law and human rights, particularly by
discriminating against women and girls. The United
States is doing its part to address this crisis. We are the
biggest donor to Afghanistan, with our aid this year to
the people totalling $113 million. We also continue to

S/PVAZSI

 

help meet the Afghan people's humanitarian needs,
while targeting their leadership.

The United States takes the Taliban threat to
humanitarian aid workers very seriously and is taking a
range of measures to hold the Taliban leadership
responsible for their proper treatment. The Council
must not allow the Taliban leaders to blackmail it by
threatening international personnel, the Afghan
people's benefactors.

Let me be perfectly clear: the Taliban has an
obligation to guarantee the safety of humanitarian
workers and all United Nations personnel at all times.
These dedicated individuals are in Afghanistan
working for the welfare of the Afghan people, under
extremely difficult circumstances. The Taliban must
ensure that these individuals are able to carry on their
work in safety and security, providing vital assistance
to the Afghan people. That is the responsibility of the
Taliban. The Afghan people deserve peace and a
chance to rebuild their lives under a broad-based,
representative government that respects their culture
and traditions.

We applaud the efforts of the Secretary-General's
Personal Representative, Francesc Vendrell, to promote
a peaceful settlement. The people have suffered for too
long. But until that day, the international community
must stand firm against terrorism. With this important
action today, the Security Council sends an
unequivocal message to the Taliban: end your support
for terrorism. Let us hope that they will at last heed our
call.

