Mr. Skoog (Sweden): Sweden and Kuwait earlier
this week put forward a draft resolution to respond
to the desperate calls of the United Nations and the
humanitarian community in Syria for a cessation of
hostilities for an initial period of 30 days, in order to
allow for much-needed humanitarian relief. We have
been working intensely with all Council members to
operationalize the concrete requests of the United
Nations, the humanitarian community and, above, all
the civilian population on the ground. We have done our
utmost to accommodate Council members' concerns. It
is now time for the Council to unanimously shoulder
its responsibility and show that meaningful action
is possible.

The key components in our draft resolution are a
nationwide cessation of hostilities for at least 30 days,
weekly United Nations humanitarian aid convoys to
all areas in need, and immediate emergency medical
evacuations. The United Nations convoys and evacuation
teams are ready to go. The draft resolution also calls
for the immediate lifting of sieges of populated areas,
including eastern Ghouta. It reiterates its demand,
reminding in particular the Syrian authorities that all
parties have an obligation to act in accordance with
international law to protect civilians and hospitals and
other medical facilities.

The draft makes an exception for military
operations directed against the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant, Al-Qaida, the Al-Nusra Front and other
terrorist groups designated by the Security Council.
This in no way relieves the parties to the conflict in Syria
from upholding their obligations under international
law at all times, including the principles of distinction,
proportionality and precaution.

The draft resolution is not a comprehensive peace
deal on Syria; its aim is purely humanitarian. There
are already ceasefire agreements in force for the areas
where fighting has escalated the most. They need to
be complied with. There are existing monitoring
mechanisms that can be utilized. The role of the Council
is to push the parties to the conflict to comply with the
proposed cessation of hostilities in order to urgently
enable needed alleviation of suffering for the people of
Syria. If the draft resolution is adopted today, it can
de-escalate violence, save lives, alleviate suffering and
break the deadlock on humanitarian access and sieges.

Since the first call for a cessation of hostilities, the
situation has gotten dramatically worse, particularly in
eastern Ghouta, as we have heard from the Secretary-
General and from Under-Secretary-General Mark
Lowcock. After seven years of war, the situation for
innocent civilians in Syria has never been worse. But
we have an opportunity to turn things around today to
avert the disaster unfolding before our eyes.

The draft resolution before the Council represents
a resolute and very urgent attempt for the Council to
take decisive and meaningful action. Today, we count
on each and every member to do the right thing.

