Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I thank the German
and French presidencies of the Security Council for
their skilful joint leadership over the past two months.
I also thank Under-Secretary-General for Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs Rosemary DiCarlo for her
briefing and able guidance of the Department. We also
recognize the ongoing efforts of Special Coordinator
Nikolay Mladenov and his team, as well as the vital
role and support of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) and the efforts of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, UNICEF, the
United Nations Development Programme and all United
Nations agencies on the ground at this critical time.

I associate myself, Mr. President, with the comments
that you and Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo made in
connection with the loss of lives resulting from attacks
on houses of worship, including those in Burkina Faso.

I also want to thank Ms. DiCarlo for the
congratulations she conveyed to Prime Minister
Shtayyeh on the formation of our new Government. 1
also welcome Ms. Majdalani, Mr. Bromberg and their
friend, Ms. Taleb, and thank them for being with us and
their briefings.

We meet at a moment of great uncertainty and
volatility. The situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, is rapidly
deteriorating, despair is increasing and the horizon for
peace is being nullified by an occupying Power that
insists upon imposing its illegal agenda at any cost. The
outlook has become even grimmer following Israeli
elections that have further entrenched the extreme right
to rule Israel as a racist apartheid State under Prime
Minister Netanyahu. The absolute support given to
Israel by a permanent member of the Security Council
has only emboldened its flouting of the law, further
fuelling its human rights violations against our people
and the colonization of our land.

Aided and abetted in its crimes, Israel's expansionist
appetite is growing. Members have only to listen to its
recent cynical statements on the intention to annex the
Israeli settlements illegally constructed in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem,
demonstrating a blatant dismissal of Palestinian rights.
Such inflammatory rhetoric, let alone the countless
war crimes being carried out every single day in broad
daylight, is shamelessly bragged about by the Prime
Minister and other Israeli officials, in total contempt of
the Council's authority and the international community
at large.

We have heard the condemnation from around
the world of those provocative statements, incitement
and illegal actions. The rejection has been resounding.
We have also heard repeated calls for a halt to Israel's
illegal and destructive policies and compliance with its
legal obligations. We are grateful for those principled
positions and the solidarity extended to our people
and their just cause. However, condemnations alone
will not suffice; such calls, whether gentle or firm,
will not be heeded by Israel, which continues to
trample international law and make a mockery of the
international system. By now it should be obvious:
appealing to and appeasing Israel have never worked.

Without accountability, how can anyone expect
anything other than the unbridled impunity we have
witnessed for decades and even worse? It is time
to turn words into deeds and solidarity into action.
Serious measures must be urgently taken by the
international community to hold Israel, the occupying
Power, accountable. There must be consequences for
violations; that is the only way to stop the unravelling
of the peace process and reverse course in order to
salvage the possibility of a peaceful and just solution
and spare the Palestinian and Israeli peoples decades
more of confrontation, conflict, suffering and loss.

That is neither a radical call nor a threat. Taking
action is a duty, based on the rules, principles and
demands enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations,
international law and United Nations resolutions. It is
a responsibility that is consistent with long-standing
international consensus and commitments - repeatedly
made, yet unfulfilled.

The Palestinian people have not suffered for
decades and waited nearly a century for their
freedom - since they were first recognized as ready
for independence - only to resign themselves to
limited autonomy. Those who believe so ignore history,
international law and the resolve of a people to attain
justice and equality. Let me also remind those present
that the Palestinian leadership's acceptance of a State
of Palestine on the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, was a historic and painful compromise,
and not one that should be dismissed or ridiculed by
newcomers to peacemaking.

The Palestinian right to self-determination has
long been recognized and supported globally. The
International Court of Justice has affirmed it to be
a right erga omnes. The Palestinian people hold
steadfast to their legitimate national aspirations for
independence, the right of return and the realization of
their full civil, political, economic, social and cultural
rights, as well as their inalienable human rights, and
they will not surrender to a lesser fate.

International consensus in that regard is strong,
just as it is strong for a two-State solution on the 1967
borders as the foundation of a peaceful solution that is
based on international law; the relevant United Nations
resolutions; the Madrid terms of reference, including
the principle of land for peace; the Arab Peace
Initiative; and the Quartet road map. That position
was unequivocally reaffirmed by the Security Council
in resolution 2334 (2016) and remains the core of the
international community's position, as reflected in the
past weeks, months and years.

Occupation, annexation and human rights violations
can never be accepted as just and moral and can never
be accepted as the new normal, irrespective of spin,
rhetoric or pretext. The wanton killing, injury and
terrorization of Palestinian children, women and men
by Israeli occupying forces and extremist Israeli settlers
and the detention and imprisonment of thousands of
Palestinian civilians, including children, constitute
gross violations of international humanitarian law and
human rights law that amount to grave breaches.

Israel's 12-year blockade ofthe Gaza Strip is illegal.
Isolating and imprisoning 2 million people is mass
collective punishment tantamount to a war crime, as
well as the main source of the disastrous humanitarian
crisis and despair in the Gaza Strip, as expressed in
the protests of the Great March of Return. Israel's so-
called withholding of Palestinian tax revenues is blatant
theft that violates bilateral agreements and the Fourth
Geneva Convention, which prohibits the pillaging of
the resources of occupied peoples.

Israel's colonization of the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, is illegal. Whether
settlements or walls, home demolitions or evictions,
forced transfers, threats to the historic status quo of
Jerusalem's holy sites or any annexation measures - all
such measures are unlawful, amount to war crimes
and cannot be justified under any pretext, including
on the basis of security claims, biblical edicts or so-
called legislation by the occupying Power. All those
illegal policies and practices must end. They will never
be accepted as legitimate, will always be rejected and
resisted and will never lead to peace and security.

An occupation that has existed and entrenched
itself for 52 years through such violations cannot be
considered legal under international law. It is an illegal
occupation, and Israel is an illegal occupant. The
international community must stop normalizing that
occupation and treating it with any deference. It is in
every way illegal and must be brought to an end.

It is strange that, when it comes to Palestine,
calls for action to uphold the law - whether to stop
the colonization, provide protection to the occupied
people or even do something as simple as ban illegal
settlement products - are viewed as delusional rather
than as legitimate tools to remedy injustice. That
flawed approach has to change. After almost three
decades of negotiations and appealing to the occupying
Power - from the Madrid Peace Conference and the
Oslo process to the Quartet efforts, the Annapolis
Conference, the Paris Conference and every other
attempt in between - Israel's violations, violence
and intransigence have only become more flagrant.
Only accountability can create the necessary pressure
to break that toxic cycle in order to finally end the
occupation and establish the rights of the Palestinian
people - the cornerstone for a peaceful and secure
Middle East.

The Security Council has been patently clear in that
regard. It was explicit in resolution 2334 (2016) in its
determination not to recognize any changes to the 1967
borders, including with regard to Jerusalem, other than
those agreed to by the parties through negotiations,
and it directly called on States to differentiate, in their
relevant dealings, between Israel and the territories
it has occupied since 1967. That is an obligation. I
repeat - the differentiation is an obligation.

To Member States contemplating establishing
missions in Israel, whether diplomatic, cultural or
for trade, and to representatives of Member States
undertaking official visits to Israel, that obligation,
in accordance with resolution 478 (1980), includes
Jerusalem. There are no exceptions. Decisions
and declarations signed by others that depart from
international law and United Nations resolutions cannot
change facts and cannot legitimize what is illegitimate.

The Security Council, in resolution 478 (1980),
unequivocally deemed Israel's annexation of occupied
East Jerusalem to be unlawful, null and void and
without legal effect. Likewise, in resolution 497 (1981),
it deemed Israel's annexation of the occupied Syrian
Golan to be unlawful, null and void and without legal
effect. The same applies to any annexation measures
planned or imposed by Israel over any part of the
territories it has occupied since 1967.

The prohibition of the acquisition of territory by
force stands. Recognition of such annexations by any
country, no matter how large and powerful, is without
legal effect. We therefore reiterate our condemnation
and complete rejection of recent decisions by the United
States, taken in violation of the Charter and Security
Council resolutions and with zero regard for the
inalienable rights and fate of millions of Palestinians.
Similarly, as speculation abounds about the pending
American so-called peace plan, we reiterate that any
initiative detached from international law and the
relevant United Nations resolutions and dismissive of
human rights can be neither viable nor just, and will
not succeed.

International law is abiding, and Security Council
resolutions are valid and binding until implemented.
Moreover, States have a responsibility not to recognize
as lawful a situation created by breach of the law,
and a State assisting another State in the commission
of internationally wrongful acts incurs liability. That
is not our personal narrative; those are established
international rules and norms that must be upheld.

Despite the bleak picture, we have not given
up hope. Some may say we are living in denial; we
are not. We recognize the enormity of the crisis
we face - existential, in fact - but we have not
abandoned our beliefthat international law will lead us
to justice. On the contrary, despite deep worries about
the weakening of the rules-based order and its ability
to withstand current challenges, we are reassured of
its strength and longevity by the firm statements from
across the international community denouncing Israel's
attempts to annex occupied East Jerusalem and the
occupied Syrian Golan and affirming that positions in
this regard remain unchanged.

We see that strength and longevity also in the firm
commitment to the Arab Peace Initiative, affirmed
again at the Arab Summit in Tunisia last month, as
well as in the strong positions repeatedly reaffirmed
by the European Union, the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (OIC), the Non-Aligned Movement and
countless capitals around the world. We see it in the
ongoing efforts of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for
the Coordination of the International Assistance to
Palestinians and in the generous support of donors,
regionally and internationally, who have long assisted
in building and strengthening the institutions of
the State of Palestine. We see it in the international
community's strong support for UNRWA's mandate,
pending ajust solution for the Palestine refugees and in
the response to the Agency's funding crisis, including
the OIC's establishment of a waqf for the refugees. We
see it in the resolute efforts of Jordan as custodian ofthe
Muslim and Christian holy sites in Jerusalem. We see
it in the efforts of Egypt and Russia to help us heal our
painful division and restore Palestinian unity. And we
see it in every principled vote at the United Nations in
support of right and justice, despite immense pressure
and threats.

Of course, as stressed at the outset, more than
words are needed. Business as usual cannot continue.
It is time to act; we cannot continue to decry the threats
to multilateralism and our international system without
seriously acting to protect, restore and revive them
based on our shared values, humanity and future. Only
then can we overcome the challenges and rectify our
course. That is a matter of urgency for Palestine, but
also for the international community, which must seize
the opportunity now.

On our part, we are ready to do so. We remain
committed to a peaceful, political, legal, non-violent
path for realizing our rights and bringing an end to the
conflict, and President Abbas has once again extended
his hand in peace. Prime Minister Shtayyeh, newly at
the helm of the Government of the State of Palestine, has
committed to working with all partners to address the
humanitarian, socioeconomic, security and protection
crises affecting the Palestinian people, despite severe
austerity measures imposed following Israel's theft
of our revenues. We are coordinating closely with our
regional partners, as reflected in the recent League of
Arab States ministerial meeting in Cairo, to address the
challenges we face.

No one can accuse us of not wanting peace or of
not seeking the best interests of our people. Our only
condition is that any effort or initiative must be based on
international legality and the parameters enshrined over
decades in the relevant Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions. That is a minimal ask and should
be respected, not disregarded, by those who seek to lead
peacemaking efforts. We appeal to the international
community to rise now to its responsibilities before it
is too late.

I thank you, Mr. President, and Council members
for your attention and urge you to act.

