Mr. Onanga-Anyanga: I congratulate you, Sir,
on your presidency of the Council during the month of
August.

Members of the Council have before them the
interim report of the Secretary-General on Burundi
(S/2014/550) pursuant to paragraph 20 of resolution
2137 (2014). Since the publication of the report, the
situation in Burundi has continued to evolve.

I would like to start by expressing my appreciation
for the recent calls made by the President of Burundi
to his closest advisers, in particular the Minister of
the Interior, to ensure that political parties can freely
undertake their activities throughout the country.
Also, visibly preoccupied by the recent unlawful acts
perpetrated by young people affiliated with his party,
the Chairperson of the ruling Conseil national pour la
defense de la democratie-Forces pour la defense de la
democratie (CNDD-FDD) publicly condemned such
acts and stated that the perpetrators would face justice.

Those are welcome and timely developments,
for there should be no room for political intolerance,
violence or impunity. Such steps must therefore be
sustained so that they have a lasting and positive impact
and help to create a conducive environment for free,
fair and peaceful elections in 2015.

Meanwhile, the sociopolitical situation in Burundi
remains characterized by the deep-rooted differences
and persisting mistrust between the Government
and the opposition parties, and between and within
opposition groups as well. There is a lack of genuine
political dialogue on major national issues. In addition,
the impact of a number of restrictive laws on the
freedoms of expression and assembly is still a source
of controversy and concern. That is disconcerting only
nine months away from the 2015 elections.

Yet there is room for optimism. On 1 July,
President Nkurunziza declared that the 2015 elections
would be the best that the country had ever organized.
Moreover, the opposition parties remain determined
to stay politically engaged and not to boycott the
2015 elections. That is very encouraging, as the 2015
elections will be the real litmus test of Burundi's
democratic process and stability.

The adoption of the new Electoral Code by
consensus, its promulgation on 3 June and the signing
of the code of conduct for the 2015 elections on 9 June,
organized under the auspices of the Government and
the United Nations Office in Burundi (BNUB) and
in which all political stakeholders condemn political
violence, as well as the announcement of the electoral
calendar in July by the President of the Commission
electorale nationale independante, the electoral
management body, are all positive milestones. It is now
incumbent upon all actors, particularly the Government
of Burundi, to do everything possible to create a climate
conducive to credible elections before they start in May
2015, and to nurture it throughout the entire electoral
period. The timely deployment of electoral observers,
as requested by the Government of Burundi, will be
critical to the success of the elections, as is the need to
secure adequate and timely funding.

(spoke in French)

The reason that the Secretary-General has stressed
the need for a credible electoral process is the fact that,
apart from their technical complexity, the elections in
Burundi have major political significance. Ensuring
their smooth conduct should therefore be part of the
strategy to prevent the resurgence of conflict in Burundi
and to strengthen peace and national stability.
In addition, the country will embark upon an
electoral cycle that could have implications for all the
countries of the Great Lakes region. I stress that point
because, as the Council knows, the current political
tensions are, to a great extent, due to the crisis following
the boycott of the 2010 elections and to the political
imbalances that resulted.

However, while it remains highly significant, the
current stability in the country should not give rise to
complacency. We should welcome the fact that today
Burundi has become an important actor in peacekeeping
in the region. Owing to the many sociopolitical
challenges that Burundi continues to face, the gains of
peace remain fragile and require the ongoing attention,
in particular, of the entire Security Council.

That is why the country must step up its efforts to
sustain the progress made by taking ownership of the
recommendations of the Security Council, in particular
in order to establish a lasting climate conducive to
dialogue and consultation, to end impunity and to
promote national reconciliation, including through
the establishment of inclusive transitional justice
mechanisms. In that regard, I would like to welcome
the constructive role of the Speaker of the National
Assembly of Burundi.

There is also a need to encourage the establishment
of an independent judicial system and to promote and
ensure better protection of human rights, including
those of civil society and the media, not to mention
the right to development and the well-being of all by
further reducing the extreme poverty that continues to
affect the majority of the population.

Sparing no effort to achieve the pledges made
in 2012 at the Geneva Partners Conference towards
the effective implementation of the second Strategic
Framework for Growth and the Fight against Poverty
must remain a priority on the basis of the joint
commitments of Burundi and its partners. Ambassador
Paul Seger continues to make significant efforts to that
end.

Allow me also to launch in this body an appeal
to the Burundian opposition to ensure that its efforts
are sustained over time and go down in history, while
resisting the temptation to once again abandon the
electoral process. Today the political tensions affect
both the relations between the Government and the
opposition and the opposition parties. The mistrust
and divisions also undermine the largest opposition
parties, such as the Union pour le progres national, the
Front pour la democratic au Burundi and the Forces
nationales de liberation. That serves to perpetuate
the prevailing climate of political tension. Several
opposition parties have accused the Government of
interfering in their internal management and of causing
division Within them. The Government has rejected the
accusations, citing power struggles as the main cause
of such disagreements.

Whatever the case, it is certain that the establishment
of a more favourable political environment, as agreed
in the road map and, more recently, in the code of
good conduct - in particular by creating a more open
political space in which all political actors would enjoy
the same right to freely conduct their activities within
the current legal framework, without fear of harassment
or violence - would contribute significantly to building
confidence, including in the institutions responsible for
deciding political matters and organizing the electoral
process. It would also also make it possible to send a
clear message as to the resolute commitment of the
entire political class with regard to the need to engage
in more calm and healthy competition, while guarding
against troublemakers. The party in power should set
an example in matters of discipline within its ranks.
The warnings conveyed by the President of the CNDD-
FDD in that connection are very encouraging. They
show that it is possible to put a check on the scourge of
violence for the forthcoming elections in 2015.

(spoke in English)

Following the submission of the joint transition
plan to the Council on 14 May, BNUB, the United
Nations country team, the Government and partners
have moved forward with the implementation of
measures to promote continuity and minimize potential
gaps resulting from the closure of the mission, on
31 December. That process has been guided by regular
meetings of the Transition Steering Group, which I have
the honour to co-chair with the Minister of External
Relations and International Cooperation. The Group
enjoys broad representation from the Government
and international partners. In the area of political
dialogue, I have consulted numerous international
partners - United Nations and non-United Nations
partners - including the United Nations Office in
Central Africa, the Special Envoy to the Great Lakes
Region, the East African Community and, of course,
the African Union. I am pleased to note that efforts are
being made to step up their engagement. The role of the
European Union as a major player in the region will also
be essential. It will be important to bridge any potential
gaps, consistent with their respective mandates.

Similar consultations are ongoing between the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights and the Government to establish
a stand-alone presence in Burundi, as provided for
under the Joint Transition Plan and the United Nations
Development Assistance Framework, bearing in
mind the need to safeguard a full mandate on human
rights while concomitantly building the capacity of
the national numan rights commission. I am pleased
to report the Government's readiness to continue
that important partnership, pending the necessary
adjustments to reflect new developments since the 1995
memorandum of understanding. Success in that critical
area will require the political and financial support of
all the parties concerned, including the Government of
Burundi, the office in Geneva and Member States.

In conclusion, none of those challenges are
insurmountable. Further progress can be achieved by
fostering a culture of inclusive dialogue and democracy,
based on the principles of mutual respect and tolerance
enshrined in Burundi's Constitution and the Arusha
Peace and Reconciliation Agreement. In the short- and
mid-terms, ensuring that the forthcoming elections
take place in an enabling environment will be essential.
Their credibility hinges upon the participation of all
Burundians. I remain optimistic that this will be the
case. Going forward, BNUB and the country team will
remain engaged and continue to extend their support to
the Government and the people of Burundi with a View
to consolidating democracy, sustainable development
and peace.

