Mr. Bruce (World Bank): We at the World Bank
are deeply honoured to be able to participate in this
discussion. We identify with many of the statements
that have been made already, but wish to briefly add
six points.

First, we would like to confirm that the evidence
indicates that peace and improvements in security have
yielded economic benefits. During the period from
1996 to 2000, the years of war, for example, gross
domestic product (GDP) actually contracted by about
4 per cent. In the period since then, we have seen GDP
not only in positive terrain, but increasing. As recently
as 2010, the GDP growth figure was about 5 to 6 per
cent. So we see continued improvement. Underlying
that is good news about improvements in agriculture
and improvements at the top, if you like, of the
hierarchy in terms of large companies. We see
improvements in education and health outcomes, albeit
from a low base, and we see improving results in terms
of achieving the Millennium Development Goals.

Having said that, we will soon be releasing a
report that points to areas of concern in terms of the
dividends of peace, and I would like to highlight one in
particular, which is what we call the "missing middle".
The small and medium-sized enterprises sector, which
we know is very much involved in creating jobs
globally, is an area that requires attention. That is my
first point.

Secondly, I would like to embrace what many
participants have said about the importance of
institutional development. This year, for the first time,
the World Bank released the World Development
Report 201]: Conflict, Security and Development. In
the report, we saw that countries that were able to
develop strong institutions were able to avoid repeated
cycles of war, which were quite pervasive in many
African countries. But what we also saw was that
countries that failed to do so - that were involved in
the abuse of human rights and where there was low
Government effectiveness - were 30 to 40 per cent
more likely to slip back into violence. So we want to
encourage the progress that we have already seen and
ask the Government to stay the course.

My third point, which is a very interesting one to
us, is that this institutional development that we have
been talking about is something that takes a long time.
Our estimates of the 20 best-performing countries
shows that the 20 fastest of them took 17 years to get
the military out of politics, 20 years to achieve
functioning bureaucratic quality, and 27 years to bring
corruption under reasonable control. The message of
those findings is that that takes time. It is a
generational effort and it is important that all of us stay
the course.

My fourth point is not only to embrace what
many Council members have said about the importance
of fair and timely elections, but also to identify two
particular risks that have not been mentioned so far. We
know from experience across Africa and elsewhere that
elections are often associated with deterioration in
economic governance, and we want to encourage the
Government of the Democratic Republic to buck that
trend, so to speak, and to continue the course of fiscal
discipline.

The second related risk that we see, particularly
in this context, is that if current trends in food prices
and oil prices are anything to go by, when the elections
are held we could be facing a situation where there is
considerable pressure in places like Kinshasa, where
we are seeing cereal prices rising quite substantially.
For example, whereas inflation during 2010 was about
10 per cent, we have already noted that prices have
risen over 16 per cent in the first quarter of 2011.
Cereal prices, in particular, have risen 33 per cent. That
is worth watching as a complicating factor as we
approach the elections.

My fifth point is to underscore what others have
said about gender violence and to stand squarely with
those who are challenging the Government to do more.
Here, I also want to associate the World Bank with the
comments made by my colleague from the United
Nations Development Programme, which point to other
actions that the Government can take to help to reduce
gender disparity. We know, for example, that there are
some laws that limit what women can do without their
husband's permission in terms of routine legal
processes. We would argue that such measures and
laws are standing in the way of progress in the area of
gender equality.

My final point, which is implicit in all that I have
said so far, is that the kind of engagement that many
speakers have referred to in their statements and that
the World Bank embraces is one that needs to stay the
course for the long haul. I just want to assure the
Council that the World Bank, as well as the Africa
region that I represent, are strongly committed to that
long-term process. Right now, we have a portfolio of
about $2.2 billion. Together with many members of the
Council, we are providing support to the processes of
institution-building. We are focused very much on
providing basic services, including access to electricity,
education and health outcomes. We are very much
involved - together with many Council members -
in the work on governance. Only recently, we began to
activate a project that will support improvements in
governance in the mining sector. I spoke earlier about
our concern about rising food prices, particularly in the
context of elections. I would point out that we have an
operation that is a social action fund of about
$100 million, which will be very helpful in assisting
Congolese in dealing with some of these food price
increases.

We are there for the long haul. We welcome this
discourse. We hope that everyone will also stay
focused on the longer-term issues and the longer-term
engagement.

