Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia thanks the Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission for Somalia, Mr. Madeira, and the Deputy
Special Representative of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia (UNSOM), Mr. Zenenga.

We welcome the significant progress that Somalia
has made in recent years with regard to the conclusion
of the electoral process, leading to the presidential
election on 8 February. We are happy to see that for
the first time women and young people have greater
representation in Parliament.

We underscore the importance of adhering to the
political road map to ensure that, by 2020 at the latest,
elections based on the one person, one vote principle
will be held. We also welcome the decision of President
Jubaland to cooperate with the Federal Government and
to note that one of his priorities will be to combat the
Al-Shabaab terrorist group. In that regard and despite
the progress made in Somalia, there are still many
challenges, one of which is the fight against terrorism,
which remains a threat to the peace and security in the
region, as well as the threat of piracy. The Al-Shabaab

terrorist group continues to restrict access to those who
need help and assistance in the areas under its control.
With regard to international cooperation and
political support for Somalia, we welcome the holding of
the international London Conference on 11 May where
partners committed to supporting the strengthening
of national and international security, economic
recovery and the preparation of a security pact. We
also recognize the important contribution of regional
partners, the African Union's participation, including
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM),
in the transition towards a secure and stable Somalia.
We support the position of the Secretary-General that
international cooperation is fundamental to maintaining
the recent political and security progress, in addition to
ensuring consistent and long-term support to develop
the institutional capacities of the Somali Government
leading to the development of good governance
initiatives led by the community.

We are deeply concerned about the deterioration
of the humanitarian situation, due in large part to the
worsening of the drought, which has spread beyond
Puntland and Somaliland to southern areas, such as
Gedo and Juba Hoose. United Nations data indicates
that 6.2 million people are facing acute food insecurity
and millions of people require urgent assistance to save
their lives. According to the report of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, more
than 570,000 new displacements have been caused by
the drought since November 2016. The ongoing lack
of social security networks and basic services are
also increasing the country's vulnerability and the
possibility that the crisis could spread further. The
international community must urgently respond to
these challenges to prevent this serious situation from
becoming a famine, such as what happened in 2011,
during which, according to the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, 250,000
people died, more than half of whom were under five
years old.

In conclusion, we would like to recognize the
important work of the United Nations Support Office
in Somalia, the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia and the African Union Mission in Somalia. We
consider them to be fundamental in building the Somali
State, in particular with regard to the processes aimed
at strengthening the State and preparing for an electoral
process that is inclusive, free, impartial and transparent,
while respecting the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Somalia.

