Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation congratulates the Mexican
delegation on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for April and commends the Libyan
delegation for its outstanding work last month. We
thank Mr. Hedi Annabi, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for his briefing and also welcome
the 6 March 2009 report (S/2009/129) ofthe Secretary-
General on the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH).

We note that there has been some general
improvement in the security situation on the ground
and that some progress has been made in implementing
the five benchmarks for the consolidation of stability
process in Haiti. However, as pointed out in the report
of the Secretary-General and the report of the Security
Council mission to Haiti, the situation remains fragile.
Such problems as poverty, unemployment and food
insecurity still jeopardize achieving lasting stability in
the country.

We hope that the Haitian Government, with the
assistance of the international community, will enhance
its capacity through measures such as restructuring
national institutions, enhancing police capacity and
border control, developing legislation, promoting
judicial reform and prison management and making
greater efforts to fight corruption. To that end, the
Haitian Government, Parliament, the political parties,
the private sector and civil society should intensify
political dialogue and coordination among themselves
to strive for long-term stability and development.

We call on all parties in Haiti to demonstrate the
political will to ensure that the upcoming senatorial
elections are free, fair and inclusive. Over the years,
MINUSTAH has played a crucial role in guaranteeing
stability in the country and we will continue to support
the Mission. To achieve lasting security and stability in
Haiti, we must rely first and foremost on the
Government and the people of Haiti. We also
encourage the international community to continue to
support Haiti in achieving national reconstruction and
socio-economic development. We look forward to the
positive outcome of the Washington donor conference,
to be held on 14 April.

