Mr. Snoussi (Morocco) (interpretation from French):
Mr. President, allow me once again to express my great
pleasure at seeing you presiding over the work of our
Council.

Today we are meeting once again here in the Security
Council to discuss a highly sensitive and highly painful
issue, that of the destiny of the city of Al-Quds. Indeed, the
recent decision of the Israeli Government to expand the
municipal authority of Al-Quds is yet another step in a
series of challenges that Israeli officials have placed before
the international community.

The "umbrella authority" measure is the latest in this
series. Reiterating its contempt for United Nations
resolutions that consider the establishment of settlements in
Al-Quds and in the other occupied territories as an illegal
act and that emphasize that all measures aimed at changing
the geographic and demographic nature of this Holy City
are null and void, the Israeli Government is yet again,
unfortunately, providing us with proof of its arrogance and
its obvious intention not to respect the official commitments
it has undertaken.

As His Majesty King Hassan II has emphasized, the
Israeli Government wishes to create a new school of
international law by which any new Government can purely
and simply renounce the commitments undertaken by the
preceding Government. That school would unfortunately be
a school of annihilation rather than one of existence.
Indeed, what the Israeli officials have not wanted to
understand is that by signing the Oslo agreements, their
country in fact had acted for the first time as a State
recognized by the Arab States. And in signing these
agreements sponsored by two super-Powers, the country
was building a bridge of confidence and respect with the
international community. What the Israeli officials did not
want to understand either is that what has been destroyed
can, unfortunately, be reconstructed only with a thousand
times the effort and a thousand times the sacrifices. But the
question that everyone is asking is whether we can still do
that.

The Israeli plan aimed at establishing an irreversible
situation in Al-Quds and at surrounding the Arab
populations is a flagrant contradiction of the relevant
Security Council resolutions and of international legality,
which forbid changes in the legal status and demographic
and geographic composition of Al-Quds. The intransigence
of the present Israeli Government has led to a halt in the
peace process on all of its tracks. It has thus encouraged the
establishment of new settlements in the occupied Arab

 

territories, and particularly in Al-Quds, and the decision
to dig a tunnel under Haram al-Sharif, an action which, as
the Council will recall, gave rise to very painful events.

However, the cruelties and humiliations continue. As
the Council can see, the latest Israeli decision is not an
isolated action but rather the result of a long-term strategy
aimed at totally changing this Holy City, whose heritage
includes the Al Aqsa Mosque, the first of the two kiblahs
and the third holiest place for Muslims and the cradle of
all the revealed religions.

The Council can easily imagine the perverse effects
the latest Israeli decision will have on what we call the
peace process, a process that, unfortunately, now exists in
name only.

Morocco, which has always advocated a just and
lasting peace in the Middle East, can only condemn most
severely the Israeli decision regarding the extension of the
municipal authority of Al-Quds. Morocco, whose
sovereign, as you know, is the Chairman of the Al-Quds
Committee, solemnly affirms that there can be no genuine
peace without Al-Quds. The Muslim community
throughout the world will allow neither the occupation
nor the encirclement of that city, which is the symbol and
the centre of our revealed religions.

Morocco strongly reaffirms its opposition to this new
act of aggression, which, unfortunately, strengthens all of
those who had thought that no genuine peace with Israel
was possible. Israel has succeeded in reviving an
atmosphere of suspicion that we thought had been buried
for ever. As everyone knows, including Israel, we were
among those who had contributed to recreating the
climate of confidence. But, unfortunately, all of that has
been buried.

The international community has launched numerous
appeals for Israel to put an end to its acts of provocation,
but in vain. The innumerable resolutions of the Security
Council and the General Assembly continue to be treated
with utter contempt by Israel. Some see here the
confirmation of a policy that no one wished publicly to
acknowledge, and we are still among those who believe
that the Security Council will not allow its impartiality or
sense of justice to become suspect.

Israel's impunity up to now, regrettably, has
certainly encouraged it along that path. The Muslim
community believes that the questions of Palestine and
Al-Quds are priority questions and, faithful to this

 

position of principle, wishes to emphasize the need for the
return of the Holy City to Palestinian sovereignty in order
to help bring about a just and lasting settlement to the
Palestinian problem.

The Muslim community has reaffirmed on numerous
occasions that this Holy City was an integral part of the
territories occupied in 1967 and has recalled in this
connection the relevant resolutions demanding that its
geographic and demographic nature remain unchanged.
There is no room for any interpretation or evaluation.

We hope that the Security Council will see fit to
launch an appeal, and we hope that this will be the last
time, calling to order the Israeli officials by reminding them
of their international obligations.

At this point, when contempt, hatred, disillusionment
and a feeling of frustration have taken over, only a miracle
could restore confidence and allow for the re-establishment
of genuine peace. Are we going to wait until it is too late
to act? Those who are engaging in these acts, these
provocations, are not aware of the terrible risks to which
they are subjecting the communities that live in this region.
Nor are they aware of the dangers to which they are
exposing Israel itself and its neighbours. If more time is
lost, tomorrow no one will want peace any more, even
those who have fought for it. Are we going to stand by
with our arms folded? Let us do something while there is
still time, because tomorrow it will already be too late.

