Mr. Seger (spoke in French): Allow me first of all to
thank the Council for having invited me to this briefing,

I would also like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga,
and his entire team for their outstanding work with
regard not only to the transition plan that he has just
presented but also their tireless efforts in balancing the
dual burden of continuing to implement the mandate
of the United Nations Office in Burundi (BNUB) until
the end of the year and of ensuring a smooth transfer
of BNUB's remaining tasks to the country team. I also
take this opportunity to welcome the Minister of the
Interior and the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of
External Relations and to the Government of Burundi
for its very constructive and positive cooperation
thoughout our relationship.

I will limit my statement today to two points. First,
Iwill sum up the essential aspects ofthe configuration's
efforts to assist Burundi, in particular in the light of the
current situation, and to inform the Council about my
upcoming visit to the region from 21 May to 1 June.
Secondly, I will raise the idea of convening a follow-
up meeting to the Geneva conference of 2012 to assess
progress in the implementation of the second poverty
reduction strategy paper and the mutual commitments
agreed upon at the meeting in Geneva.

As the Council has heard, the current situation in
Burundi is difficult and tense. Without dwelling on
developments since the adoption of resolution 2137
(2014), which the Council has followed closely by
meeting three times in closed consultations, I now
note a growing lack of trust on two levels. Internally,
the perspective of the 2015 elections is giving rise
to a significantly increased tension. Exacerbated by
an absence of dialogue, the political space is clearly
limited, leading to mutual mistrust between the ruling
party and the opposition parties. In the same vein, recent
events on the political front in Burundi have raised
great concern at the international level, as underscored
by the various statements and visits by bilateral and
multilateral partners and institutions. The international
community's increased attention to Burundi clearly
demonstrates its strong bond with the country and its
people. We have to further intensify our common efforts
in favour ofa frank and open - but also respectful and
friendly - dialogue between Burundi and its partners.

I have therefore focused my efforts of recent
months on exploring options for ending the current
impasse while continuing to appeal for a smooth
transition towards the post-BNUB phase and beyond.
In that context, I met with United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) Administrator Helen Clark, high-
level officials from the Department of Political Affairs,
a ministerial delegation from Burundi and a few
bilateral partners. Administrator Clark has assured me
of UNDP's full commitment to continuing the work of
peacebuilding after BNUB's departure. I also had the
pleasure of participating in the first two meetings of
the transition steering group via video-teleconference.
Furthermore, following the configuration's meeting
on 12 March, I continued my informal exchanges with
key configuration members to share our respective
analyses and cooperate with the Government through
its Permanent Representative in New York. Yesterday, I
also met with the World Bank Vice President for Africa,
Mr. Makhtar Diop. I will come back to that visit later.

As BNUB's mandate is coming to an end, as we
know, on 31 December, I intend to continue to engage in
dialogue with the various stakeholders over the coming
months to ensure continued or even increased political
commitment on the part of the international partners in
Burundi. The countries of the subregion have a central
role to play. I welcome the efforts of neighbouring
States and regional organizations in the context of the
current situation and call upon them to become even
further involved.

Given recent developments, the Burundian
Government has invited me to move my visit up to the
month of May. I have gladly complied and have planned
my visit for 21 May to 1 June. Contrary to my usual
practice, I will stay in Bujumbura for only two days
and will devote some of my time to visits to Brussels,
Paris, Kigali and Arusha, United Republic of Tanzania.
The goal of my stopovers in Europe and Burundi's
neighbouring States is to discuss recent developments
with high-level representatives from the various
countries and regional organizations, in particular the
European Union and the East African Community, in
order to explore the best options to engage with Burundi
and define their respective roles, in particular after
BNUB's departure. In my opinion, that last point is of
particular importance, given that Burundi's partners
will have to fill the gaps left by BNUB's withdrawal.
Indeed, the transition plan just presented by the Special
Representative of the Secretary- General clearly reflects
those gaps.

My initial intention was to include Addis Ababa
and Dar Es Salaam in my itinerary in order to meet
with African Union and Tanzanian officials, but due to
time constraints I was unable to do so. I will, however,
make up for that on one of my upcoming trips, during
which I will also seek to enhance my contacts with
other important partners in the region, in particular
Kenya and Uganda.

The programme for my two-day stay in Bujumbura
is being finalized, and I would like to take this
opportunity to thank BNUB's staff in advance for their
preparatory work. As usual, I will meet with high-
level representatives from the Government, including,
I hope, the President, and representatives of various
political parties, civil society and the international
community. I also plan to participate in the first meeting
of the joint steering committee that will support the
implementation of the Peacebuilding Fund's new
priority plan, which has been allotted $11.65 million
and covers four priority areas: social cohesion, youth,
human rights and property development.

My upcoming trip has a more concrete objective
as well. Within the configuration, we have been
discussing the idea of convening a roundtable meeting
as a follow-up to the 2012 Geneva conference. That
issue was also at the core of yesterday's discussion in
Washington, D.C., with Assistant Secretary-General
Judy Cheng-Hopkins and the World Bank's Vice
President for Africa, Mr. Makhtar Diop. The Geneva
conference, as the Council knows, was organized on
the basis of the principle of mutual commitments and
responsibilities. International partners committed to
supporting Burundi financially within the framework
of the second poverty reduction strategy, and Burundi
committed to embarking on important reforms in the
political and the socioeconomic sectors.

We must admit that the Geneva conference's
momentum has slowed over the past few months and
given way to an increasing lack of trust, as I mentioned
at the beginning of my statement. We have reached the
midpoint of the second poverty reduction strategy, and
that provides us with an opportunity to come together
again and take stock of the mutual commitments
undertaken in Geneva. Such a meeting would have
several objectives: to counter the risk of an economic
and political relapse; to rekindle what I would call
"the spirit of Geneva"; and to review the progress in
the implementation of the second poverty reduction
strategy and the mutual commitments.

Ideally, the roundtable meeting would take place
sooner rather than later - namely, in the summer or
early autumn - and would include a limited number of
high-level representatives of the main partners and the
Government in order to encourage open communication
in an informal setting. Finally, such a roundtable would
also respond to the Council's call contained in paragraph
19 of resolution 2137 (2014) of 13 February. During the
informal discussions, high-level representatives of the
Burundian Government supported the idea of such a
roundtable. I thus intend to officially present this idea
during my exchanges in Burundi, so as to then present
a concept paper to the concerned stakeholders. As per
usual, I will send a report on my visit to the Council.

Given its painful history, Burundi has made
remarkable progress towards stability in a very short
period of time. We must stay the course and prevent
any backsliding into the past. The international
community's involvement in Burundi is still very
much needed - perhaps now more than ever. It is in
this spirit that I welcome the attention the Security
Council is giving to the situation in Burundi. It is now
up to us, as Burundi's partners, to pick up the BNUB
torch and consolidate its extraordinary achievements
by enhancing our involvement. The joint expressions
of concern by the Council and other forums regarding
recent developments, in my opinion, have above all
shown that the international community cares about
Burundi. In my view, that is an important message that
we must build on.

