Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I am very
honoured and pleased, Mr. President, to see you back
here with us. I think that we should keep you here
longer, if Mexico allows, because your presidency is
such a welcome one.

I should like to express my great appreciation for
the initiative of the Mexican presidency in scheduling
this important debate. I should like also to say that the
keynote address just made by the Secretary-General
contains points which we must reflect on and that are
of importance to our meeting today and for us in the
Council in future.

Moments of crisis are particularly well suited to
reflection, and today's exercise, proposed your
presidency, Sir, comes at a most appropriate moment.
The world is facing a crisis of great proportions whose
consequences might be very far-reaching and could
extend well beyond our lifetimes.

Regional organizations have a key role to play,
and there is sufficient provision for it in the Charter of
our Organization - in Chapter VIII. However, regional
organizations cannot substitute for the role and
character of the United Nations as a universal
Organization. Instead, regional organizations are
intermediate structures that enable cooperation and
coordination at the regional level in a heterogeneous
world. The manner in which those organizations
interact with the universal Organization that is the
United Nations has been a matter of debate in the past
and will continue to be in future.

In actuality, their role is dependent on their
cohesion and on a sound regional consensus. This is
particularly the case in matters of international peace
and security, inasmuch as a regional consensus assists
the Security Council by guiding its deliberations. When
regional consensuses are taken into account, they
ultimately improve compliance with, and the
sustainability of, decisions that seek to prevent and
resolve conflicts.

In southern Africa, the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) has played such a
key role. Its origins are deeply rooted in the
convictions of the then-frontline States, whose national
policies sought to further the cause of self-
determination in Africa. Their participation in bringing
about the end of colonialism and apartheid in
Mozambique, Angola, Zimbabwe, Namibia and South
Africa is well documented in the Security Council and
is recognized and reflected in landmark Council
resolutions, processes and missions.

Today, SADC continues to play a pivotal role in
conflict prevention and resolution in the region as well
as in promoting economic integration among member
States. SADC members played a pivotal role in the
resolution of the conflict in Angola by energetically
adopting policies and measures to curb the ability of an
insurgency to wage war on the people of Angola.
Furthermore, their policies insured compliance with
Security Council resolutions. That is our main task:
compliance with Security Council resolutions. In the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Organization is
actively engaged and has played a pivotal role in
providing for the dialogue that led to the recent
appointment of a Government of national
reconciliation, while upholding the principles of
sovereignty and territorial integrity that unite the
region.

Present events might preclude fundamental
changes in the pattern of international relations. In our
view, States should take a number of decisive political
decisions, one of the most important issues being the
subject of our meeting, addressed by the Secretary-
General and other speakers. Moreover, the drafters of
the United Nations Charter, in their wisdom, also
established a set of provisions dealing with this subject.

We believe that regional arrangements based on
the political will and commitment of States have
enormous potential and that in the future regional
organizations can play a fundamental and ever
increasing role in guaranteeing the peaceful settlement
of local disputes and, over all, a more secure and
equitable world. By reinforcing political and
economical cooperation in the framework of regional
and subregional organizations, States will be better
prepared to defend their interests, their sovereignty and
their individual and collective security.

Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter
contains provisions concerning regional arrangements,
their role in the maintenance of peace and their
relations with the Security Council. More than ever, the
United Nations is called on to play a key role by
encouraging and promoting dialogue among its
Members with a view to achieving the goal of
strengthening regional organizations and enabling them
to play an increasing role in the maintenance of
international peace and security. I sincerely hope that
our meeting this morning will make a significant
contribution to restating and clarifying such a role,
particularly by defining ways for the years ahead.

