Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting
and particularly for coming personally to New York to
participate in it. That is a very good illustration of the
importance France reserves for the problems of Africa,
especially African problems of peace and security and
particularly West African ones. I thank you very much.

I also wish to thank His Excellency Minister
Nana Akufo-Addo, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Ghana and current Chairman of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), for
addressing the meeting this morning and sharing with
us in the Council the views of ECOWAS with the
authority we have been accustomed to when it comes
to this place.

I would like to thank Mr. Chambas for the very
comprehensive briefing that he gave us. I would also
like to thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and the Associate Administrator
of the United Nations Development Programme for
their statements on questions relating to West Africa.
They have enabled us to obtain an overall and
comprehensive picture of the problems there.

The insightful address given to us by the
Secretary-General set out a sound framework for a
regional approach to cross-border issues, and we were
very pleased that he was able to be with us this
morning.

The Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for West Africa has also been able to share
with us the work done on the ground to bring together
the political and peacekeeping missions of the United
Nations in the subregion. His important reflections on
cross-border issues make a very important contribution
and provide a good illustration of the value of the
coordinating role that a United Nations office can play
in addressing, in a comprehensive manner, the
problems affecting a conflict region. The experience
gained in West Africa may be useful in other
subregions in Africa and beyond, where similar
problems urgently require a regional approach.

The report (S/2004/200) provides an important
tool to help the Governments of the region, the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the international community to tackle
the main issues of common concern, especially those
relating to trafficking in small arms. Here, I fully agree
with the suggestion of our German colleague, that
small arms constitute the real weapons of mass
destruction in the subregion that we are dealing with
and in Africa in general. With regard to the issues of
child soldiers, mercenaries and the illegal exploitation
of resources, it is our conviction that the objectives can
be achieved only if the countries of the region are fully
involved throughout the implementation process, thus
assuming ownership of the solutions proposed in the
report.

While we recognize the gains and comparative
advantages of United Nations peacekeeping and
political missions in the region, we are of the view that,
given the temporary nature of such missions, ways
should be found to gradually transfer expertise and
competence to more permanent mechanisms, such as
the secretariat of ECOWAS and the relevant national
institutions of ECOWAS member States, in close
coordination with the United Nations Office for West
Africa.

Focusing on the recommendations of the
Secretary-General, we are pleased to note the clear
definition of the respective roles and responsibilities of
the United Nations, the States of the region and the
partners. However, it should also be borne in mind that,
in order for some of the recommendations contained in
the report to be addressed by the Governments of the
region, the provision of financial and technical
assistance will be required.

While agreeing with the assertion in the report
that addressing cross-border problems will require
radical reform of governance in the region, it is the
view of my delegation that the definition of a
successful strategy and way forward will require full
involvement and leadership on the part of the regional
Governments and the active participation of other
actors - non-governmental organizations, civil society
and the wider international community - with none
being excluded.

ECOWAS has been in the foreground as a
subregional organization. It has spared no effort in
dealing - with the support of the international
community - with the crises in Liberia, Sierra Leone,
Guinea-Bissau and, more recently, Cote d'Ivoire.
Those crises have had an adverse impact on the socio-
economic situation and impeded the process of
economic integration in the region.

The conflicts in the region have also fuelled the
proliferation of arms, the recruitment of child soldiers,
the illegal exploitation of natural resources and the
recruitment of mercenaries. Serious consideration
should therefore be given to the strengthening of
existing regional and national mechanisms, such as the
ECOWAS Moratorium on small arms and the Mano
River Union peace mechanisms. In this regard, while
welcoming the idea of an international conference on
assistance to the Mano River Union region, we believe
that, in the long-term, the benefits of such a conference
would be far greater if its agenda were extended to
cover the entire subregion.

We also strongly support the recommendation
relating to the ratification and observance of existing
international conventions by the countries of the region
and by the rest of the international community.

Current realities in the region put a high premium
on the need to have an effective regional framework for
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. In the
framework of strengthening the ECOWAS secretariat,
my delegation welcomes the creation of a unit within
the secretariat to deal with that critical issue.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to
underscore that, in finding solutions to address cross-
border problems in the West African subregion, the
importance of strengthening the relationship of
cooperation between ECOWAS and the African Union,
especially its recently established Peace and Security
Council, should be actively pursued.

My delegation is engaged in pursuing, within the
Security Council, ways of achieving the more effective
implementation of the proposals contained in the
report, and I look forward to the suggested discussion
on the ground with the leaders of the countries when
the Security Council decides to go again to the region.

