Mr. Pronk: I last briefed the Council half a year
ago, in March (see S/PV.5392). At that time, I said that
the implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA) between the north and the south was
on track. It still is. However, it is a bumpy ride, and the
train can easily derail. The peace is fragile, and the
confidence gap between the north and the south is
widening.

I am glad to report that the United Nations
Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) has completed almost
100 per cent - exactly 99 per cent - of its
deployment in southern Sudan. We have fulfilled our
mandate in eastern Sudan and have withdrawn the
troops from the area. The authorities have given
2
assurances that United Nations humanitarian and
development efforts will continue unhindered.

The withdrawal of the United Nations from the
east has sent a strong signal to the people of the Sudan
that the United Nations came to eastern Sudan upon the
invitation of the Government, accomplished its task
and left. There was no hidden agenda to occupy or to
colonize, as is the ongoing rhetoric about the United
Nations vis-a-vis other parts of the country.

We continue to monitor the Eritrean-mediated
talks between the Sudanese Government and the
Eastern Front, which, at last, began in Asmara three
months ago. They are taking place without the United
Nations and without others as international observers.
That is different from the north-south talks in Naivasha
or the Darfur talks in Abuja, but the parties have the
right, and they deserve the opportunity, to try to reach
an agreement all by themselves. They have informed us
that they expect to sign an agreement before the
commencement of Ramadan, and that is very soon.

Concerns, however, remain: an asymmetry of the
talks between a strong Government of the Sudan and a
weak Eastern Front, and a possible disconnect between
the leaders of the Eastern Front and their constituencies
on the ground. Moreover, the talks should not take the
shape of negotiations between the Government of the
Sudan and the Government of Eritrea about, but
Without, the people of the east. Their true participation
is essential in order to restore security and to tackle the
root causes of the conflict.

As for the south itself, CPA implementation in
southern Sudan, although slow, remains on course. The
government of Southern Sudan, which with limited
resources has been working hard to transform southern
Sudan from a war-torn region into a region with a
functioning administration has done a good job. The
Southern Sudan Legislative Assembly meets regularly
and is a forum for healthy debate and accountability.
President Kiir has reshuffled his cabinet and his
administration in order to enhance good governance
and abate corruption. His recent ZOO-day action plan is
a courageous effort to engender a culture in public
service that is action-oriented and puts the needs of the
people at the forefront. The political environment has
encouraged relatively free media. With the cooperation
of the government of Southern Sudan, United Nations
Radio Miraya - Radio Mirror - started broadcasting
06-52553
at the end of June 2006 and is being well appreciated
throughout southern Sudan.

The Ceasefire Joint Military Committee (CJMC)
remains the cornerstone of the Peace Agreement.
Chaired by the United Nations, it is the best-
functioning institution of the CPA. The redeployment
of the forces is on track. On 9 July 2007, all Sudanese
armed forces will have to be withdrawn from the south.
I have no reason to expect that this will not happen.
However, the presence of the so-called other armed
groups poses a threat. The Other Armed Groups
Collaborative Committee envisioned in the CPA has
started meeting, but the actual alignment status,
composition and location of these groups remains
vague. In a number of areas in the south, commanders
of the former alternative movement, the South Sudan
Defence Forces (SSDF), have refused to abide by the
joint Juba declaration, adopted earlier this year, which
provides for their integration into the Sudanese
People's Liberation Army (SPLA). Many people in the
south suspect that the north is still supporting these
commanders in order to destabilize the south, to
control disputed areas and oil fields and to create
uncertainty about the border.

Six months ago, I highlighted the factors behind
the ongoing violence in the south. Since then, the
violence has not decreased. On the contrary, we have
had to deal with it throughout southern Sudan - tribal
conflicts, land and water disputes, cattle looting, an
abundance of arms, fights between settlers and
nomads, youth unemployment and crime and a lack of
discipline among unpaid soldiers, in addition to the
presence of the other armed groups and the Lord's
Resistance Army (LRA). However, our presence in
southern Sudan has helped. In cooperation with the
government of Southern Sudan, our military, together
with the humanitarian and the civilian elements of the
mission, has been able to prevent escalations. Any
cannibalization of forces for diversion to another part
of Sudan, therefore, will have consequences for the
peace in southern Sudan. UNMIS, the nightwatchman,
should not be asked to pack up and go somewhere else
in the afternoon.

At the same time, there is a need for international
assistance in security-sector reform. The formation and
training of the Joint Integrated Units (JIUs) is way
behind schedule. There has been a rise in cases of
indiscipline in SPLA. International help, from a
number of countries, which I do not have in my United
06-52553
Nations mandate, is urgently required to train the
SPLA into a professional and democratic army.

Southern Sudan remains in urgent need of
reconstruction and developmental assistance. The
absence of basic facilities like water, sanitation, health
care and education has now forced the people to
question what difference peace has made in their lives
and those of their children. Some progress has been
made. Between January and June this year, over 300
kilometres of roads have been cleared of mines and
repaired. The UNICEF "Go to School" campaign has
provided school supplies to 1.6 million southern
Sudanese schoolchildren. However, coverage stands at
only half of the funding for this year's requirements as
presented in our work plan. This also affects our
capacity to provide services for returning refugees and
displaced people. An estimated 160,000 people
returned between January and July this year. With the
end of the rainy season approaching, large numbers of
returnees will be in urgent need of basic services. In
the coming year we shall need more funds for relief
and return and for reconstruction and development.
The people in southern Sudan are still heartbreakingly
poor

The performance of the National Congress Party
(NCP) within the Government of National Unity is not
encouraging. The NCP has accepted CPA in letter but
seems to ignore it in spirit. It continues to stall the
functioning of almost all critical institutions of the CPA
and has not accepted, to this day, the Sudan People's
Liberation Movement (SPLM) as an equal partner. The
isolation of SPLM. ministers who are part of the
Government of National Unity has created an
asymmetry in the Government, thereby relegating
"making unity attractive", which is part of our
mandate, to a distant dream. This asymmetry has also
caused every important issue to be put on the back
burner.

We had high expectations of the long-awaited
Ceasefire Political Commission (CPC), which to our
disappointment has turned out to be a forum that has
yet to resolve a single one of the issues forwarded by
CJMC. Instead of acting as a political body that solves
political questions, CPC has become a legalistic club
preserving the status quo. It has acted merely as a
secretariat that steers every contentious issue towards
the Presidency, where the outcome has been no
different.
3

No progress has been made on the issue of Abyei.

As a result, Abyei remains devoid of any governance

structure, leaving the people without any formal

policing, public sanitation or health services. Abyei is
the test case for CPA implementation.

In the key area of oil, the parties continue to
disagree on the status of the National Petroleum
Commission. The calculation and subsequent
distribution of oil revenues lack the transparency
needed to ensure fairness and accuracy.

The demarcation of the north-south border
remains unresolved. The Border Committee has yet to
undertake any substantive work. This task is urgent
because the absence of a clearly delineated border has
consequences for the redeployment of forces, the
distribution of oil revenues, JIU formation, the
elections and, eventually, the referendum.

Progress in the peace talks between the
Government of Uganda and LRA is a reason for hope.
LRA has agreed to bring together its forces - which
turned out to be much larger than we had expected -
in assembly areas in southern Sudan. If the present
cessation of hostilities lasts, peace can be brought to
northern Uganda, and this will have a significant
spillover effect in the region, including in the Sudan.

The State security structure in northern Sudan
continues to harass and intimidate all opposition to the
Government. There has been a crackdown on political
freedoms in the country, with heavy-handed tactics
used against peaceful demonstrations by the opposition
and by civilians protesting against Government
policies. Human rights violations, in particular by the
State security forces, have not decreased. No progress
has been made in bringing national security laws into
line with the new Constitution.

As stated during my last briefing, I had
commended the decision of the Governor of Khartoum
to cease all forced relocations from the IDP camps
around Khartoum. I am pleased to announce that he has
stood by his decision. However, last month, the
authorities in the neighbouring state of Gezira began
demolishing the houses of a large community in the
Dar Assalam camp, using overwhelming force.
Thousands of families have been forcibly relocated to
places that have no basic services. This inhumane
treatment is a violation of international humanitarian
law. It is also far below what was expected after the
adoption of the new Constitution.

I am alarmed at the recent kidnapping and
beheading, in Khartoum, of Mr. Mohammad Taha,
editor-in-chief of the Sudanese newspaper Al-Wifaq.
This brutal murder has been claimed by Al-Qaida. True
or not, the style of execution is alien to the Sudanese
environment and is indicative of a foreign presence.
Other journalists have received similar threats. This is
an attack on freedom of expression. This heinous crime
can roll back any progress made in liberalizing the
media through forced self-censorship. That would be a
setback. Since the adoption of the Constitution, in mid-
2005, the Sudanese press has become politically more
diversified and agile, using its rights and freedoms, as
it should do in a country striving for democracy.

During my last brief I commended the
Government for concluding the status-of-forces
agreement. However, I cautioned that the
implementation of the agreement would indicate its
success or failure. I am not so positive any more. The
authorities continue to arrest and detain UNMIS
national staff members. Recently two international
staff members were also manhandled and arrested. The
Government has refused to allow any broadcasts by
UN Radio in northern Sudan, including Darfur. It has
restricted United Nations access in Abyei. Intentional
delays - often more than eight months long - in
clearing critical equipment through customs at
Khartoum airport are severely impacting our
operations. Our monitors have not been given full
access to detention facilities, in particular those run by
national security. All in all, that hinders the work
mandated to us by the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement, which was signed by the Government, and
is a violation of the status-of-forces agreement.

I now turn to Darfur. The Darfur Peace
Agreement (DPA) is only four months old, but it is
nearly dead. It is in a coma. It ought to be under
intensive care, but it is not.

It is a good Agreement. The peace talks resulted
in a balanced text, somewhere in the middle of the
extreme positions taken by the Government and the
rebel movements. Had they continued negotiating
another year, the outcome would have been more or
less the same. In hindsight, maybe we should have
taken more time - not to get a better agreement, but in
order to bring on board all parties. Only the
Government and the Mini Minawi faction of the
Sudanese Liberation Movement have signed. Abdul
Wahid's faction did not sign. They should have. They
were wrong, but they took a political decision to stand
aside. That does not make them terrorists. Abdul
Wahid's people, most of them Furs, the largest African
tribe of Darfur, stood aside, but they have not reverted
to fighting either. They have kept the earlier agreement
that they had signed, so we have to bring them on
board. That is the first condition for bringing the DPA
out of its coma.

After the signing of the DPA, parties which did
not sign were excluded from the institutions, in
particular from the Ceasefire Commission (CFC). That,
too, was wrong. They were told: First sign, then talk.
That further split the rebel movements. There are now
five to seven different groups, including the National
Redemption Front, which in July launched an attack in
West Kordofan. We have condemned that attack. Sadly,
it provided the Government with an excuse for
continuous attacks and air raids under the pretext that
the civilian population had to be protected. However, it
is an outright violation of the DPA. We need a truce.
That is the second condition for bringing the DPA out
of its coma. Mini Minawi can play a role, maybe, in
mediating between his present and his former allies in
order to finally get peace on the ground.

Since its signing, the DPA has been violated day
after day, week after week. There was a rise in violence
after the signing of the DPA. The use of rape as a tool
of terror is frequent and again on the rise. The attackers
show little mercy towards women and children.
Villages are being attacked and bombed in the middle
of the night. White helicopters are being used to
support the offensive operations of the Sudan Armed
Forces. The freedom of movement of humanitarian and
other United Nations workers has been severely
curtailed and violence against them stepped up. Twelve
of them have been killed just in the past two months.
The situation in and around the camps remains
precarious, and violence by militia against internally
displaced persons, including women, is brutal and
degrading.

The tragedy is that none of the violations has
been addressed in the CFC. It simply does not function.
It has been hijacked by the signatories, it is not well
chaired, non-signatories have been excluded, and the
United Nations has been silenced. In the southern
Sudan, the CJMC is one of the most important pillars
of the CPA. If it were taken out, the CPA would be
paralyzed. That is exactly the present state of the DPA,
so the third condition is to start addressing the
violations of the DPA through a renewed, fully
representative, but authoritative CFC.

Since the DPA does not function, violations
remain unsanctioned. Most people in Darfur have lost
faith in the DPA. Many did not have it from the
beginning. We should be realistic. The DPA in its
present form, even though it is theoretically a good
agreement, will not get adequate support beyond those
who have already signed. We will have to start new
consultations, but we must avoid labelling those
consultations as a reopening of the peace negotiations.
We must talk, add, improve and give an opportunity to
those who feel excluded and form at least one third of
the population of Darfur. We must get their interests
guaranteed, on paper as well as in reality. That is the
fourth condition for bringing the DPA out of its coma.

There is a fifth condition. The Security Council,
in adopting resolution 1706 (2006), made it crystal
clear that the international community wants a
transition from the present African Union peacekeeping
force to a United Nations force. The Council has also
invited the consent of the Government to that
deployment. From its side, since February the
Government has also been crystal clear. It is against the
transition. That is unwise. UNMIS has proven to be a
fair and effective peacekeeper in the southern Sudan.
We can and will do the same in Darfur.

The United Nations does not deserve the
insinuations from the Sudanese political leadership in
power. We do not intend to recolonize, nor are we
laying a carpet for others to do so. We do not have a
hidden agenda. Our only aim is to protect the people,
while respecting the sovereignty of the Sudanese
nation. Secretary-General Kofi Anan has clearly said
that "without the consent of the Sudanese Government,
the transition will not be possible". However, getting
the consent of the Government requires consultations.
A transition to a United Nations force has to be made
attractive to the Sudanese leadership in order to get its
support. That also requires trust, confidence-building
and time. It requires that those in favour of a transition
and those against it should refrain from the present
collision course. It also requires that the present
African Union force stay until the consent is acquired.
The African Union is less effective than it was a year
ago, but its presence is essential. The departure of the
African Union would leave the people in the camps
unprotected and vulnerable to anyone who would wish
to harm them and resume the cleansing of 2003 and
2004.

Those are five essential conditions to revive the
DPA and bring it out of its coma. Together they would
form a plan for the short-term - say, until the end of
the year. If we do that, we can work out a plan for the
period thereafter. On the basis of our experience on the
ground, we will be more than happy to share with the
Council our views on the contours of such a plan for
the longer term.

The five points, therefore, are: get everybody on
board; establish a truce; reform the CFC; resume talks
to improve the DPA; and get off the collision course,
both within the Sudan as well as internationally. In
short, de-link what should be done today to save the
DPA from tomorrow's actions to get a renewed and
fully robust peace force on the ground.

