Mr. Nielsen (Denmark): Denmark aligns itselfwith
the statement delivered earlier today by the observer of
the European Union, as well as with the statement made
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Mediation.

Denmark warmly thanks Sweden for convening this
debate on a topic of extreme importance to the United
Nations. In its broadest sense, prevention constitutes
the bedrock of our cooperation. It is a shared strategic
agenda that should guide and mobilize all parts of the
United Nations system and Member States. Against
that background, Denmark strongly supports the vision
outlined today by the Secretary-General. We look
forward to working with Mr. Guterres and his team to
turn that new agenda into concrete actions and reforms
that will make United Nations efforts for prevention
and sustaining peace more effective.

Denmark firmly shares the view that the work of
the Organization on conflict prevention, supporting
political solutions and providing good offices and
mediation must be further strengthened. The United
Nations system must work on the basis of a common
and integrated operational strategy for prevention and
sustaining peace. We welcome the Secretary-General's
ambition to improve coherence of the country-level work
being undertaken by the Secretariat across departments.
More predictable resources for prevention, including
special political missions, will also be crucial. Denmark
is a major donor to the Department of Political Affairs,
and we will remain a close partner in the future.

As has been illustrated very clearly in today's
debate, prevention and sustaining peace require much
deeper and wider coordination of United Nations
peace efforts. Denmark welcomes the Secretary-
General's strong emphasis on enhancing coherence
within the United Nations system. Denmark is a long-
standing supporter of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture and donor to the Peacebuilding Fund,
which is a key tool in that regard.

The imperative must be to protect people and
ensure respect for international humanitarian law and
human rights by States and non-State actors. Denmark
has been among the core supporters of the Human
Rights Up Front initiative and will remain committed
to ensuring its further development as a critical
instrument of the United Nations. Member States carry
the primary responsibility for protecting populations
from atrocity crimes, but the international community
has a responsibility to act where States fail to do so.
The Security Council must live up to its responsibility
in the maintenance of international peace and security
and strengthen its leading role in prevention. Syria
remains the most striking and heartbreaking recent
example of the consequences when the Council fails to
stop bloodshed and conflict.

The most effective prevention strategy is to address
the causes and core drivers of conflict. Member States
must ensure representative, legitimate and inclusive
political and economic institutions, and respect for
human rights and the rule of law. Without effective
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, we will not succeed.

Furthermore, the United Nations must make youth
a strategic priority and give the leaders of tomorrow a
much stronger role in prevention and sustaining peace.
Through its development cooperation, Denmark is
strongly engaged in the global youth agenda and stands
ready to support the Secretary-General in creating
opportunities for future generations and making
sure that youth are included in decision-making. The
strengths and capacities of young people must be met
with optimism and opportunities. If not, we risk further
marginalization, radicalization and frustration, fuelling
violence and destabilization. Denmark looks forward to
working with all partners to implement resolution 2250
(2015).

As we put behind us a year marked by conflict,
violence, terrorism and human suffering around the
world, the expectations for the Organization and its
Secretary-General to deliver on the promise of the
United Nations are high. We have a shared responsibility
to make 2017 a year for multilateralism, common
solutions and a strong United Nations prevention role.

