Mr. Valero Bricefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to
reiterate the support of our Permanent Mission to the
United Nations to your great country, Pakistan, in its
duties as President of the Security Council.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela endorses
the statement delivered by the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

The rights of the Palestinian people to their lands
are ancestral, and are increasingly besieged and
isolated by Israel, the occupying Power. That natural
corridor between Asia and Africa, with access to the
Mediterranean Sea, and seat of ancient cultures, has
been and is a region coveted by colonialists and ancient
and modern empires.

Archeological findings reveal that the oldest
villages of humankind date back to as many as 9,000
years before our era. Palestine is a trove of thousands of
years of history. The epic of Atrahasis, the great sage,
tells of a time expressed in Babylonian terms "when
gods were in the ways of men" - a time when humans
did not inhabit the Earth. The Earth was inhabited only
by gods, who were divided into two classes: the Igigi,
who worked the land and with their labour fed and
eased the lives of the aristocracy of the gods, and the
Annunaki, who lived off the work of others. Exhausted
by their oppressive labours, the Igigi rebelled against
the other gods and claimed luminous life in the sunlight.

So it is that since time immemorial, gods and
humans have risen up against oppression and injustice.
The myth comes to mind now that the Palestinian
people are claiming their inalienable right to exercise
authority over their own land and to occupy a worthy
place in history, without subjugation and oppression.
This umbilical cord connecting a people with its
ancestral roots helps to explain the heroic resistance of
the Palestinians and of the Arabs of the Middle East in
defence of their national and cultural identity.

Permanent members of the Security Council have
prevented the Council from promoting arrangements
to facilitate a peaceful settlement of the Palestinian
question, in fulfilment of its primary responsibilities
in the maintenance of international peace and
security under the Charter of the United Nations. The
intensification of the conflict is associated with the
impunity enjoyed by Israel, the occupying Power. Its
political and military elite, exploiting the support,
influence and power of veto of a permanent member of
the Security Council, flagrantly violates international
law, the human rights of the Palestinian people and
international humanitarian law.

The violations of international law by that elite in the
occupied territories of the State of Palestine are evident.
Their actions include, among others, the trampling of
the territorial sovereignty of the Palestinian people,
the destruction of the economy, the displacement of
populations, the destruction of basic infrastructure
and crops, and targeted and mass killings within the
framework of its policy of State terrorism. The Israeli-
Palestinian conflict also unmasks the imperial political
and economic interests associated with the interests of
political and economic groups of countries ofthe region.
The desire to control the oil reserves ofthe Middle East
is key to understanding the prevailing situation.

Venezuela reiterates its rejection of the interference
of foreign Powers and their support for the terrorist
groups in Syria that are responsible for widespread
violence aimed at promoting the overthrow of the
legitimate Government of President Bashar Al-Assad.
We call for the cessation of armed violence in order
to find a negotiated political solution to the crisis that
is confronting the Syrian Government and opposition
forces, taking into account the political initiative
proposed by President Bashar Al-Assad a few days
ago. We reiterate our full support for the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of Syria, in
accord with the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations.

Some members of the Security Council have
called attention to the opportunistic manipulation
of resolution 1973 (2011), concerning Libya,
thereby contributing, fortunately, to containing the
warmongering plans of certain countries. The nature
of the United Nations and the validity of its Charter are
at stake. Foreign intervention in the internal affairs of
sovereign States and armed aggression have been the
methods of choice used by some Powers to attain their
colonialist objectives. On behalf of the alleged defence
of democracy and human rights, inspired by the policy
of regime change, peoples are massacred and their
legitimate institutions destroyed.

We emphasize that there is no good terrorism. All
terrorism is harmful, as it promotes the dismantling
of States and their sovereignty. Never have terrorism,
interventionism and the violation of human rights
been acceptable options. The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela Government reiterates that political
dialogue and the use of peaceful means of settlement
of disputes are the most expeditious tools for resolving
disputes or conflicts. Sovereign peoples and States
solely responsible for designing and implementing their
own destiny.

In the current historical circumstances, as the
drums of war grow loud, the Sixteenth Summit of the
Heads of State or Government of the Non-Aligned
Movement, held in Tehran in August 2012 appealed
for the resumption and advancement of the Middle
East peace process based on resolutions 242 (1967),
338 (1973), 425 (1978), 1397 (2002) and 1850 (2008);
the Madrid terms of reference, including the principle
of land for peace; and the Arab Peace Initiative. The
dignitaries stated that

"the construction and expansion of settlements and
the Wall...are totally contradictory to the peace
process and must be ceased completely for the
resumption of credible peace negotiations" .

They also

"reiterated the necessity and urgency of ending the
prolonged, unlawful Israeli occupation of all of
the Arab territories occupied since 1967, including
East Jerusalem. They further reaffirmed their long-
standing position in support of the achievement of
the independence of the State of Palestine in all
of the Palestinian Territory occupied by Israel in
1967, including East Jerusalem as its capital" .

In conclusion, the Government of President Hugo
Chavez Frias of the Bolivian Republic of Venezuela
reiterates its support of the legitimate aspiration of
the State of Palestine to become a full Member of the
United Nations. We hope that the objections filed by
a permanent member of this body will be withdrawn
so that the General Assembly is able to approve
expeditiously the admission ofthe State ofPalestine as a
full Member, in the light of a possible recommendation
of the Security Council, consistent with the provisions
of the Charter. The Security Council must fully exercise
the powers which that legal instrument, the constituting
document of the United Nations, accords it in this area.

