Mr. Akram (Pakistan): We are meeting today at a
momentous and perhaps tragic point in world history.
We are meeting as hopes for a peaceful solution of the
Iraqi issue are about to end. There is no doubt that this
is a sad moment for the Security Council and for the
United Nations, whose primary vocation is peace.

War, as the Secretary-General recently stated, is
always a catastrophe. It leads to major human tragedy.
It was our hope that we could have secured the
implementation of the resolutions of the Security
Council so as to disarm Iraq of its weapons of mass
destruction through peaceful means. Unfortunately, in
its detailed discussions spanning several weeks, the
Council could not find convergence on any of the
proposals - either those on the table or those under
informal consideration among its members. Pakistan
has consistently advocated a peaceful solution. We
have stressed that every possible avenue should be
exhausted to secure a peaceful solution, and that the
use of force must be the very last resort.

It is against that background that Pakistan
anxiously awaited the conclusion of the work by the
United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC) on its programme of work
and on the document concerning its key remaining
disarmament tasks. I am grateful to Mr. Blix for once
again coming before the Council to present these
documents. I also wish to thank Mr. ElBaradei, who
has outlined the accomplishments of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) with respect to the
Iraqi nuclear weapons capabilities. They have both
done their work in a most thorough, professional and
objective manner. The Council owes them a debt of
gratitude.

We have carefully studied the programme of work
and the 12 key remaining disarmament tasks identified
by Mr. Blix and his team. We believe they could have
provided a useful basis for the completion of the
disarmament process in Iraq in accordance with the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council, if Iraq's
full and unconditional cooperation could have been
assured and obtained in time. It is regrettable that, in
the situation as it has evolved, UNMOVIC and the
IAEA will obviously find it difficult to pursue their
responsibilities for the present time. Nevertheless, we
agree that resolutions 1284 (1999) and 1441 (2002)
remain in force and are relevant for the future.

We take cognizance of the decision by the
Secretary-General, justified by the need to ensure the
continued safety and security of United Nations
personnel, to temporarily withdraw all United Nations
personnel, including UNMOVIC and IAEA staff, from
Iraq. We support the Secretary-General's decision. We
believe that under the circumstances he had no choice
other than to give priority to the safety and security of
United Nations personnel. The Secretary-General has
notified Council members that the activities of
UNMOVIC and the IAEA, as well as other United
Nations mandates, have been suspended de facto. We
understand that necessity and await the time when
conditions will allow United Nations personnel,
including the inspectors, to resume and complete their
tasks. Indeed, the long-term task of monitoring will
require their return to Iraq. We presume that the present
structures will therefore be kept intact.

The past few weeks have seen the whole world's
attention riveted on the Security Council. Despite the
best efforts we have all made, the Council was not in a
position to traverse the path and to take everybody
along. Members were separated by differences - and,
we believe, by honest differences. In Pakistan's view,
despite that inability to reach consensus, the Security
Council remains relevant. The Council must uphold
international legality, and it must do so equitably and
consistently. It must seek to implement all its
resolutions. In that regard, I would like to mention
those relating to Palestine and, in particular, those
relating to Jammu and Kashmir, where a people have
been struggling and dying for the past 50 years. The
Security Council is the embodiment of humanity's best
hope for peace. We continue to repose confidence in
that fact.

The changed circumstances that we are likely to
face will no doubt reorder our priorities. Today the
most urgent task before us is to decide how to address
the humanitarian challenge that is likely to confront the
world in the days to come. The withdrawal of United
Nations humanitarian staff from Iraq and the
suspension of the oil for food programme, as well as
the outbreak of hostilities, could lead to a humanitarian
crisis whose dimensions are as yet unclear. The
Secretary-General intends to make proposals to the
Council that we have all agreed to consider as soon as
they are ready. Pakistan will do everything possible to
ameliorate the suffering of our unfortunate brothers and
sisters in Iraq. Pakistan will work closely with the
Secretary-General and with Member States to ensure
that the Iraqi people do not suffer any further. They
have suffered enormously in the past. Any delay or
procrastination that exacerbates their suffering would
be doubly regrettable.

Pakistan believes that the time and space for
diplomacy never ends. Even once the guns speak, it is
the duty of the Security Council to restore peace and
security, to contain conflict, to prevent the suffering of
the Iraqi people and others in the region, to ensure the
unity and territorial integrity of Iraq and its neighbours
and to ensure the stability of this sensitive region of the
world. Those are responsibilities that will not end; they
will become more acute.
The Security Council's exertions during the past
few weeks have revealed the divisions within the world
and among the major Powers. But the process of
healing the wounds that have opened here, and those
that are about to be opened in the next days and weeks,
is a task that can also be accomplished here, in the
Security Council and in the United Nations.

