Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, let me thank
Special Coordinator Mladenov for his comprehensive
and insightful briefing.

Poland strongly condemns yesterday's rocket attack
from the Gaza Strip, which struck a residential building
in the Sharon region, injuring at least seven people,
including two infants. While recognizing Israel's
right to defend itself, we call on all sides to exercise
maximum restraint in order to avert any escalation,
which could potentially lead to a full-scale war in the
Strip. In this context, yesterday's events on the ground
are extremely worrying.

In 2016 the Security Council adopted resolution
2334 (2016) reaffirming its previous resolutions
regarding applicable international law and the
parameters of a peaceful solution to the Palestinian-
Israeli conflict. Unfortunately, since then the conflict
has not seen significant positive advances towards
achieving peace. On the contrary, trends on the ground
have been negative: the closure of the Temporary
International Presence in Hebron, new tensions around
the Temple Mount and the Israeli decision on tax
revenues, not to mention the issue of settlements, have
had negative consequences and only add to the already
extremely volatile security situation in Gaza as well as
in the West Bank.

Those developments on the ground clearly point to
a continuing need to continue the de-escalation process,
as the risk of miscalculation increases daily, especially
as we approach the first anniversary of the Great March
of Return, at the end of March.

Our priority is the resumption of meaningful
peace talks. We believe that a negotiated two-State
solution and the resolution of all final-status issues,
including that of Jerusalem, remain a realistic way
of fulfilling the legitimate aspirations of both parties
and achieving long-term peace. Unfortunately, as the
situation on the ground worsens, the two-State solution
is being questioned. The recent increase in violence,
in particular in the West Bank, proves that perpetual
occupation and conflict are paving the way for growing
frustration among the citizens and providing a fertile
breeding ground for extremism.

The humanitarian situation on the ground, in
particular in the Gaza Strip, has continued to deteriorate.
Basic needs continue to be unmet and many people lack
access to basic services, including health care. The
prevailing lack of decisive steps towards a return of
the legitimate Palestinian Government to Gaza, despite
Egypt's best efforts to revive the process, is detrimental
to Palestinian aspirations to statehood, contributes to
the worsening of the humanitarian crisis and risks
escalation. Progress in the Palestinian reconciliation
process would undoubtedly contribute to improving the
situation on the ground.

Let me underline that the critical financial
shortfalls of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) are also cause for alarm, particularly since
80 per cent of the population of Gaza is dependent on
the Agency's humanitarian services. In that regard,
I commend the mobilization of donors in 2018,
which helped to secure additional funding for the
Agency's budget, as well as the imposition of austerity
measures by the Agency under the leadership of
Commissioner-General Pierre Krahenbiihl.

However, it is vital to continue such efforts this
year, as UNRWA remains a key factor for stability
and security in the region. We strongly believe that
stopping UNRWA's important activities could well
cause instability and create a vacuum that would only
serve the extremists.

Unfortunately, provocation, incitement and
inflammatory rhetoric continue on both sides. In our
opinion, such acts constitute a significant obstacle
to the reactivation of the peace process. Let me be
clear. Violence by all sides should be prevented and
condemned, as we expect the genuine commitment
of both sides towards a peaceful and negotiated two-
State solution.

In conclusion. I would like to reiterate that Poland
fully supports the long-standing European position that
all settlement activity is illegal under international law.
Such settlements continue to undermine the practical
prospects and hope for peace.

