Mr. Akram: I welcome this opportunity to share
some personal thoughts as Chair of the Liberia
Committee for the last two years. I take this
opportunity, first of all, to thank all Council members
and, in particular, the Committee experts, as well as the
Secretariat staff, for their contributions to the
Committee's work and their support for the Chairman.
I commend, in particular, Loraine Richard-Martin, the
Secretary of the Committee during 2003, and her
equally able successor James Sutterlin, as well as their
colleagues Tilo Stolz and Arminia Decepida, for their
outstanding performance.

Our work over the past two years could be
divided into two distinct periods: the first period, from
January to December 2003 as the 1343 Committee; and
the second period, from December 2003 to the present
time, as the successor 1521 Committee. The first
period was marked by ongoing civil war and
continuing violations of the sanctions and the arms
embargo. The second period, in 2004, was marked by
an improvement in the situation as Liberia underwent a
transition from conflict to peacebuilding.

Since August 2003, there have been no violations
of the arms embargo that have been reported. However,
the Committee agreed to adopt an approach towards
the continuation of sanctions that is differentiated
between the arms sanctions and the economic
sanctions.

The Committee has had to rely a great deal on the
Panel of Experts, in the absence of a mechanism for
reporting by Member States. Also, the guidelines for
the Committee's work have not been approved since
the Committee was established in 2001. It is my hope
that those matters will be finalized as a matter of
priority next year.

My first and foremost priority in the Committee
has been to maintain transparency in its work. I would
like to briefly comment on some aspects of the
Committee, and perhaps my comments may apply to
others.

In my View, in devising and implementing
measures under Chapter VII, we must remain focused
on the initial objectives that led to their imposition.
The goalposts for the maintenance of sanctions should
not be shifted in mid-course. The monitoring and
implementation of sanctions is a difficult task and an
expensive one. Sanctions need a closer cost-benefit
analysis. The socio-economic and humanitarian impact
of sanctions must be clearly and regularly assessed. It
is equally important to objectively assess the capacity
of the Government concerned to fulfil the
conditionalities imposed by the Council. There is a
need to promote coordination in policies with regional
and subregional organizations - in Liberia's case,
with the Economic Community of West African States
and the African Union.

The lifting of sanctions should be based on a
political judgement rather than on technical
requirements linked to conditions for lifting such
sanctions; and in transitional situations, ways must be
found to remove the stigma of sanctions against the
country.

Having offered those comments as Chairman of
the Liberia Committee, I would like to add a few
comments as Pakistan completes its two-year term on
the Security Council at the end of this month.

It has been a singular privilege for the members
of my delegation and myself to serve on the Security
Council with so many able and outstanding colleagues.
Our term has coincided with momentous developments
in international relations - developments in which the
Council and the United Nations have been in the eye of
the storm. We have entered a new era in history
marked, paradoxically, by the asymmetry of power as
well as the interdependence of nations.

We have yet to determine a new paradigm for
managing global affairs in this new era, but the United
Nations and the Security Council will have a central
role in it. The United Nations is an indispensable
instrument for the promotion of humankind's shared
goals. The Security Council is the crown jewel of the
United Nations, entrusted with the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security and empowered with the unique
capacity to create international obligations and take
enforcement action. Yet the essence of the Charter is
cooperative, not coercive multilateralism.
The Security Council's scope of action extends
sequentially from pre-conflict peacemaking, through
conflict-management and termination to post-conflict
pacification. In our view, where the Council and the
United Nations really fall short is in exploiting the
tremendous possibilities contained in Chapter VI of the
Charter for the pacific settlement of disputes. The
Secretary-General, his special representatives, the
Security Council itself, its subsidiary bodies and
missions, as well as other United Nations judicial and
humanitarian structures can play a much more active
role in reconciling differences and settling disputes
before they result in open conflict. The special debate
on the pacific settlement of disputes, held during
Pakistan's first presidency in May 2003, identified a
number of views, ideas and proposals which need to be
seriously pursued and promoted.

In the recent past, the Council has been too quick
to evoke its authority under Chapter VII of the Charter,
often where the threat to international peace was
neither imminent nor fully visible. The provisions of
Article 41 have been utilized with increasing frequency
to impose sanctions and punish recalcitrant regimes
and warring parties. The effectiveness, value and
negative consequences of such sanctions measures
have yet to be fully analysed and evaluated, as is
apparent from the report of our working group on
sanctions.

Moreover, there is a visible impatience on the
part of some, once Chapter VII has been invoked, to
move rapidly towards the application of Article 42 of
the Charter and to threaten or authorize enforcement
action. In our view, the space between Articles 41 and
42 of the Charter is not always fully explored,
including in some celebrated cases, to achieve the
international community's objectives without recourse
to the use of force and military intervention.

One consequence of the proclivity to punish and
enforce, rather than conciliate and mediate, is that the
major threats to international peace and security -
such as in South Asia, North Asia and the Middle
East - are prevented by one or the other of our
permanent members from being addressed
substantively in the Security Council. Thus, while the
Council expends most of its time in seeking, not
always successfully, to manage internal conflicts -
some, admittedly, with cross-border or regional
implications - and in worrying about putative threats
from terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, the real threats to global security are
being addressed through arrangements outside the
Security Council. It is almost as if the real threats to
international peace and security are considered to be
too important to be entrusted to the Security Council.

The Council's power of enforcement is most
often directed, at present, against weak regimes,
militias or mullahs. Since Iraq's occupation of Kuwait,
the Security Council has not taken enforcement action
against States which have resorted to the use of force,
aggression and occupation against other States and
peoples. United Nations peacekeeping missions have
emerged as the principal instrument of enforcement
action by the Security Council. After the failures of
Somalia, Srebrenica and Rwanda, United Nations
peacekeeping succeeded in Sierra Leone. That success
and the Council's preoccupation with intra-State
conflicts have led to a strong surge in demand for
United Nations peacekeeping, especially in West
Africa, Central Africa and, perhaps, in the southern
Sudan.

Today, the United Nations fields over 70,000
military and civilian personnel in 16 missions. Pakistan
is proud to be the largest contributor to those United
Nations peacekeeping operations. However, the nature
of peacekeeping has changed from simple operations
involving the observance and enforcement of ceasefires
to the management of complex crises involving duties
in disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
reconstruction. In short, the United Nations is now in
the business of nation-building.

The oversight and management of such nation-
building consumes at least half the time and attention
of the Security Council, inevitably diffusing its focus
on the more existential threats to international peace
and security. Huge expenditures are incurred on
peacekeeping, but there are consistent shortfalls in the
resources required to reconstruct broken nations and
build sustainable security.

Pakistan has held the consistent view that many
of those complex crises should be entrusted to
mechanisms involving other major United Nations
organs, especially the Economic and Social Council
and the General Assembly, so that comprehensive
action can be taken to address the political, economic
and social dimensions of such crises. While the High-
level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change has
proposed the creation of a peacebuilding commission
under the Security Council, Pakistan's view remains
that a more practical mechanism would be the creation
of ad hoc composite committees to address such crises
as and when they arise.
The preoccupation of the Security Council with
intra-State conflict has been conceptualized in the
thesis of the responsibility to protect populations that
are at risk in so-called failed or failing States. The
question, of course, arises as to when that
responsibility to protect commences - once the State
is on the verge of collapse or well before, when
conditions of poverty and underdevelopment clearly
indicate that a country might collapse into State failure
unless it is assisted by the international community.

An international responsibility to protect can only
become legitimate if it flows from a prior acceptance
of the right to development of all peoples - a right
that encompasses the right to food, shelter, fair terms
of trade, relief from crippling debt, and adequate
access to finance and technology. Without the
international solidarity implied by the right to
development, the world is destined to witness a host of
failed States. Humanitarian interventions invoking the
responsibility to protect could come to be perceived as
the birth of a new era of recolonization. Nor is it clear
that such interventions could be funded or well
managed by the international community. In our View,
it would be much wiser to devote the required
resources for a pre-emptive strike against poverty and
underdevelopment.

There are two other areas in which the work of
the Security Council cannot remain exclusive:
terrorism and weapons of mass destruction. After
11 September 2001, the adoption of Security Council
resolution 1373 (2001), creating the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), was a necessary and desirable
response. But if the CTC is to be effective in
eradicating terrorism rather than in only addressing
symptoms, its scope of action must be broadened to
address the root causes of terrorism, especially the
political and economic injustice against Muslim
peoples in Palestine, Kashmir and elsewhere. We look
forward to the comprehensive strategy to be proposed
by the Secretary-General. Clearly, counter-terrorism
endeavours must involve the active participation of all
those countries whose contributions are essential to
achieving the objectives of a comprehensive strategy.

Similarly, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1540 (2004) as a stopgap measure to prevent
the acquisition of weapons of mass destruction by
terrorists and non-State actors. A comprehensive non-
proliferation strategy can only be pursued with the
universal participation and cooperative action of all the
Member States of the United Nations. It cannot be
achieved by the Security Council alone, where some
enjoy extraordinary powers and unequalled privileges
in the field of non-proliferation and disarmament.

It is obvious that the Security Council can be, and
should be, made more effective and efficient. Due to
the unequal power enjoyed by five of its permanent
members, the Security Council is structurally
constrained from always acting in an objective,
consistent and just manner. But some steps can be
taken to improve its functioning. Transparency and
accountability are prerequisites to achieve that. As
provided in the Charter and the Council's provisional
rules of procedure, the Security Council's meetings
should, as a rule, be open. Close consultations should
be the exception. The dictum "open covenants openly
arrived at" must also apply to the Security Council.

The election of non-permanent members is also
an instrument to ensure accountability on the part of
those States that are accorded the privilege of serving
on the Council. During its term, therefore, Pakistan
sought to reflect not only its national interests but also
the aspirations of our constituency, namely, the
countries of Asia and the Islamic, non-aligned and
developing world. The accountability of Council
members will not be enhanced by creating new
permanent members, as they will not be obliged to face
the democratic test of a periodic election by their peers
in the General Assembly. The privilege and claim of a
country to represent its region or a group must be
subjected to the periodic democratic test of elections
by the General Assembly.

During our two years in the Security Council, the
delegation of Pakistan was often advised to temper its
idealism in the face of power realities. However, that
has not shaken our belief that sustainable security can
only be secured when principles have primacy over
power. The world needs a Security Council that does
not always mirror power realities, but one that also acts
with moral authority and credibility. The world needs a
Council that can also stand up for the weak and
powerless, a Council that is a force for objectivity,
fairness, equality and justice in the management of
international relations.

I would like to thank the President of the Council
very much. I am very glad to have ended our term
under his presidency, which reflects not only the great
skill of Algerian diplomacy but also the spirit of the
season.

