Mr. Edrees (Egypt): (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by thanking the delegation of the People's
Republic of China for having convened today's
important meeting on ways to strengthen multilateral
action and for inviting Member States to take part in
this debate. I also thank the Secretary-General and the
representative of the President of the General Assembly
for their valuable briefings at the beginning of the
meeting.

Today's debate follows another high-level dialogue,
which was called for by the President of the General
Assembly on 31 October, on the renewal of our
commitment to multilateral action. That debate was
also co-sponsored by the Presidents of the Economic
and Social Council and the Security Council. Our
recurring dialogue on this issue reflects the difficulty
ofthe challenges multilateral action faces, as well as our
shared awareness of the need not to delay in addressing
them by strengthening contexts and practices related to
multilateralism. In this regard, I would like to stress
three areas that I believe are particularly important and
should be a priority in strengthening multilateralism.

First is the comprehensive approach pertaining to
crises and other issues. The adoption of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development as a road map for our
common future has provided us with a global approach
to development. Nevertheless, we are concerned to
see that attempts are being made by some to choose to
discuss certain issues and close their eyes to others. Our
efforts to establish international peace and security are
facing similar challenges. This selective approach is
undoubtedly leading to opportunistic multilateralism,
which is harmful in the long term to the trust and
credibility we have placed in international institutions
and multilateral action.

In this context, the selective approach of the
Security Council in dealing with certain issues,
including those relating to the Middle East, and its
double standards with regard to the implementation of
its own pertinent resolutions have greatly contributed
to the current regrettable situations in that delicate part
of the world, which is characterized by deterioration
and disorder. This selective approach is exacerbating
the state of polarization we have historically seen in
the Council, and has undermined the ability of the
international community to resolve recent ongoing
crises, such as those in Yemen and in Syria, as well
as its ability to reach fair and lasting solutions to more
long-standing issues, such as the Palestinian question.

That brings me to the second area in strengthening
multilateralism, which is through the establishment of
democracy worldwide and ensuring the universality of
multilateralism and fair representation. The successive
crises that we are facing as a human society have proved
that multilateral action on a small scale- so-called mini-
multilateralism, or closed forums diplomacy - have
created a kind of alternative multilateralism, which has
not prevented conflicts from breaking out or made it
possible for the international community to overcome
them. That applies to all areas, be it the maintenance of
international peace and security, global crises or other
issues, including the recent international financial
crisis, the effects of which are still being felt.

With regard to multilateral institutions, I would
like to make particular reference to the structural
irregularities of the Security Council. It is important
that we advance towards the genuine reform of the
Council in order to remedy the hegemony of certain
members. We support the Common African Position,
which seeks to bring genuine change to the Council's
decision-making mechanism, rather than simply
cosmetic changes.

That brings me to the third and final aspect of our
vision for strengthening multilateral action and our
practices, namely, the lack of commitment to collective
action in the light of the difficulties we face and the
substantial efforts that are required to achieve it.
The notion of collective action entails the generation
of solutions on which everyone agrees so that we
can attain the Sustainable Development Goals and
maintain international peace and security. In practice,
that requires intensive and tough deliberations and
consultations, as well as compromise and creative
and innovative vision. However, we cannot ignore the
impression shared by some of us, enhanced by some of
our practices, that our main multilateral Organization is
increasingly becoming a forum for the mere delivery of
speeches, with no effective implementation of measures
or real impact. That is creating pseudo-multilateralism,
of which we should be very wary.

The effectiveness of our Organization depends on
our belief in it and respect for its Charter and on the
capacities that we dedicate to allowing it to effectively
fulfil its mission. In that regard, it is important that
multilateralism also include decision-making and not be
limited to mere deliberations and statements. We also
need to provide the Organization with the resources
necessary to implement the mandates that we have
entrusted to it. In that context, I would like to warn
against the growing threat of becoming dependent on
voluntary funding as opposed to regular base funding,
which is moving the Organization away from its mission
and the multilateral nature of its main objectives.

In the light of the three areas that I have mentioned,
and given that my country is a major contributor
to peacekeeping operations, as well as the fact that
Egypt is due to Chair the African Union in 2019, and
that the African continent has the highest number of
peacekeeping operations and contributes the highest
number of peacekeeping personnel, allow me to once
again state that Egypt welcomes the adoption of the
Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations
Peacekeeping Operations, an initiative of the Secretary-
General that will enable troop-contributing countries to
participate in a more significant way in the consultations
pertaining to strengthening peacekeeping operations.
Egypt remains convinced that the effective deployment
of peacekeeping operations requires an overall vision
of all their stages, from designing the mandates to the
periodic reviews, as well as the structure of operations
and the equipment, predeployment and exit strategy.

It is therefore important that we establish practical
and objective frameworks to assess performance through
the competent bodies. We also have to ensure that there
are sufficient resources available for the implementation
of mandates and that the structure of the operation is
commensurate with the specific nature and situation
of the mission. In that regard, during its chairmanship
of the African Union in 2019 Egypt will continue to
focus on the various dimensions to implementing the
Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations
Peacekeeping Operations, notably by strengthening the
institutional framework for tripartite dialogue among
the troop- and equipment-contributing countries and
the Secretariat. We also intend to deepen the strategic
partnership with the United Nations in peacekeeping
and in rebuilding and development efforts in post-
conflict situations. On 18 and 19 November, Egypt will
host a regional high-level conference on improving the
performance of peacekeeping operations in Africa,
based on the Declaration of Shared Commitments on
United Nations Peacekeeping Operations, and allow
troop-contributing countries to take part in discussions
related to improving peacekeeping operations.

In conclusion, we have become accustomed to
the presence and criticism of the United Nations. We
have therefore forgotten that the results achieved by
the Organization can only reflect our cooperation or
lack thereof. Allow me to remind the Council of the
wise words that should never be forgotten of former
Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, at the first
Security Council summit ever held on 31 January 1992,
in which he stated,

"Collective security can be based only on
collective confidence and good faith - confidence
in the principles by which it is governed and good
faith in the means by which it is sought to be
ensured. With all the convulsions in global society,
only one power is left that can impose order
on incipient chaos: it is the power of principles
transcending changing perceptions of expediency."
(S/PV3046, p. 11)
