Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): May I thank all of
the briefers for sharing their assessment of progress
in South Sudan following the visit. It is important
and welcome to see such joint African Union-United
Nations activity.

The signing of the revised Peace Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan, in September, was a significant moment
in the peace process. Let me again publicly take the
opportunity to welcome that important step taken by
the parties. We also applaud the role of the region. The
deal would not have been agreed without the work of
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), and in particular by Ethiopia, the Sudan,
Uganda and Kenya. We welcome their engagements in
monitoring progress and holding the parties to account
for implementing the Agreement. If I understood the
Ethiopian Ambassador correctly, let me also welcome
IGAD's intention to approach the Security Council
to discuss any proposal to deploy troops to support
the Agreement.

As our briefers made clear, some significant progress
has been made since the revised Peace Agreement was
signed, which we warmly welcome. That includes in
particular the establishment of key transitional bodies,
the return of Rick Machar and other opposition leaders to
Juba for the Peace Day celebrations, the release of some
prisoners and the holding of National Pre-transition
Committee meetings, all of which is to be welcomed.
I was struck by the Swedish Ambassador's comment
about the tangible sense of hope that he perceived while
he was there and that everything we do must be to
sustain that hope.

Despite the promising start, we remain concerned
that several fundamental provisions of the Agreement
are yet to be implemented and the targets set out in the
time frame are being missed. We are deeply concerned
by the reports of continued violence, in particular
around Wau and Yei, which threatens to undermine
the Agreement and violate the commitments made by
all parties in the cessation of hostilities, numerous
ceasefire agreements and the revised Peace Agreement.
We are also concerned that the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan and the Ceasefire and Transitional
Security Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism are
being denied access to areas, such as south of Wau, to
carry out their, including monitoring the implementation
of the ceasefire as mandated by the Council and IGAD.

Secondly, we have yet to see the full and unfettered
humanitarian access that has been repeatedly promised.
That has been improved in some areas, but elsewhere
obstructions continue, including around greater Bagari,
where access was denied for several months early this
year, and has recently been blocked again, and where
we know there are people in famine-like conditions.

Bureaucratic obstructions also continue, including

taxes and fees that divert tens of millions of dollars
from providing food, water and shelter for the most
vulnerable in South Sudan. We call on the Government
to South Sudan to introduce a temporary waiver from
income taxes for international stuff of humanitarian
and development organizations, as well as a waiver
from other taxes, fees and permit costs and fees for as
long as the current acute humanitarian crisis continues.
We call on the opposition to cease attempts to impose
illegal charges. As of September, the World Food
Programme assessed that 6.1 million people, over half
of the population, were facing severe food insecurity.
The humanitarian community is in South Sudan as a
lifesaver, not a revenue raiser.
Thirdly, more must be done to ensure that the
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan is supported across South
Sudanese society. That includes increasing the
transparency of Government revenue so that the people
of South Sudan can see that it is being used for their
benefit. Fundamental rights and basic freedoms must
also be respected, including the freedom of expression,
the opening of civic space and the release of the
political detainees that are still being held. To build
confidence in the peace Agreement, its implementation
must be truly inclusive. We welcome the focus of the
visit on women's participation. I found the words of
the Executive Director of UN-Women particularly
important in that regard during her briefing today.
I especially noted her comments on the security
institutions, the need to end gender based violence
and the need to ensure the representation of women.
We know that female involvement in peace processes
makes them much more likely to be sustained. That is
in everybody's interest.

Tackling impunity will also be essential to building
confidence in the peace process and preventing future
grave violations. We call on the Government of South
Sudan to sign the memorandum of understanding
with the African Union to establish the hybrid court
to ensure perpetrators are held to account for their
appalling crimes.

I want in particular to highlight our concern about
the impact of the conflict in South Sudan on children.
The Secretary-General's recent report on children
and armed conflict (S/2018/865) finds that children
have been deliberately targeted and killed, very young
girls have been subjected to gruesome gang rape and
children have been abducted and their schools have been
destroyed. We welcome the recent visit of the Security
Council Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict, as mentioned by the Swedish Ambassador,
and the work on a comprehensive action plan to address
that issue. We urge the signatories of the action plans to
implement them in full.

Let me conclude by repeating that we are strong
supporters of the peace deal and we applaud the efforts
of the region in achieving it. There has been welcome
progress, but there needs to be so much more. It is
essential that the parties demonstrate their commitment
to the agreement by addressing all outstanding issues
urgently. That is because it is the people of South Sudan
who are suffering most from hunger and from violence.
It is for the sake of the people that we must all redouble
our efforts.
