The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Argentina.

At the outset, I thank and welcome the Force
Commanders. I would like to thank them for both their
briefings and for the dedication with which they carry
out their tasks in the various missions in always difficult
environments. We strongly support the holding of these
meetings with the Force Commanders because they
allow us, along with the rest of the membership, to have
first-hand and quality information on the activities
and the challenges of the missions on the ground. We
hope that this practice, which has been ongoing for five
consecutive years, should be continued in the future.
We also support the initiative of the Secretary-General,
mentioned by other colleagues, to review and evaluate
peacekeeping missions as a necessity - a strategic,
political and ethical imperative for the Organization.

Allow me to say that Argentina is delighted and
welcomes the presence in the Chamber of Major General
Kristin Lund, the first woman Force Commander of
the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus. We
welcome her presence because in such a serious activity
as peacekeeping it would be selfish for us women if
we left peace solely in the hands of men. I therefore
welcome her presence here. We are pleased with the
responsibility she has been given.

Argentina, like other members of the Security
Council, understands that maintaining international
peace and security is the ultimate goal of the Council.
The responsibilities assigned to missions clearly entail
various dimensions: the protection of human rights,
assistance in rebuilding institutions and consolidating
democracy and the rule of law. Those are tasks are
undertaking in every United Nations missions, which
are increasingly multidimensional and complex.
They also increasingly require more coordination and
coherence.

The United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO), the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (UNDOF) and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) are among those that are currently
essential to guarantee the protection of civilians. With
regard to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we
would like to once again emphasize the merit and effort
of MONUSCO in fulfilling its mandate, which has
made it possible to overcome the threat posed by the
Mouvement du 23 mars and to contribute to improving
the security situation in the east of the country.

The establishment of an Intervention Brigade
was a risky bet and, for the time being, we believe it
remains a challenging one. It was a risky bet in order
to impose peace. Its establishment was justified since
it was created at the specific request of the authorities
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and because
of the specific situation in the country, which has
experienced several decades of unresolved conflicts,
with a significant portion of its territory in the hands
of armed groups. Moreover,the conflict has the dubious
honour of costing the most lives since the end of the
Second World War.
The mandate of the Brigade is as unique as it is
specific. It should not be expanded or confused with the
rest of the Mission, which consists first and foremost in
protecting civilians, even when such a protection - how
could it be otherwise - implies a proactive attitude of
preventive patrolling in order to avoid having to react
immediately after civilians become victims of an attack.
However, the active protection of civilians should not
be confused with the neutralization of the armed groups
through aggressive activities. That is the understanding
of my country. Such offensive actions should and could
be carried out solely by the Intervention Brigade.

With regard to UNDOF, the continuation and the
uninterrupted militarization of the Syrian conflict have
meant that the crisis has progressively spilled over into
the area of operation of the Force, with an impact on
the capacity of the mission to fulfil its mandate and
putting at risk both its staff and the maintenance of the
ceasefire between Israel and Syria. The events that took
place a few weeks ago reflect the fact that the mission
staff is the target of direct and deliberate attacks by
terrorist groups that are opposed to any international
presence. In fact, they benefit from greater instability
and they seek to exacerbate tensions in the region.

Under those circumstances the Force has reduced
its presence and control over a significant portion of
its area of operations. While there is no doubt that both
the mission and its mandate continue to be extremely
relevant and necessary, recent events clearly require
us to think about the most effective and secure way
for the Force to fulfil its mandate in an operational
environment that is completely different from the one
for which it was designed, and it will remain so for the
foreseeable future. In that regard, while we are awaiting
information to be presented by the Secretariat on the
necessary measures to maintain the capacity ofUNDOF
to fulfil its mandate, we would like to emphasize the
rapid implementation of risk-mitigation measures by
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations in order to
allow the mission to fulfil its mandate in a secure way.

At the same time, in such a volatile context, it is
essential for the parties to exercise maximum restraint in
their activities, to fully use the communication channels
that UNDOF has made available and avoid succumbing
to provocations. We acknowledge the intense work and
the critical role that the Force Commander has been
playing throughout this period in order to ease tensions
each time that serious incidents have taken place that
had the potential to worsen the situation.

On that point I would like to put a question to
General Singha. How does he evaluate the consultation
process and the interaction between the Force, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Security Council throughout this period when the
circumstances in which the Force operates have been
changing drastically? What would General Singha
change? What would he improve?

Turning to Mali, Argentina condemns in the
strongest terms the repeated attacks targeted against
MINUSMA, and we would like to express our solidarity
with the family members of the Blue Helmets who fell
in the line of duty: from the Niger, Senegal, Chad,
France and other countries. That is why we in particular
value the work of the personnel of this Mission, who put
their lives at risk on a daily basis defending peace in the
face of the constant threat from fundamentalist groups.

We understand that MINUSMA should not replace
the national armed forces of Mali, or become the
main element in the fight against extremist groups.
Such tasks would basically contravene the role of a
peacekeeping operation. For that reason, if the current
trend of increasing attacks against the United Nations
continues, it will be necessary to undertake an in-depth
analysis with regard to the presence of MINUSMA in
Mali.

Finally, I cannot conclude without referring to
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH), the only United Nations peacekeeping
operation in my own region, Latin America and the
Caribbean. Bearing in mind that in the next few days
the Council will need to renew its mandate, I would
like to make two brief comments. First, we are worried
about the rapid onset of the deadline to decide on the
future of the Mission. We understand that the political
and security situation in Haiti has not improved so
significantly as to justify an accelerated and sudden
reduction in the troop level, as is proposed in the report
of the Secretary General (S/2014/617).

We are also concerned about the change in the
Mission's mandate and concept. We believe that it is
important to proceed with caution and that decisions
should be taken based on conditions on the ground,
so as to ensure the successful conclusion of the only
peacekeeping operation deployed in the North American
hemisphere. We agree that MINUSTAH should remain
in Haiti no longer than necessary, but as long as it is
requested by the democratic Government of Haiti. At
the same time, we believe that it is important to learn
from the lessons of the past and to bear in mind the
experiences of hasty withdrawals that have forced us
to return.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to Lieutenant General Maqsood
Ahmed to respond to the comments and questions
raised.

