Mr. Malok (South Sudan): Allow me to express
my appreciation for the opportunity to address the
members of the Security Council on an issue that is of
utmost importance to my country.

Despite the differences on some issues and the way
in which the mandate is implemented, our continuous
support for the renewal of the mandate of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) is a clear
indication of our appreciation for the work the Mission
does in our country and a recognition of our shared
objective of realizing peace in South Sudan. South
Sudan therefore welcomes the renewal of the UNMISS
mandate until 15 March 2019, during which time the
Mission is asked to make several assessments. However,
South Sudan would like to raise certain issues.

It is unfortunate that the Council chooses to
politicize the peacekeeping resolution. There is a
need to bridge the discrepancy between the primary
responsibility of the State and the complementary
support of the international community - in this case,
UNMISS. Although South Sudan is now violently
divided between the Government and the opposition,
it is important to remember that the leadership was
elected by the people and represents the legitimacy of
the Government and the sovereignty of the country.
Although it is practical to be connected to both parties
and to work on fostering national consensus, the United
Nations should work in collaboration with the current
Government to address the practical problems facing
the country.

It is one thing to condemn the leadership of the
country and another to threaten the imposition of
an arms embargo and sanctions, which, as I have
repeatedly mentioned to the Council, would lead
only to an adversarial relationship and aggravate the
situation. It is worth reiterating that representatives of
the international community Visited South Sudan in the
first place to support the country. Recent developments
may indeed undermine the nature and magnitude of
that support, but remedies can be found to restore a
constructive basis for partnership in the stabilization
and development of the country. It would be an ironic
double jeopardy to punish a country already suffering
from an acute crisis.

My country's position is that punitive actions and
punishment are counterproductive. The only solution
to the conflict in South Sudan is through a political
process in which President Salva Kiir Mayardit has
continued to play an active role and made numerous
compromises. The situation calls for cooperation
as opposed to confrontation and threats of punitive
actions, including the imposition of an arms embargo
and sanctions. Therefore, we believe that it would
be appropriate for UNMISS and the United Nations
country team to meet with the relevant authorities in
the Government to discuss and develop a strategy on
the most constructive way to address the crisis and
concurrently use their mutual strategic understanding
as a basis for reaching out to the armed opposition.

The mischaracterization of the conflict in South
Sudan has helped to fuel it. The conflict in South Sudan
is political in nature, not ethnic. Every woman, child and
man in South Sudan has been affected by the conflict in
one way or another and everyone has a heartfelt story
to tell. Therefore, alarming statements and reports
of genocide instil fear, panic and despair, causing
communities to flee, as witnessed in the aftermath of
Adama Dieng's unfounded report. Furthermore, the
continuous use of moral equivalence has emboldened
other armed groups to act in an irresponsible manner,
knowing that there will be collective blame and

punishment. It is important to pinpoint who Violates the
law and where and when it is done in a timely manner.

As we have seen in some cases in South Sudan,
internally displaced persons and refugees seeking
shelter after displacement have often been exposed to
further abuse and their wide-ranging subsistence needs
are not met due to various constraints. We therefore
welcome the Secretary-General's commitment to
strictly enforcing his zero-tolerance policy on sexual
exploitation and abuse. We also welcome the call on
UNMISS to contribute to the safe, voluntary and
dignified return of internally displaced persons and
refugees to their homes so that they may resume
their livelihoods.

South Sudan has taken steps to address some of
the issues outlined in resolution 2406 (2018). There
is an ongoing judicial process to address the Terrain
Hotel incident in an open and transparent manner.
The Government has also taken steps with regard to
fees and taxes on non-governmental organizations and
humanitarian agencies. It is essential that such efforts
be acknowledged as a step in the right direction. The
Government further commits to making changes as
appropriate and to bettering the relationship. I would
like to reiterate my Government's position that punitive
actions and punishment are counterproductive.

In conclusion, we express our gratitude to the Council
members who sought our views during negotiations.

The meeting rose at 10.20 am.
