Mr. Al-Hussein (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset allow me to congratulate you on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for this month,
and wish you all success in fulfilling the task entrusted
to you. I would also like to thank the previous
president, the Permanent Representative of Bulgaria,
His Excellency Ambassador Stefan Tafrov for the
efforts he made during his presidency of the Council.

At the end of World War 11, our Organization was
established in an endeavour to save future generations
from the scourge of war through the maintenance of
justice, respect for international law and the promotion
of basic human rights. The United Nations took it upon
itself to maintain international peace and security by
resorting to collective measures to prevent and remove
threats to peace and to bring about, by peaceful means
when possible and in accordance with the principles of
justice and international law, the peaceful settlement of
international disputes.

Those purposes and guidelines are relevant to the
current situation, which threatens the exhaustion of
peaceful means in dealing with the Iraqi issue. As such,
the Jordanian Government is of the opinion that all
Member States of the United Nations should work
towards achieving a solution through peaceful means
and should avoid acts that would breach that peace and
make the situation in the Middle East even more
critical. This alone compels the Security Council to
assume its responsibilities as provided for in the United
Nations Charter, including paragraphs 1 and 2 of
Article 24. It is, therefore, the responsibility of the
Security Council to use all available and reasonable
means to resolve the Iraqi issue and settle it through
continuous dialogue and negotiations.

In this connection, the Jordanian Government
would like to reiterate its position that the
implementation of Security Council resolutions is an
obligation on all States, without exception, including
the Security Council's resolutions on the Middle East,
whether they were adopted with regard to Iraq or to the
occupied Palestinian territories.

It is the opinion of the Jordanian Government that
a peaceful exit out of the current crisis requires Iraq to
fully implement relevant Security Council resolutions,
including those related to inspection operations. In this
regard, the Jordanian Government again welcomes the
decision of Iraq to allow the inspectors to return
without conditions, as mentioned in the letter from the
Foreign Minister of Iraq to the United Nations
Secretary-General dated 16 September 2002.

It further welcomes the understandings reached
earlier this month in Vienna on practical arrangements
for the return of inspectors. The Jordanian Government
hopes that the resumption of inspection operations will
be the right step towards a comprehensive solution that
encompasses the implementation of relevant Security
Council resolutions, including those relating to Kuwaiti
and non-Kuwaiti prisoners of war and missing persons
and those of third countries.

This in turn must lead to an end to the long-
lasting suffering of the Iraqi people, so that they can
live in prosperity and dignity and so that Iraq's future
generations can live in peace and security.

Finally, the Jordanian Government hopes that the
Security Council will deal with the Iraqi question in a
prudent and responsible manner that respects the
purposes and principles of the Charter. It further
appeals to all States to abide by their obligations and to
act within the framework of the Security Council, its
relevant resolutions and international law.

