My delegation reiterates its thanks and appreciation, Madam President, for your successful stewardship of the Security Council's work this month. I thank the Secretariat and the Permanent Representatives and members of the delegations that expressed their condolences on the passing away of Mr. Walid Al-Moallem, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates. I also thank the dear colleagues who extended their warm congratulations on my appointment as Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates. Since the most recent meeting on the political and humanitarian situation in my country, held on 27 October (see S/2020/1049), we have witnessed a number of important positive developments. Simultaneously, we have also witnessed, from the United States Administration in particular and from other hostile Governments in general, more violations of international law, of the purpose and principles of the United Nations and of the relevant resolutions of the Council. This is what I will clarify in my statement today. The international conference on the return of Syrian displaced persons and refugees, held in Damascus on 11 and 12 November, represented a very significant step in the framework of the efforts of the Syrian State and its allies to ensure the safe, dignified and voluntary return of displaced persons and refugees to their areas of origin and places of residence. It was also a step towards providing a suitable environment for that through cooperation with friendly countries and humanitarian partners to reconstruct what terrorism has destroyed and rehabilitate residential neighbourhoods and public facilities, primarily schools, health-care facilities, power plants and the economic, social, cultural and service infrastructure. These have been among the concerns expressed in this Chamber over the years, with demands made that they be addressed. The closing statement of the aforementioned conference expressed the participants' firm adherence to the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic. That statement stressed the rejection of the coercive measures imposed on the Syrian people and demanded an end to the foreign occupation and its crimes, including the plundering of Syria's wealth and resources, as well as the continued combating of terrorism and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Shams (ISIS) and Jabhat Al-Nusra terrorist organizations and affiliated individuals and entities. All these matters are consistent with the positions of the United Nations and the resolutions of the Security Council and the General Assembly related to these core issues. The participants also affirmed their adherence to a political solution under Syrian leadership and ownership, with the facilitation of the United Nations. They stressed the need for the Constitutional Committee to carry out its work in a consensual and constructive manner, without external interference or attempts to impose artificial timelines, in order to enable the Committee to achieve maximum support on the part of the Syrian people for the outcome of its work. They called on the international community to provide appropriate support to create an environment conducive to the return of displaced persons and their return to normal life. That is consistent with resolution 2254 (2015) and the mandate of the Special Envoy. In that context, my delegation would like to thank the Russian Federation and the Governments of the countries that genuinely participated in this conference, whether by attending personally or via video. Furthermore, we would like to thank those Governments that boycotted the conference because, once again, they proved by their own actions the falsehood of what they claim regarding human concern and a constructive role at the international level. Those Governments also proved their desire to prolong the crisis and continue geopolitical machinations at the expense of the security and stability of my country and the well-being of its people. In that context also, my delegation regrets that the United Nations, the main humanitarian partner of the Syrian Government, yielded to the instructions of former employee of the United States State Department James Jeffrey and breached its mandate and the requirements of its cooperation with the Government of my country. Unfortunately, the United Nations system ended up simply assigning its Resident Coordinator in Syria to attend as an observer instead of engaging in dialogue and discussions as an active partner, supporting efforts aimed at improving the humanitarian situation and the dignified, safe and voluntary return of displaced persons and refugees in accordance with international law. It is regrettable that, at a time when the United Nations was forced not to send its representatives to participate in the international conference on the return of Syrian displaced persons and refugees, a United Nations delegation, including Mark Cutts, who is known as the Deputy Regional Humanitarian Coordinator, sneaked across our border with Turkey into Idlib governorate in north-west Syria without the consent of the Syrian Government. Cutts was accompanied by a number of so-called security men affiliated with the Hayat Tahrir Al-Shams/Jabhat Al-Nusra terrorist organization, which is on the Security Council's list as the Syrian arm of Al-Qaida. Is this the practical application of the role of the United Nations as an effective partner of the Syrian Government in the humanitarian field? This condemnable behaviour represents a violation of my country's sovereignty and of the existing cooperation between the Syrian Government and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs; support for terrorism; and a violation of the Council's resolutions related to combating terrorism and the principles of humanitarian action set out in General Assembly resolution 46/182. We look forward to the Secretary-General and his Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs taking the necessary measures to ensure an apology and hold the perpetrators accountable for that violation. My country condemns in the strongest terms the visit of United States Secretary of State Mike Pompeo to the Israeli settlements in the occupied Syrian Golan and the West Bank on 19 November. That visit represents an expression of the current United States Administration's keenness to affirm, until the very last moments of its tenure, its bias towards and absolute loyalty to Israel at the expense of the principles of international law, the provisions of the Charter, the relevant United Nations resolutions, including resolution 497 (1981), and the security and stability of our region. That visit also represents an encouragement for the Israeli occupying authorities to continue with their aggressions, the latest of which were the acts of aggression launched against my country on 18 November and last night. We assure the Council and Pompeo that his visit will not change the legal, political or geographical status of the Golan as an occupied territory and an integral part of Syria, and we will exert all efforts - using all means provided by international law - to restore it. On another note, the American occupation and its tools of separatist militias continue their practices aimed at plundering the resources of the Syrian State. In conjunction with their overt theft of Syrian oil and gas, which we have shared with the Council in many of our official statements and letters, the United States occupation forces recently excavated antiquities in Hasakah governorate, in north-east Syria, unearthing them in the presence of French and Israeli archaeologists. The American occupation forces also excavated an archaeological site in the Al-Malikiyah, Qamishli governorate, countryside, where they found 12 graves and historical monuments dating back to the Roman era. Those looted Syrian antiquities, which are priceless and date back thousands of years, are being smuggled through Iraqi Kurdistan and Turkey in preparation for their transfer to other destinations. The crimes described are an extension of the crimes that ISIS has consistently committed to provide financial resources for its terrorist activities and to enhance the geographical scope of its alleged caliphate. The principal has replaced the agent, in a clear exchange of roles. Not only that, but the American occupation forces continued their efforts to grant a kind of legitimacy to terrorist organizations, their agent militias and the artificial entities associated with them. Recently an American delegation from the so-called Commission on International Religious Freedom illegally infiltrated the countryside in the Syrian governorate of Deir ez-Zor and the Al-Tabqa area, in Raqqa governorate. The delegation held meetings with representatives of those militias and their affiliated entities. Moreover, the American company Creative Associates International also concluded agreements with the so-called Civil Council in Deir ez- Zor. Is this how the host country of the United Nations defends the provisions of the Charter and the principles of international law? As the Council is aware, the Turkish regime and its terrorist organizations and mercenaries systematically use drinking water as a weapon against civilians by cutting off the water supply from the Allouk water station for about | million Syrians in the city of Hasakah and the vicinity. To add insult to injury, the Turkish regime and its tools stole water pumps belonging to the wells of Asfar Najjar and Ayn Al-Kebrit, and Majra Al-Khabur, located in the city of Ras Al-Ayn, in Raqqa governorate, in northern Syria, which reflects the persistent commission by the Erdogan regime of war crimes and crimes against humanity in my country while enjoying the impunity provided by its allies in NATO. Furthermore, mercenaries of the Turkish regime in the so-called Sultan Murad and Sultan Suleiman Shah terrorist factions carried out digging and excavation work in several archaeological areas in Afrin and the vicinity to steal antiquities and smuggle them into Turkey. The Turkish regime was not satisfied with that; rather, it stole large quantities of wheat, barley and other agricultural crops and smuggled them into Turkey, similar to what it did with the previously looted oil, antiquities, factories, machinery and property, and burned what it was unable to steal. Despite all of these undeniable facts, some come to lecture us about the implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). invite them to start with the first sentence of the resolution, which affirms the strong commitment of the Security Council to the sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic. Is the Security Council ready to demonstrate its will to implement it? Will the other stakeholders cooperate with the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy in the implementation of this commitment? What about the implementation of resolution 2253 (2015), which was adopted just one day before the adoption of resolution 2254 (2015)? Resolution 2254 (2015) contains more than 2,650 words. It must be fully respected, instead of being selectively implemented by applying one paragraph and ignoring another. We either respect the resolution in its entirety or consider it not applicable. Preferences and predilections should be avoided in dealing with this resolution. We must start with the first paragraph, which affirms the Security Council's strong commitment to the sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic. This is the beginning of 2254 (2015). The fourth round of meetings of the Constitutional Committee will take place soon. Here, my delegation reaffirms the Syrian ownership and leadership of the political process, facilitated by the United Nations. We stress that the success of the Committee's work requires respect for its agreed rules of procedures and the rejection of any external interference in its work and any attempt by some Governments to impose artificial timetables. The Constitutional Committee is its own master, and the Syrian people alone have the exclusive right to make their own future. Second statement by the Permanent Representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to the United Nations, Bashar Ja'afari I apologize for asking for the floor again. It is not my habit to follow-up on what my colleague the Turkish representative says, but his statement today is misleading to the members of the Council, to say the least. I recall some important milestones that the Turkish regime has gone through since the beginning of the Syrian crisis and its sponsorship of terrorism in my country. Since the beginning of the Syrian crisis, Turkey's border with my country has been open to tens of thousands of terrorists from around the world. All will recall that some of the foreign ministers of the permanent members of the Security Council have described these terrorists as jihadists. Some of those ministers and Heads of Governments and republics have even referred to the foreign terrorists who entered my country from Turkey as the "moderate Syrian opposition". Of course, the movement of these thousands upon thousands of terrorists was financed by Qatar and Saudi Arabia, and the Turkish regime was in charge of transporting them to our common border, where they were trained and then brought into Syria. The first chemical gas test was conducted in the Turkish city of Gaziantep and publicly carried out by Jabhat Al-Nusra inside Turkish territory, and the link was posted on social media. That post contains audio of a person who conducted chemical gas experiments on rabbits, who can be heard saying: "We have succeeded in using chemical weapons on rabbits and we will transfer the use of the chemical to the Syrian interior." This statement is proven and known. The Turkish regime has been involved in the bloodshed of Syrians in various forms since the beginning of the crisis, including infiltrating the terrorists and encouraging them to use chemical weapons. We provided the Council with a special message concerning a Syrian terrorist named Haitham Al-Qassab, who transported two litres of sarin from Libya to Istanbul on a Turkish civilian plane. These two litres of sarin were then transported by the same terrorist to the Syrian border and brought into Syria. Obviously, those chemicals were used in the Syrian town of Khan Al- Asal in March 2013, resulting in the martyrdom of 23 Syrian soldiers and civilians. We informed the Council about all this, but unfortunately no one - neither the Council nor its counter-terrorism sub-committees - took any action. But these facts cannot be denied by the Turkish regime. Who served as patron of even this fragile, weak and unpatriotic opposition? It was the Turkish regime. Most of the opposition members are residents of Istanbul. I also recall a very important issue - the admission by former Qatari Prime Minister Hamad bin Jassim on France 24, the BBC Arabic Service and the Qatari State Television that Washington has asked Qatar to lead the process of sponsoring terrorism in Syria. That was the United States mandate for Qatar. Washington asked Sheikh Hamad to go to Riyadh to coordinate with the Saudis on who should lead this operation against Syria. The former Saudi king at the time told Hamad, "With God's blessing, let Qatar lead the process and we will support you from behind". All of this occurred with Washington's knowledge. Hamad then said that Qatar alone had spent $137 billion to undermine the stability of my country, Syria. Is this a caricature or are these facts to be taken into account in the Security Council? Is this a joke? Who will be held accountable for shedding the blood of hundreds of thousands of Syrians? Now the representative of the Turkish regime comes to lecture us with chastity and purity, even though his regime is known for what it does in Cyprus, Azerbaijan, Libya and the eastern Mediterranean. The closest people to the Turkish regime are today against it, including some Europeans.
