Ms. Rice (United States of America): I wish to
begin, Sir, by welcoming you as the new Permanent
Representative of Libya and congratulating you on
your assumption of the Chair as President of the
Council for this month.

I also want to thank Prime Minister Prodi for his
leadership and to thank the other members of the
African Union-United Nations panel for their valuable
discussion of ways to strengthen the African Union's
capacity to organize more effective peacekeeping
operations. I am pleased to welcome here as well today
Foreign Minister Zuma of South Africa and African
Union (AU) Commissioner Lamamra, who have both
made enormous contributions in this field.

We are glad to have this chance to discuss ways
to further deepen the important partnership on

09-2716]
peacekeeping between the United Nations and the
African Union, a partnership that we steadfastly
support and one that lets both the United Nations and
the AU do far more than either could do on its own. We
look forward to further efforts to ensure that the two
organizations coordinate smoothly and draw upon their
own unique strengths.

In the past, United Nations partnerships with the
AU and other, subregional, organizations such as the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) have helped end conflicts and protect
vulnerable civilians. The question today is how best to
build upon those successes, carry out peacekeeping
operations more effectively and promote peace and
stability across the continent.

Africa's needs are great, but so are the
contributions that Africans have made for many years
to keeping the peace. We salute the many African
countries that have contributed troops and otherwise
supported peace operations across the continent - and,
indeed, beyond the continent. And in particular we
recognize the ongoing courage of the African Union's
decision to become the first body to deploy troops to
Darfur when the situation there was and is at its most
uncertain, unstable and risky. Tragically, this week's
further loss of life has reminded us again how brave
the troops of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur are and how crucial their life-
saving mission is.

We also want to express thanks for and
acknowledge the extraordinary contributions and
sacrifices of the Governments of Uganda and Burundi
as they play a crucial role in the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM), where the circumstances are
indeed dangerous and where lives have been lost.

Reading the report before us today (S/2008/8l3)
suggests several important steps forward. Let me
discuss a few of them briefly.

First, we should work together to further enhance
the AU secretariat's capacity to plan, manage and
sustain peacekeeping operations in the field over the
long term. My Government also encourages the
secretariats of both the United Nations and the African
Union to share the burden of planning for joint
operations and to further develop mechanisms to make
coordination on joint missions easier and smoother.
Secondly, as the panel as noted, peacekeeping is
not the only tool, or even always the best one, to
handle every conflict. The panel recommends that the
African Union also increase its capacities in the areas
of conflict prevention, crisis management and post-
conflict peacebuilding and stabilization. We welcome

that call.

Thirdly, we are pleased to note that the panel has
recommended that a trust fund mechanism be created
to coordinate donor assistance to the ongoing project of
stronger African Union peacekeeping. The United
States encourages donor nations to join in assisting the
AU, either through a trust fund or through bilateral
programmes.

Fourthly, we must recognize how seriously
peacekeeping ventures in Africa can be undermined by
insufficient resources. This is indeed a major
challenge, and we hope we can work together to look
at ways to do better in the future. The United States has
already taken a leading role in the effort to build up
Africa's peacekeeping capacities and to support
operations already in the field. Starting with the
African Crisis Response Initiative in the 19905 and
United States training and equipment support for
African contingents that deployed then to the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone, the United States has
led efforts to help build African peacekeeping capacity.

Just since 2005, we have trained and equipped
more than 68,000 African peacekeeping troops from 22
countries through the Global Peace Operation
Initiative's African Contingency Operations Training
and Assistance programme. These troops have joined
in peacekeeping missions across the continent under
the auspices of the United Nations, the AU and
subregional organizations such as ECOWAS. Since
2005, through Global Peace Operation Initiative's
programmes amounting to more than $7 million, the
United States has provided funding, equipment,
advisers and technical assistance to help the AU and
ECOWAS secretariats build up their peacekeeping
capabilities. We have also extensive materiel, logistical
and technical support to AU peacekeeping forces in
Darfur and Somalia.

We urge our colleagues on the Council to
increase significantly their bilateral contributions to
AMISOM. We encourage other donors to follow suit,
and we hope that additional countries will consider
contributing to AMISOM. to join in this important
effort. There is much more for all of us to do, but we
look forward to working together to create a more
peaceful, prosperous and secure Africa.

