I welcome Prosecutor Bensouda and thank her for briefing the Council on the actions of the International Criminal Court (ICC) in Darfur. The Dominican Republic takes note of the progress report presented by the Office of the Prosecutor. We are glad to know that accountability remains a priority in the peace negotiations between the Government of the Sudan and the rebel groups in Juba, South Sudan. In that regard, we welcome the positive statements and comments that representatives of the Sudanese Government have made to the media regarding their possible future relationship with the ICC. More important, this is the time for the Government of the Sudan to demonstrate that accountability is a priority for the authorities. The Dominican Republic commends the efforts made by the Office, the Governments of the Central African Republic, the Republic of France and the Republic of Chad and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic to arrest ICC suspect Mr. Ali Kushayb and put him in the custody of the Court. Now is the time for the long stagnation to give way to action. The people of Darfur deserve that the ICC and the international community continue to fight against impunity for all victims and their families. We would also like to welcome the possibility that proceedings and trials against the ICC suspects take place in the Sudan. Besides being already expressly contemplated as a possibility in resolution 1593 (2005), that could represent a perfect first stage of cooperative and fruitful relations between the Sudan and the ICC. We continue to be concerned about the complex and difficult situation in Darfur. We express our deepest condolences to all the victims and their loved ones who died or suffered as a result of the latest violent acts that took place during the reporting period. These acts must come to an end, and the people in the Sudan must have the peace they deserve. In addition, we want to join the ICC in condemning any kind of attack against humanitarian aid workers in Darfur. Moreover, we strongly reject all sexual and gender-based violence against women and girls in Darfur. We call on the Government to help stop these atrocious acts, which represent an impediment for all girls and women to living in a non-discriminatory society, free from sexual harassment and sexual violence based on their gender. Finally, the Dominican Republic reiterates its commitment and full support to the ICC and the Prosecutor's Office. Its work continues to be of the utmost importance in order to bring justice to the victims of war crimes, genocide and crimes against humanity. We call upon the Government of the Sudan to open its door to justice and to the end of impunity. It is time that the Sudanese people move forward towards a sustainable peace, based on democratic principles of justice and accountability.
