Mr. Hoxha (Albania) (spoke in French): Albania
welcomes the opportunity to participate in this
important public debate on children and armed conflict.
I would like to thank you, Sir, for the very detailed
concept note (S/2015/168, annex) that was circulated in
advance of this debate.

Albania associates itself with the statement made
earlier by the observer of the European Union. However,
I will make a few comments in my national capacity.

We fully agree with your assessment, Sir, that the
year 2014 was, unfortunately, the bleakest year for
children, and that this trend is very sadly confirmed
for the current year as well. This was indicated recently
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict in her latest report
submitted to the Human Rights Council in Geneva
during the twenty-eighth session.

The conclusions of that report leave no room
for doubt. The year 2014, characterized by the
intensification and recurrence of conflicts, served to
highlight the significant vulnerability of children to
the devastating effects of war. In armed conflict zones,
children have been the victims of the worst violations.
They were kidnapped, executed or mutilated, sexually
abused, recruited and forced to commit atrocities,
sometimes even against other children. As the report
points out, the most tragic aspect is that what has been
seen, documented or verified, is only a small part of
violations against children.

(spoke in English)

We reiterate our deep concern regarding the
atrocities perpetrated by extremist non-State armed
groups, in particular against children belonging to
religious and ethnic minorities. An unprecedented
mixture of barbaric medieval behaviour with modern-
day propaganda by the Islamic State of Iraq and the
Levant and its affiliates has revealed some of the most
unspeakable crimes and the most vicious acts and
behaviours, including, as reported, the beheading of
children and the filming of acts of rape against girls
in Iraq. Most worrying is the fact that terror groups
are now focusing their recruitment efforts on children,
posting videos of little boys firing weapons almost
as big as they are in order to breed the next terrorist
generation.

We welcome the efforts of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Children and Armed
Conflict, including her recent recommendations on
the four areas in which the work of the Human Rights
Council can improve the protection of children. As
a Human Rights Council member, Albania remains
committed to incorporating, as a matter of priority, the
violations and the specific needs of children affected by
armed conflict into the Council's work and mechanisms.

We reiterate our support for the "Children, Not
Soldiers" campaign, jointly initiated with UNICEF,
which seeks to put an end to the recruitment and use
of children by national armed forces in conflict by
2016, and we appreciate the progress achieved during
the first year of the campaign. In that context, we
welcome the confirmation, on 1 December 2014, of the
decision by the International Criminal Court Appeals
Chamber against the first individual to be convicted
of committing war crimes consisting of enlisting and
conscripting children. It represents a milestone in
ensuring accountability and ending impunity.

We expect the Security Council to be at the
forefront in addressing violations against children
everywhere. Nothing, no rule, no procedural aspect, no
kind of interest, could explain an absence of swift and
resolute action by the Council in such situations. We
have said it before, and we reiterate it again: the use of
veto in such cases is simply the abuse of veto. Albania
reiterates its unwavering support for the French proposal
and the efforts of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency group for a code of conduct to refrain
from the use of the veto in situations of genocide, war
crimes, crimes against humanity and ethnic cleansing,
situations that always first and foremost affect the
children.

In conclusion, let me remind the Council that this
year we will celebrate the twenty-sixth anniversary
of the adoption of the Convention on the Rights of
the Child, the first legally binding instrument to take
a holistic approach to human rights and to recognize
children as rights holders. The Convention is the most
ratified treaty in human history, but still, a lot more
needs to be done to keep children safe and removed
from war atrocities.

Given its importance in the protection of children
in armed conflict, Albania has acceded to the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict, and
we are committed to its full implementation. We call on
countries that have already signed the Protocol to ratify
it, but also on all other countries to consider being part
of this important instrument for the rights of the child.

Finally, we think that the upcoming discussion
on the occasion of the tenth anniversary of resolution
1612 (2005), which established the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict, under the Malaysian
presidency in June 2015 should serve as an opportunity
to build and sustain momentum towards the universal
ratification and acceptance of the Optional Protocol on
the involvement of children in armed conflict.

