Mr. Barkin (United States of America): At the
outset, we would like to thank our briefers for joining
us today. We would like to join others in expressing
our condolences for the tragic death of Ms. Almaas
Elman and urge justice and security for all of Somalia's
civil society.

Since the Council's most recent meeting on Somalia
in August (see S/PV.8601), we have seen varying
degrees of progress towards long-term security and
stability in Somalia. The United States applauds the
recent successes of the Somali national security forces
against Al-Shabaab with the support of the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), particularly in
Lower Shabelle. We are encouraged by United Nations
reports of fewer incidents of armed conflict during the
past three months compared to the same period last
year, as well as by the fact that Somali security forces
are successfully reclaiming and holding territory from
Al-Shabaab in the face of repeated counterattacks.

We further support the ongoing efforts of
AMISOM's leadership and look to the Somali security
forces and institutions to undertake the reforms and
development efforts that will enable them to take on
greater responsibilities from AMISOM. in accordance
with the transition plan. In that regard, the United
States is pleased to help build capacity within Somalia's
security forces, and we appreciate Somalia's partners
on the Council, who are also contributing to capacity-
building for the country's security. It is crucial that
we ensure collaboration and coherence in this overall
effort. We are also encouraged by the fact that tensions
between Somalia and Kenya appear to be easing and
we remain prepared to facilitate future dialogue and
reconciliation efforts.

Additionally, we congratulate Somalia on its
progress on fiscal reforms, as it seeks eventual debt
relief next year through the Heavily Indebted Poor
Countries Initiative, and we encourage the Somali
authorities to continue their efforts.

With that in mind, the United States underscores
the important role that sanctions have played in
limiting Al-Shabaab's operational capabilities, and
we look forward to working with our partners to use
the Somali sanctions regime to choke off funding and
other sources of support to Al-Shabaab and to further
degrade its ability to carry out attacks against Somalia,
and its neighbours and partners.

We are, however, concerned about ongoing
political divisions and the lack of positive engagement
between the Federal Government in Mogadishu and
the federal member states. We acknowledge the recent
confidence-building efforts of the Federal Government
and state Governments of Galmudug and South-West
state with regard to political, security and development
challenges in their communities, but more needs to
be done.

We are troubled by the recent events in Jubaland and
the state presidential elections in August. We urge the
Federal Government and Jubaland's Ahmed Mohamed
Islam "Madobe" to engage in direct dialogue to address
outstanding issues, and we encourage neighbouring
federal states and international partners to support
efforts to reach a resolution.

Finally, looking to the 2021 elections, the United
States urges the Federal Government and the state
Governments to be transparent in their preparations
and respect the rights of independent journalists to
freely inform the public about electoral issues and
developments. We also stress the importance of
completing the outstanding elections-related laws that
will serve as the foundation for the elections and deepen
the trust between the Federal and state Governments.
We caution that limiting electoral processes or delaying
legislation will only damage the country's goals of
peace, stability and economic growth.

