Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for agreeing to hold this emergency
meeting at the initiative of France and the
United Kingdom.

This is a dark day for the people of Aleppo,
surely the darkest of the past five years. Al-Assad's
forces, propped up by Russia and Iran, have once
again redefined horror. They have gone from siege
to slaughter.

Today the United Nations has received reports that
pro-Government forces have been entering homes in
eastern Aleppo. They have been going door to door
executing people on the spot. Eighty-two people have
been murdered, 13 of whom are women and 11 children.
None were terrorists. We have heard reports of women
committing suicide in order not to be raped. We have
heard reports of people being burned alive. We have
heard reports that hundreds of men have disappeared
while fleeing Aleppo, taken by the regime.

All those reports evoke the darkest days of the
history of the United Nations. When it happened
before, we said "never again". Well, it is happening
again, today.

There must be protection for civilians. Even wars
have rules. We urge the Al-Assad regime and Russia
and Iran to respect those rules, and indeed to respect the
will of the vast majority of Security Council members
and the vast majority of members of the General
Assembly. We urge those who chose to back Al-Assad
to think again.

As the Secretary-General has just told us, the
Security Council has failed. It has failed because
Russia has used and abused its veto time and again,
even to prevent a seven-day ceasefire. To those who
backed Al-Assad and blocked action in the Council
we ask: How can you side with such cruelty? How can
you abide such an abuse of the Charter of the United
Nations, words that we all claim to uphold? Therefore,
re-find your moral compass, re-find your believe in the
dignity and worth of the human person. Re-find these
things before it is too late, and help us bring an end to
the suffering.

We know what needs to happen. The attacks, the
killings must stop. The suffering of those left in Aleppo
has gone on for far too long. The United Nations
stands ready to help get aid in and get civilians out.
The opposition has agreed to the plan. But in order
for it to happen, the regime and its backers must put
humanity first and grant the United Nations the
permission needed.

We will have different arguments from Russia
this morning, but I sincerely hope that, despite the
differences, Russia and others on the Security Council
who opposed the ceasefire last week could at least agree
to these basic steps: first, to allow the United Nations
to access eastern Aleppo so that it can provide eyes on
the ground, get aid in to those who need it and protect
civilians; secondly, join my call today that we will hold
accountable anyone from any side who commits war
crimes; and, thirdly, help bring peace to Syria through
the only route possible, that is, a political solution.

With the eyes of the world watching, we should
be clear what will happen if this does not come to
pass. Aleppo will become a memory - a city only
known to the dead. In the coming days, hundreds, if
not thousands, of people will be killed or disappeared,
their fates unknown. But the fall of Aleppo will not
be a victory for Al-Assad. He will have sacrificed
his country and the lives of hundreds of thousands of
innocent civilians just to keep his grip on power. How
can he expect to lead a country that he has so callously
destroyed? How can he expect to unite a country that he
himself has wilfully divided?

A doctor from Aleppo illustrated this best earlier
this month. He said,

"Assad gave people in Aleppo only two choices:
either to go back to his control or to die by bombing.
We will not go back again to Assad's control."
The war will not end with the fall of Aleppo.
Al-Assad will never control the hearts or minds of
those crying out for freedom. He will only hold a third
of Syria, and he will be in debt to those foreign Powers
that would rather help him destroy his country than
help the Council save it.

The irony is that, as the as they carry out these
barbaric attacks in the name of defeating terrorism, it
is the real terrorists, the real threat, who are resurging
elsewhere in Syria. This week Palmyra fell again
to Da'esh. Palmyra is now in the hands of a group
whose bloodlust is rivaled onlyby that of the Al-Assad
regime. Instead of fighting them, Al-Assad has enabled
them. He has enabled them through obsessively,
systematically brutalizing his own people. He claims
that he is fighting terrorism. If it were not so tragic, so
horrific, those claims would be laughable.

The Council cannot turn a blind eye on this gravest
day of this most heinous conflict of the twenty-first
century. We cannot be distracted by false claims of
fighting terrorism. And we cannot, we must not, allow
there to be impunity for these war crimes. We owe it to
the people of Aleppo, the living and the dead, to ensure
that there is accountability for the horror perpetrated by
Al-Assad and his Russian and Iranian backers.

