Mr. Goktiirk (Turkey): I shall indeed be brief at this
late hour.

This open debate on general issues relating to
sanctions is indeed appropriate and timely. We commend
Canada, a country known for its earnest efforts to
strengthen international cooperation, for having taken this
initiative.

It is in fact the duty, as well as the right, of the
Security Council to take stock of the sanctions it has
initiated on behalf of the entire United Nations membership
and to see if they are on their intended course. Turkey
regards sanctions as a fundamental component of the
collective actions taken by the international community to
restore peace and stability, as provided for under Chapter
VII of the United Nations Charter, and plays an important
part in their implementation. Sanctions regimes have taken
an even more prominent role in the course of the past
decade. Yet we cannot equally say that they have
commensurately become more effective.

The effectiveness of sanctions, in our understanding,
has two crucial aspects. The first aspect is whether
sanctions applied to a specific regime or area serve their
intended purpose. This, in turn, raises the question of
whether the sanctions are properly targeted, on the one
hand, and whether there is compliance by all, on the other.
In his millennium report, the Secretary-General draws
attention to the deficiencies in this respect. As the Security
Council has become increasingly capable of acting under
the collective security provisions of the Charter, this is
the right juncture to devise ways to render sanctions more
focused, sparing populations and their future generations
from further devastation.

The second aspect concerns international cooperation
on implementing sanctions. When the Security Council
uses its power, it does so on the premise that its decisions
will invoke collective obligations and burden-sharing on
the part of the full United Nations membership.
Therefore, the collateral effects of sanctions on third
States, and especially the uneven burden they place on the
countries neighbouring the target State, are an issue that
must be addressed resolutely. Turkey, for one, suffers
immense economic and social losses resulting from its
adherence to the sanctions regime directed towards one of
its neighbours. Turkey's consequent application under
Article 50 of the Charter remains before the relevant
sanctions Committee of the Council.

It is worth mentioning here the valuable work done
so far by the Special Committee on the Charter of the
United Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of
the Organization. Practical ideas to alleviate the burden
shouldered by third States - ranging from according
commercial exemptions and concessions and asking the
views of the affected States to giving priority to
contractors
 

of third States for the humanitarian investments in the
target States - have been formulated over the years. These
are also at the disposal of the Security Council as it
embarks on improving the sanctions system of our
Organization.

