Ms. Zappia (Italy): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this debate. I also wish to thank the
Secretary-General and all the briefers for their
valuable contributions.

Italy aligns itself with the statements delivered
by the observer of the European Union and by the
representative of the Group of Friends of Mediation.

Experience has proven that the recourse to peaceful
means for the prevention and settlement of disputes
and crises is the best and most cost-effective solution.
Among the peaceful tools at our disposal, mediation
is key. It is a vital instrument to give substance to the
sustaining peace agenda. It is notjust a way to overcome
crises, it is also an occasion to reinvigorate the positive
forces of a country, promote dialogue and inclusiveness
and, ultimately, eliminate the root causes of conflicts.
The United Nations plays an essential role in
promoting mediation, most notably through the
Department of Political Affairs (DPA) and its Mediation
Support Unit. Strengthening the mediation capabilities
embedded in United Nations missions in the field is
also crucial. The creation and deployment of Peace
and Development Advisers is an important step in
that direction.

The Secretary General has injected new energy
into this dynamic by promoting a surge in diplomacy
and establishing the High-level Advisory Board on
Mediation. The dialogue the United Nations is fostering
in different parts of the world, such as Libya, the Horn
of Africa and Colombia, is a tangible example of this.

As a proud partner of DPA, Italy has consistently
scaled up its contribution to the Department in support
of its mediation activities, and will provide additional
funding soon. Italy is also partnering with UN-Women
and the United Nations Development Programme to
promote the inclusion of women and a gender perspective
into peace, national dialogue and reconciliation
processes, and to develop the necessary capabilities.

We encourage the Secretary-General to fully
exert his powers under Article 99 of the Charter of the
United Nations.

The Security Council should more frequently adopt
the informal-meeting format to discuss issues that,
while not being formally on the agenda, still deserve
its attention, and it should be briefed more frequently
by the relevant civil society actors. As a member of the
Peacebuilding Commission, Italy believes that inviting
the Chairs of the country-specific configurations
to brief the Council is a practice that should be
regularly pursued.

The United Nations should also strengthen
partnerships with regional and subregional
organizations in the area of mediation. Civil society
actors are also important partners. I take the example of
the support that the Comunita di Sant'Egidio provided
to the Central African Republic peace process.

Mediation can produce sustainable and lasting
solutions only if it is inclusive. Women in particular
play an essential role in reconciliation processes and
in building inclusive societies, and therefore lasting
peace. Today, however, too few women are involved in
mediation. Italy attaches great importance to ensuring
the full and active participation of women in conflict
prevention, management and resolution and in post-
conflict efforts. That has been a priority of our term
in the Security Council and is a key issue we are
promoting through our candidature to the Human Rights
Council for the 2019-2021 term. Italy has launched the
Mediterranean Women Mediators Network in order
to promote the meaningful participation of women in
peace processes in the Mediterranean region.

In conclusion, Italy reaffirms its strong commitment
to mediation as a tool to overcome the most complex
challenges. In that spirit, we will continue to work
relentlessly to create opportunities and platforms for
dialogue. In October, Italy will host the Italy-Africa
Ministerial Conference, and in November, the fourth
iteration of the Mediterranean Dialogues. Finally, as
announced by Prime Minister Giuseppe Conte, Italy
will also host an international conference on Libya.

