Mr. Belinga-Eboutou (Cameroon) (Spoke in French): My delegation expresses its empathy on the
occasion of the suffering of the Algerian people, who
have recently been so sorely afflicted.

My delegation welcomes the presence at this
meeting of the Deputy Secretary-General, who in April
2003 and at the start of this month provided us with
information on this subject. We are grateful to her for
her important contribution.
My delegation is also grateful to the World Food
Programme, the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), the United Nations Children's
Fund (UNICEF) and the World Health Organization
(WHO) for the considerable amount of information that
they have just provided on the humanitarian situation
in Iraq. We thank them most sincerely for their
valuable contribution to the only battle worth fighting:
the battle for humankind, for real individuals, the battle
for the development and the dignity of humankind. The
mere presence of those programmes in conflict areas
and in areas emerging from conflict sends a message of
hope that life has not been abducted but remains.

In particular, Cameroon welcomes the
participation at this meeting of the representative of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC). His
presence is an opportunity to express our appreciation
for the outstanding work on the ground since the first
day of conflict.

The coalition's military campaign has put an end
to a regime whose tyrannical nature has been
recognized and censured by all. However, the problems
of the martyred Iraqi people are far from being
resolved. In the immediate future, restoring security
and essential services is a major challenge and a
categorical necessity to which we must all respond.

The breakdown of basic services has created a
vicious circle that we must quickly break in order to
avoid further risk to the humanitarian situation. The
link between sanitation, water and health and the link
between food, education and health are, of course,
evident. Yet, we cannot distinguish between cause and
effect in either sector. We believe that the situation
reveals what we could call a circular, cumulative
causality.

In short, the humanitarian situation in Iraq at
present is complex and far-reaching. We have just
heard on this question the WHO and the other four
major United Nations agencies involved in the
implementation of resolution 1472 (2003). In general,
considerable progress has been achieved. Certainly, a
number of difficulties remain. But thanks to the efforts,
the solidarity and the sense of humanity of all, we can
hope that the much feared humanitarian catastrophe
will not occur.

Following the representatives of the United
Nations agencies, I would like to refer to some of the
problems discussed.

With respect to insecurity, in particular insecurity
on Iraqi roadways, I fear that this may seriously affect
food distribution and sanitation services in certain
regions, especially in rural areas. In that connection,
my delegation would like to have further details on the
organization of the distribution of food, medicine and
vaccinations in outlying areas. We would also like to
know about the nature of the relationship United
Nations agencies and humanitarian organizations have
with tribal leaders in order to best achieve this
objective.

With respect to education, we are concerned to
note that the school year may have been lost in some
regions. Would it not be possible, while conditions are
being established to allow for the gradual return to
school of children, including young girls, to extend the
school year by six to eight weeks? Clearly, the return
of children to school will depend upon security, as well
as on transport conditions, which in turn will depend
upon the provision of fuel.

Before this meeting, the Red Cross had
repeatedly referred to, inter alia, the catastrophic
situation of the hospitals, which had been vandalized
and which lacked water and electricity. We had also
noted the serious management problems, such as the
lack of leadership in those hospitals, which had
resulted in poor strategic planning, coordination and
stock management. Could the World Health
Organization provide us with more information on that
issue?

We have often said that humanitarian, economic
and political issues are closely linked. That is
especially true in Iraq. Clearly, the close involvement
of the Iraqi people in the provision of humanitarian
assistance to their country will be the key to the
success of that operation. Such involvement should
occur in the distribution and, above all, the provision of
goods and services. In that regard, it is essential to
speed up the process of ensuring that services are
provided by Iraqis. That should assist the economic
recovery and reduce humanitarian dependence.

In that regard, my delegation believes that the
rapid implementation of micro-credit mechanisms
could enable women in particular to start up small,
simple projects. The men and women of Iraq are well
known for their outstanding personal qualities, and we
hope that the United Nations agencies and
humanitarian organizations will help them to regain
confidence and to take charge of their own lives.
Buying Iraqi products and employing Iraqi people will
make that possible.

We have just adopted a new resolution on Iraq
that extends for a six-month period the oil-for-food
programme, for which the four agencies represented
here are the primary partners in the field. We would
like to know if those agencies believe that in the
coming six months they will be able to carry out the
contracts for which they are responsible. How do they
see the follow-up? How, for example, does the United
Nations Development Programme intend to pursue the
project to dredging the port of Um Qasr over the next
six months?

The era of Saddam is over. We are all anxious to
see how - once basic survival requirements have been
met - the Iraqis will take charge of their lives and
rebuild their country. Earlier today, after the adoption
of resolution 1483 (2003), we said that the
international community would be by their side, to
support them, not to replace them. We also said that
this will require all the external actors - the coalition,
the United Nations, Member States and non-
governmental organizations - to coordinate their
activities, work together and develop cooperative
relations, while avoiding inevitably counterproductive
competition.

