The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia,
Rwanda and Serbia and Montenegro, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion, Without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kusljugie
(Bosnia and Herzegovina), Mr. Drobnjak
(Croatia), Mr. Gahima (Rwanda) and Mr. Sahovic'
(Serbia and Montenegro) took the seats reserved
for them at the Side ofthe Council Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior consultations
and in the absence of objection, I shall take it that the
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of
its provisional rules of procedure to Judge Theodor
Meron, President of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations
of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Judge Meron
took a seat at the Council table.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Council agrees to extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Judge Erik Mese, President of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious Violations
of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens
Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations
Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States
between 1 January and 31 December 1994.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Judge Mase
took a seat at the Council table.


The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior consultations
and in the absence of objection, I shall take it that the
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of
its provisional rules of procedure to Ms. Carla Del Ponte,
Prosecutor of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations
of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991.

There being no objection it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Ms. Del Ponte
took a seat at the Council table.


The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Council agrees to extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Hassan Bubacar Jallow, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan
Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such
Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring
States between 1 January and 31 December 1994.

There being no objection it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Jallow took
a seat at the Council table.


The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2003/829, which contains a note by the
Secretary-General dated 20 August 2003, transmitting
the tenth annual report of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
since 1991.

Members of the Council also have before them a
letter dated 3 October 2003 from the Secretary-
General, and its enclosures, which will be issued as
document S/2003/946.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by the President and Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), as well as the President and
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR). As there is no list of speakers for the
Council members, I invite those who wish to ask
questions to so indicate to the Secretariat as from now.

I now give the floor to Judge Meron, President of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia.


