Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, I wish to thank the Secretary-General

for his report (S/2006/707) and the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Rilcker - whom I congratulate on his assumption
of that important post - for his briefing. We also
welcome Ms. Raskovic-Ivic, President of the
Coordination Centre of the Republic of Serbia for
Kosovo and Metohija, and thank her for addressing our
meeting.

We have noted that during the past few months,
as a result of the joint efforts of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and Kosovo's Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government, standards implementation has made
significant progress in a number of priority areas.
However, that progress is not sufficiently
comprehensive; challenges remain, particularly in areas
such as security, refugee returns, culture and ethnic
integration. The majority ethnic group in Kosovo bears
a major responsibility for creating a stable social
environment conducive to the harmonious coexistence
of ethnic groups. Other parties should also actively
cooperate in that effort.

Many aspects of standards implementation have a
bearing on the future status process for Kosovo. We
hope that, with UNMIK's help, Kosovo's Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government and their leaders can
overcome these difficulties and implement the
standards in a comprehensive and effective manner.

Since the launching of the future status process
for Kosovo at the end of last year, the Serbian
Government and Kosovo authorities, with the good
offices and coordination provided by the Secretary-
General's Special Envoy, Mr. Ahtisaari, have held
many rounds of direct talks. The first high-level
meeting was held in July this year. That kind of
dialogue has enabled the two parties to fully
understand each other's positions and to achieve some
common understanding; thus it is essential in order to
maintain the momentum of cooperation and the search
for a sustainable solution. China welcomes the
continuation of this dialogue and supports efforts to
reach a settlement acceptable to both parties through
peaceful negotiations.

The Kosovo issue concerns the stability and
prosperity of the Balkans and the surrounding areas. In
order to resolve that issue, it is necessary to hear the
views of all the parties. Respect for sovereignty and
territorial integrity is an important principle of
international law. China has always respected the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of countries in the
Balkans.

We have always believed that, in order to find an
appropriate and comprehensive solution to the Kosovo
issue, we must effectively implement the provisions of
the relevant Security Council resolutions, encourage
both parties and help them to reach a compromise
through consultations and negotiations. We hope that
the parties will continue to move the political process
forward with a view to resolving the Kosovo issue in a
spirit of sincerity and pragmatism.

