Mrs. Gallardo Hernandez (El Salvador) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation welcomes your initiative,
Sir, to convene this open debate of the Security
Council on post-conflict peacebuilding, in particular
during this year, 2010, when we will review the
progress made by and challenges facing the
Peacebuilding Commission five years after its creation.
We also thank the Secretary-General for his ongoing
support for peacebuilding efforts through the
Peacebuilding Support Office and his leadership at the
head of the Peacebuilding Fund.

El Salvador reaffirms its commitment to the
objectives and goals of the Peacebuilding Commission,
given the Commission's significant contribution in
support of the efforts of countries emerging from
conflicts, in particular those now on the Commission's
agenda.
It is also worth noting the importance of the
valuable lessons learned that we have been able to
identify collectively within the framework of the
Commission's Working Group on Lessons Learned,
which El Salvador was honoured to chair for three
years. These lessons must serve us in all peacebuilding
processes being carried out in countries on the agenda
of the Commission, as well as in others.

We are aware that each conflict has its own
specificities. The Commission must therefore make an
even greater effort to promote a comprehensive
approach that devotes special attention to these
particular characteristics and also takes into account
the priorities agreed upon by domestic actors and
national ownership. In this regard, my delegation
wishes to reiterate the need to continue to involve all
relevant bodies of the United Nations system in the
work of the Peacebuilding Commission, including the
Economic and Social Council and its subsidiary bodies,
in particular the agencies, funds and programmes that,
let us not forget, are carrying out operational activities
for development in the field.

The country-specific configurations continue to
play a special role in the activities of the Commission.
In this regard, the effectiveness of their work is
essential if we wish to achieve the goals and objectives
that the Peacebuilding Commission has set for itself.
We also recall the importance of strengthening
coordination and cooperation among the various
national and international actors in the field and here at
Headquarters, in order to ensure that the synergies that
emerge between the two can make an effective
contribution to Governments' national peacebuilding
efforts and do not become an obstacle to the process.

Moreover, in the view of my delegation, the time
is ripe for us to give further thought to the nature,
scope and time frame in which the comprehensive
peacebuilding strategy is to be carried out. While this
tool was provided for in the founding resolutions of the
Commission, practice has demonstrated that we need to
show some flexibility during the design and
implementation phase so that it does not become an
obstacle to the peacebuilding process. Furthermore, it
is important for the Commission to seriously consider
those elements or conditions that must be observed in
the deployment of an exit strategy. The Commission's
work in a given country cannot last indefinitely. The
successful experience of El Salvador is proof of that.
The Security Council undoubtedly has an
important role to play in supporting the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission. Therefore, we believe it
appropriate to strengthen the channels of
communication and exchange of views between this
organ, the country-specific configurations and, in a
broader context, the Commission's Organizational
Committee.

In the view of El Salvador, the Security Council,
acting in coordination with the General Assembly, can

provide a genuinely strategic, more in-depth vision for
the Peacebuilding Commission. In addition, the
existing ties between peacekeeping and peacebuilding
operations can be strengthened. This relationship must
also be reflected in greater cooperation between the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Peacebuilding Support Office in order to maximalize
the vision, the follow-up and, of course, resources. We
also believe it important to strengthen synergies and
coherence between the strategies of the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Peacebuilding Fund, and to
redouble in turn the cooperative efforts between the
Commission and relevant regional bodies.

In conclusion, let me reiterate the conviction of
the Government of El Salvador that the new
peacebuilding architecture is a very valuable tool for
the international community to the extent that it will
enable us to meet the challenges facing countries
emerging from conflict. That will benefit peacekeeping
and security worldwide, as well as peoples that, like
ours, have undertaken efforts to build lasting peace.

