Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I thank Special Representative

of the Secretary-General Kubis for his update and
Ambassador Tanin for his statement.

I would like to comment on two aspects of the
situation in Afghanistan, that is, political developments
and the security situation.

On political developments, we are pleased to note
that preparations for the elections of 5 April remain on
track and that vigorous political activity can be observed
across the country, including large-scale rallies. The
recent pronouncement by President Karzai that the
Government would not interfere in the April elections
is commendable. That commitment by the Government
is particularly significant as the elections will mark the
first time since 2001 that there is a democratic transfer
of power from one president to another. We also applaud
the use of televised debates in the campaign, as it will
allow candidates to get their message across to a broad
spectrum of the Afghan public.

We are deeply concerned by reports of threats
against campaign workers and election officials. We are
also concerned by the reported assassination attempts
and killings linked to the elections. We are, however,
encouraged to note that politically motivated violence
has so far not constituted a strategic threat to the
elections.

The risk assessment of the 7,168 polling units
conducted by the Government, which certifies that
Afghan security forces could secure 94 per cent of the
units, is also encouraging. We strongly urge all the
citizens of Afghanistan to shun violence in the run-up
to the elections.

With regard to security, we note that, although the
situation remains volatile, Afghan security forces have
proven capable of defending territory from attacks by
anti-Government elements. We regret that this is at
the cost of significant casualties. We also note with
concern that the reporting period saw an unprecedented
number of suicide attacks, killings and other criminal
acts that had a negative impact on both the people
of Afghanistan and the ability of the United Nations
to undertake mandated tasks and activities. In that
regard, we strongly condemn the coordinated attack of
17 January on a Kabul restaurant in which a number of
civilians, including four United Nations officials, lost
their lives. An attack on United Nations officials is an
attack on the international community.

We welcome the cooperation between the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
and the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF)
in developing a strategy for the disposal of explosive
remnants of war from military bases, firing and
demolition ranges and other sites across the country.
In 2013, 5 per cent of civilian deaths in conflict in
Afghanistan resulted from explosive remnants of war.
We therefore see their disposal as vital to reducing the
number of civilian deaths in the conflict.

As ISAF prepares to leave Afghanistan at the end
of 2014, we encourage the Afghan Government to
continue to engage with all regional and international
partners in order to ensure that a security vacuum is
not created that could be exploited by anti-Government
elements.

We welcome the adoption of resolution 2145 (2014),
which will enable UNAMA and the Government of
Afghanistan to consolidate the gains made in the
country in recent times.

Finally, Nigeria is hopeful that in the near future we
shall see a stable, peaceful, prosperous and democratic
Afghanistan where the human rights of all its citizens
are promoted and protected.

