Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank all the briefers: Mr. Titov, Assistant
Secretary-General for Rule of Law and Security
Institutions; Ms. Nikamitsu, Assistant Secretary-
General and Assistant Administrator of the United
Nations Development Programme; and Ms. Bangura,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict. I also thank Nigeria for
convening today's meeting.

The previous debate by the Security Council on
security sector reform (SSR) (see S/PV.7161) made
it abundantly clear that that concept is important in
post-conflict situations, including its contribution to
establishing a modern State that is committed to the
rule of law, good governance and the avoidance of
relapse into conflict. Thanks to efforts made by Nigeria,
the Security Council adopted resolution 2151 (2014),
the first resolution devoted solely to SSR. As we meet
today to consider the implementation of the resolution,
we stress the importance of the Security Council's
consideration of SSR in a complementary manner and
in conjunction with debates regarding peacebuilding
processes.

We have already set out our position on SSR in
terms ofpeacebuilding and peacekeeping. We have also
emphasized that United Nations engagement should
always be based on certain basic principles, namely,
that host countries have the primary responsibility
for providing security; the need to respect national
ownership; and their sovereign right to determine their
own national priorities. It is important for national
authorities to be kept informed and to provide for
populations' needs and aspirations. However, we stress
the new challenges confronting SSR, especially given
the increasing complexity and the increase in the
number of peacekeeping mandates.

I wish to thank the delegation of Nigeria for its
useful concept note (S/2015/6l4, annex), which indicates
clearly some ofthe challenges we must consider in order
achieve our primary goal of creating sustainable and
efficient security structures that are accountable and
take into consideration the rule of law, international
human rights law and international standards.

The way for the Security Council to engage
genuinely with the issue of security sector reform in
post-conflict situations is by establishing transparent
cooperation among itself, the troop contributors to
peacekeeping operations, the Secretariat and host
countries, particularly during the consultations on
drafting and renewing the mandates of peacekeeping
operations and special political missions.

We cannot overlook the political nature of SSR,
especially in countries recovering from conflict. We
should recognize that it can be used as an integral
part of the wider political process and as an element in
mediation plans aimed at launching a national dialogue
and helping to achieve a political solution in many of
the cases on the Council's agenda. We therefore call
for concerted and integrated efforts on the part of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and
the Department of Political Affairs (DPA), so that
the DPKO can benefit from DPA's evaluations of the
political platforms and positions of all the parties in
each situation. We call for SSR to be included in the
plans and proposals of the Mediation Support Unit.
We hope that the heads and chiefs of United Nations
special political missions and the Special Envoys of the
Secretary-General will take note of and consider those
plans with the aim of achieving successful security
sector reform. We also believe that SSR units should be
supported so that they can provide advice and in order
to increase the levels of cooperation and coordination
with regional and subregional organizations.

The Council can be more effective in bringing
about security sector reform by drafting peacekeeping
mandates clearly and giving priority to SSR in the
peacekeeping operations that require that essential
element, thereby ensuring that host countries can
clearly interpret their mandates and that United
Nations entities are able to effectively implement the
SSR provisions. The Council will also be better able
to address non-traditional challenges by focusing
the counter-terrorism committees' work so that they
specifically target efforts to build new and more
modern States in countries emerging from conflict. It
should also ensure the establishment of an environment
conducive to ensuring the success of SSR by giving
particular attention to arms embargoes and exceptions
to them that can ensure support for national security
institutions.

The United Nations has a pivotal role to play in
supporting SSR in post-conflict situations and in States
undergoing political transition by focusing on host
countries' national requirements and by fulfilling their
needs. We should encourage support for the security
sector through such means as the provision of training,
financial and technical support and cooperation with
regional organizations.

