Mr. Sipaco Ribala (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, allow me to offer my
condolences to Tunisia on the death of its President and
to thank Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed,
not only for her excellent informative briefing but also
for the outstanding work that she has been doing and
her continued commitment to achieving international
peace and security.

I also thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacebuilding and Political
Affairs, for her informative briefing. I also thank
Ms. Jamila Afghani, President of the Afghan section
of the Women's International League for Peace and
Freedom, for her valuable contribution.

Last but not least, I commend the President of
the Security Council, Ambassador Gustavo Meza-
Cuadra, and the delegations of Germany and Indonesia
for convening this meeting. This briefing, as we
shall see, will enlighten us on various aspects related
to the woman and peace and security agenda, the
reconciliation process and the inclusive participation in
the upcoming elections in Afghanistan. Those issues
are ofvital importance to achieving lasting peace and a
truly inclusive political process.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea has
consistently accorded great attention to the political
and reconstruction process in Afghanistan, especially
now as work is under way on the upcoming presidential
elections, scheduled for September, and on sensitive
peace talks. We are confident that, despite the
difficulties that their country has experienced, the
Afghan people will maintain their resolve to elect their
political leaders, based on universal suffrage, and we
hope that the State institutions responsible for holding
elections, political parties and international partners
will ensure that the elections are credible and inclusive
and that their outcome is accepted by all Afghan parties
so as to ensure the success ofthe reconstruction process.

At such a critical time - as we have stressed in this
Chamber time and again - during the period leading
up to the presidential elections, women must play not
only a significant, but also a leading role. While we
acknowledge that significant progress has been made
in that regard, we encourage the Afghan Government to
continue to include women at all stages of negotiations
and decision-making in the peace and reconciliation
processes. It is clear that we must ensure that the rights
of women are always guaranteed at all levels of the
peace talks. In that regard, we echo and support the
message conveyed by the Deputy Secretary-General
that women must be at the centre of efforts to achieve
lasting peace and security in the country.

We listened attentively to the information provided
by the briefers, and we are certain that the various
meetings held with political and religious leaders, as
well as with various women's groups, during the visit by
the high-level United Nations delegation last weekend
will undoubtedly strengthen the Afghan peace process.

We must all promote the implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda and build peace
through the political and economic empowerment of
women. In that context, we echo the recommendations
of today's briefers, as well as those of those of
Informal Expert Group on Women, Peace and Security,
established pursuant to resolution 2242 (2015), at its
10 July meeting, namely, for the purpose of resolving
the conflict, to include support for the meaningful
participation of women in any peace talks with
members of the Taliban, as well as decision-making
bodies involved in the peace process, including
during informal and formal peace negotiations, while
calling on the Government and international partners
to dedicate the resources necessary to implement the
national action plan on women, peace and security,
demanding the protection of women human rights
defenders and calling on the Afghan Government to
sign the Arms Trade Treaty and to take meaningful
steps to stop the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons in the country.

Our delegation supports a policy aimed at ensuring
that the upcoming peace process in Afghanistan is
as inclusive as possible by incorporating all social
and political stakeholders in the country, including
the opposition. That is why we welcome the fact that
political leaders met with Taliban representatives
in Qatar. We hope that the parties will respect their
international obligations and protect civilians, among
others, as an outcome of the talks. In that regard, we
also believe that the peace process will be strengthened
not only by the support of the United Nations, but also
through partnerships with the international community
and, in particular, countries of the region.

In conclusion, we would like to stress our concern
about the ongoing attacks on civilians and the level of
sexual and gender-based violence that continue to occur
in Afghanistan. In that regard, we join delegations in
condemning yesterday's terrorist attack in the country.

