Mr. Allam-mi (spoke in French): At the outset,
allow me to welcome the recent report of the
Secretary-General introduced by Deputy Secretary-
General Eliasson (8/2013/677), to which the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) made
its contribution. I also thank you, Sir, and the other
members of the Council for having allowed me to
participate in this meeting on Central Africa.

ECCAS is also gratified to see that the situation
in the Central African Republic is now of concern to
the international community at the highest level, in
particular the Security Council. Indeed, while Central
Africa has been tending to the Central African Republic
for more than a decade and is desperately attempting to
find a lasting solution to the crisis, with the support
of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in the Central African Republic (BINUCA) and its
European friends, including France, it would seem that
the international community has suddenly grasped
the scope of the crisis following the toppling of the
Bozize regime by the Seleka coalition. The alert was
sounded at the high-level meeting held here in New
York on 25 September following the deterioration of the
humanitarian and security situation, which had become
disastrous.

Today, the Central African Republic is a failed
State run by a fragile transitional Government that
is powerless, given the daunting task of bringing
the country out of the crisis. Without a doubt, the
Government needs help in stabilizing the country, but
we must continue to demand that our expectations be
met regarding the protection of civilians and respect
for human rights. In that regard, it is also crucial to
bring the Central African political class to the table,
as well as the opinion-makers, so that they can bolster
the political consensus formed through the National
Charter for Transition, adopted by the National Council
for Transition, in the framework of implementing the
political agreement of Libreville of January 2013 and
the N'Djamena declaration oprril 2013. The Economic
Community of Central African States is pleased that the
transition authorities in the Central African Republic
have transformed that consensus into a transition road
map that lays out various actions to be undertaken, as
well as timetables for them.

I travelled to New York today to thank the Security
Council for its support for the Economic Community of
Central African States, which has untiringly addressed
the issue of the Central African Republic. I also request
that that support continue in the future. We hope to be
able to continue, alongside the African Union, to help
political actors and other stakeholders to reach some
kind of reconciliation and agree on a common path,
so that the Central African Republic can regain its
security, stability and democracy.

Bearing in mind the examples of the African
Union Mission in Somalia and, more recently, the
Regional Brigade of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, ECCAS believes its Mission for the
Consolidation of Peace in the Central African Republic
(MICOPAX), within the International Support Mission
in the Central African Republic (MISCA), will
effectively contribute to restoring peace in the country,
if its future mandate provides it with the necessary
prerogatives and bolsters its capacities in line with
the recommendations of the most recent joint United
Nations-African Union-ECCAS evaluation.
The generation of troops for ECCAS will provide
it with more than 4,000 troops in the theatre of
operations, including an aerial unit. I would like to
recall that the financing of MISCA - also known as
MICOPAX II - has been underwritten by ECCAS
since 1 August, when MISCA was established. The
situation in the Central African Republic is under the
control of MICOPAX II but continues to be of concern.
Total disaster has been averted, but the risks of the
situation deteriorating and sliding into chaos, general
civil war and ethnic and sectarian conflicts are real .

Free and transparent elections will not be enough to
extricate the Central African Republic from the crisis
that it has been undergoing for over a decade. We must
address the root causes of the conflict.

First, a legitimate and representative democracy
must be established in the Central African Republic
that serves the general interest of the Central African
people, rather than those of a clan or ethnic or religious
group. One of the causes of the ongoing conflict
stems from the seizure of power and resources of the
country by a group of Central Africans who came to
power through violence and/or elections. That led to an
uprising of marginalized people.

Secondly, they must establish genuine Government
defence and security forces that are professional,
balanced and representative, instead of clan-based
militias.

Thirdly, they must re-establish an ongoing
dialogue among the political actors, with the assistance
of the international community and in the framework
of a follow-up committee and on the basis of a shared
political agreement to save the Central African
Republic. The Central African political actors must
participate in the transition, and then later support
the elected authorities, instead of engaging in public
smear campaigns against one another or counting on
the international community to solve their problems in
their stead. The international community can only help
them, but it cannot act in their stead.

Fourthly, financial, economic and humanitarian
assistance must be mobilized immediately in order to
address the multiple security issues in the country and
tackle the poverty in which those people live. For let us
not forget that one of the root causes of the conflict in
the Central African Republic is the abject poverty of
marginalized people, who live extremely difficult lives,
thus being forced to take up arms and resort to Violence
in order to obtain their needs by attacking the affluent.
The emergency deployment of a multidimensional
mission is absolutely necessary in order to save the
Central African Republic and its people in distress.
MICOPAX II/MISCA needs to be strengthened. The
planned United Nations option should provide for
substantial support to MISCA, build its operational
capabilities and guarantee its financing. Allow me
to also reiterate the request of the Heads of State and
Government of ECCAS at their recent summit in
N'Djamena on 21 October for a robust mandate under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, so as
to enable MICOPAX, which is the core of MISCA, to
fully carry out its stabilization mission in the country
and create the best conditions possible for the civilian
component of MISCA, with the support ofa reinforced
BINUCA.

There is no longer time for useless criticism of
the stark reality affecting the Central Africans people,
nor for shedding crocodile tears regarding their
misfortunes. The time has come to act and to support
France, ECCAS and the African Union in their efforts
to help the people, help the transition in the country
to succeed and ensure the implementation of the road
map to overcome the crisis affecting the country. The
international community should provide MISCA/
MICOPAX with the necessary means to take action and
support the transition, while ensuring, of course, that
the process be productive and transparent, so that our
goals are achieved, namely, peace and security for the
Central African people, who are the innocent victims of
a hellish reality, lasting stabilization and the rebuilding
of their country, thereby strengthening security and
stability in the countries of the region.

In conclusion, let me reiterate ECCAS's willingness
to continue its legitimate efforts to achieve a lasting
and final solution or settlement of the Central African
crisis in the framework of a mechanism of effective
cooperation and coordination with the United Nations
and the African Union, without forgetting our
participation in the international contact group and our
mediation role taken up by the Congo.

