Mr. Hoxhaj: It is my pleasure to address the Council
today regarding the latest significant developments in
the Republic of Kosovo during the past three months.
Let me, at the outset, thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his continued efforts for peace, stability
and democracy in my country and in the region.
During the past few months, we have witnessed
incredible progress in Kosovo. The year 2012 has been
a historic one for our country and our citizens. Due to
limited time at this meeting, I will focus my comments
on key developments, including the end of international
supervised independence, the establishment of
contractual relations with the European Union (EU),
and the new phase of bilateral relations between the
Republic of Kosovo and the Republic of Serbia.

On 10 September, the International Steering
Group decided to end the supervised independence of
Kosovo and to end the mandate of the International
Civilian Office. That consensual decision by all
25 member States, including 20 European Union
member States as well as Turkey, Croatia, Norway,
Switzerland and the United States, closed the chapter
of Kosovo's supervision forever and we entered a new
phase as a fully sovereign nation. That decision came
after the Parliament of Kosovo approved constitutional
amendments on the 7 September that removed
references to the Status Settlement produced by the two-
year United Nations-led negotiation process from 2005
to 2007, mediated by the Secretary-General's Special
Envoy Martti Ahtisaari. That was a major milestone
for the Constitution of Kosovo as the fundamental
legal framework in the country. As highlighted in the
formal conclusion of the International Steering Group,
the decision by members of the Parliament of Kosovo
from all ethnic communities demonstrated that we were
a functioning multiethnic independent State - a core
value of our society.

This new phase of Kosovo's statehood emerged as
a result of the close partnership over the past four years
among our institutions and our international partners.
Throughout that period, we were able to provide

stability, build key State institutions and enhance
fundamental development as a modern and multiethnic
country.

Kosovo is a country made up of the diverse
communities who live there and have lived there
for generations. Today, we are proud that Kosovo
is maintaining its multiethnic character, as it has
throughout history, by protecting, promoting and
upholding the principles of multiethnicity and
secularism. The spirit that has governed the Ahtisaari
Plan will continue ahead.

We have ended an international mission with a
political mandate as a result of exercising the full
extent of our sovereignty. At the same time, we remain
committed to working closely with international
technical missions to further enhance the progress of
our country. The end of Kosovo's supervision proves
that our country is a success story. In less than five years,
with the closing of the international mission, Kosovo is
confirmed to be a unique achievement in the history
of State-building. The end of supervised independence
makes us aware of our increased responsibilities to
demonstrate our commitment and to address the needs
of our society. The most important supervisors of
independence remain the people of Kosovo. It is their
suffering, their patience and their support that has led
us to where we are today.

Kosovo is very committed to the rule of law as
a basic precondition for democratic governance and
economic development. We have made significant
progress in the past months in the fight against
corruption and organized crime. That was as a result
of good cooperation between Kosovo's institutions and
the European Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX).

As a sovereign State, Kosovo has invited EULEX
to support its justice system. In fact, the Parliament
of Kosovo ratified an agreement that extended the
mandate of EULEX for another two years, until 2014.
The agreement was reached through an exchange of
letters between the President of Kosovo, Ms. Atifete
J ahj aga, and EU High Representative Catherine Ashton.
That act is important for two reasons: first, it created
the domestic legal bases for the EULEX presence in
Kosovo and, secondly, it established a formal mutual
agreement between the European Union and Kosovo.

In terms of economic development, Kosovo has
maintained its macro financial stability in close
coordination with the International Monetary Fund.
In October, the Government decided to increase the
funding for pensions from 33 per cent to 40 per cent.
That development is occurring while many countries
are coping with financial challenges and are making
significant cuts in public sector salaries and pensions.

In the meantime, the World Bank's Doing Business
2013 has ranked Kosovo 28 places higher than in 2012,
marking the most successful progress of any country
of the Western Balkans. That progress is a result of
long-term reforms by the Government of the Republic
of Kosovo to improve the business environment. The
progress has been acknowledged by the World Bank
Director for South East Europe, who emphasized

"the fact that Kosovo managed to exit eurozone
crises with much better public finances and with a
higher rate of increase than neighbouring countries
is evidence of the strong management by the
Government of Kosovo".
On 16 November, the membership of the Republic
of Kosovo in the European Bank for Reconstruction
and Development (EBRD) was accepted by the Board
of Governors. That will allow Kosovo to obtain new
sources of development funding and will contribute
to the promotion of socioeconomic development,
particularly in important sectors such as energy.
Membership in the EBRD will help Kosovo address
the challenges of economic growth. Kosovo will be an
equal shareholder with the 65 other members of that
important financial institution.

Furthermore, over the reporting period, the
number of international recognitions of the Republic
of Kosovo, in geographical terms, continued to rise
and proved to be an unstoppable development. During
that period, the Republic of Kosovo was recognized by
Papua New Guinea, Burundi, Timor-Leste and Fiji. I
take this opportunity to thank those countries for their
decisions. We continue to establish full diplomatic
relations with Member countries of the United Nations.
To date, Kosovo has signed more than 100 international
agreements, both bilateral and multilateral.

This past October, the European Commission,
through a feasibility study, confirmed that Kosovo was
ready to start official negotiations on a stabilization
and association agreement. That will constitute the
first step towards membership in the European Union
(EU) and will bind the European Union and Kosovo
together. I would like to highlight two important
aspects of the feasibility study. First, it confirms that
the EU will establish contractual relations with Kosovo
and, secondly, it confirms that Kosovo has established
its international position.

The study emphasizes that Kosovo should
pay particular attention to the rule of law, public
administration, the protection of minorities and trade.
The European Commission also stated that the EU
and Kosovo could have a formal political dialogue
in order to discuss regional and international issues.
That demonstrates that Kosovo is a factor of peace and
stability, both regionally and internationally. It also
underscores the deep concern that Serbia continues to
fund and maintain its illegal structures, such as security
and police structures, which are a direct threat to peace
and security in the three northern municipalities of
Kosovo.

Let me reiterate that our Government and citizens
are very committed to peace, stability and security
within Kosovo and in the region. However, I need to
again draw to the Council's attention to the fact that the
situation in the three northern municipalities of Kosovo
remains tense and challenging, as confirmed by the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2012/818). In full
violation of resolution 1244 (1999) and international
norms, Serbia is leading, controlling and financing
illegal police and paramilitary units in that part of
Kosovo. That situation has to stop. Again, I call upon
Serbia to dismantle those illegal structures. They
represent a grave threat to stability, not only to Kosovo
but to the region. They are intended to hamper the
governance of our State, to destabilize Kosovo and to
create ethnic division in our communities.

A recent example of that problem is the ethnically
motivated incident at Kroi i Vitakut in the northern part
of Mitrovica, where the illegal Serbian structures are
opposing the return of Kosovo Albanians to their homes.
We condemn that provocation and are determined to
reconstruct the destroyed and burned houses. If that
situation continues, it will have a negative impact on
Kosovo's stability and development. Therefore, we
remain committed to resolving the situation in the
three northern municipalities. There is a need for an
integrated system of life in that part of Kosovo, in
accordance with the Martti Ahtisaari Plan.

Allow me to inform the Council about the official
commencement of a dialogue on the normalization
of relations between the Republic of Kosovo and the
Republic of Serbia. That process is facilitated by the
European Union and supported by the United States.
In that context, the beginning of dialogue was followed
by high-level visits to Pristina by the British Foreign
Secretary, Mr. Hague, the United States Secretary of
State, Mrs. Clinton, and the European Union High
Representative, Baroness Ashton.

Kosovo and Serbia have a long, difficult past. The
people of Kosovo have bitter memories due to decades
of oppression, apartheid, the war and then ethnic
cleansing. However, it is in our common interest to close
that dark chapter of history. As two independent nations
we are responsible for our future, and as neighbours we
are destined to share our fate.

The dialogue aims to solve problems between the
two independent and sovereign States in the interest
of normalizing relations, improving the lives of people
and advancing the European agenda for both States and
the region as a whole. The process has been endorsed by
the Parliament of Kosovo, which adopted a resolution
on the normalization of relations with Serbia. As stated
further by that resolution, the dialogue and its outcome
must be in compliance with Kosovo's sovereignty,
territorial integrity, international personality and
Constitution.

For us, the dialogue is a democratic value,
recognizing that neither threats nor violence can solve
problems. That process is also a criterion resulting from
the European agenda for both countries. In that context,
let me quote the EU enlargement strategy 2012-2013,
which says:

"[a] visible and sustainable improvement in
relations between Serbia and Kosovo is needed so
that both can continue on their respective paths
towards the EU, while avoiding that either can
block the other in these efforts.

"This process should gradually result in the
full normalization of relations between Serbia
and Kosovo with the prospect of both able to fully
exercise their rights and fulfil their responsibilities
within the EU."

Let me recall the promising outcome of that
process. On 19 October and 7 November, there were
two important meetings between the Prime Minister
of the Republic of Kosovo, Mr. Hashim Thaci, and
the Prime Minister of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Daeic'. Both
meetings were chaired by the European Union High
Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy,
Baroness Ashton.

Both countries have decided to start the
implementation of all agreements reached in Brussels
in the technical dialogue. The first and the most
important issue discussed in both meetings was the
implementation of the agreement on integrated border
management. We welcome the fact that the Serbian
Prime Minister has signed the respective protocol
on integrated border management, and we remain
confident that the implementation process from the
Serbian side will not be followed by further delays. That
agreement will establish a joint presence of Kosovar
and Serbian authorities at border crossings. For the first
time, that European model of border management will
significantly foster inter-State cooperation, starting
with four crossing points in full symmetry with each
other.

The second important topic is the establishment
of respective liaison offices in Belgrade and Pristina.
Those institutions will provide consular services to
their citizens and promote investment and economic
cooperation. At the same time, they establish an
intergovernmental communication channel, which has
always been lacking. The opening of such offices will
serve as a bridge to build mutual trust and enhance
bilateral cooperation.

The third issue is related to the need for transparent
funding by Serbia to the Serb community in Kosovo.
Due to the fact that Serbia has not been transparent in
its funding, we demand that Serbia change its approach.
That process is closely related to the full dismantling
of illegal and parallel structures in the northern
municipalities of Kosovo.

The fourth issue concerns measures to protect
Serb religious and cultural heritage in Kosovo. In that
respect, we are fully aware of the great joint success
seen in the past five years. The Kosovo Force has
already transferred the protection of most sites to
the Kosovo Police, and we expect the same for other
monuments. The Prime Minister of the Republic of
Kosovo has proposed a special unit within the Kosovo
Police, which would handle only the protection of
religious and cultural heritage.

In both meetings, other issues were also discussed,
such as the fate of missing persons, Kosovo's
membership of various international organizations
and the proposal to establish a joint technical working
group to prepare a feasibility study for the Pristina-
Nis motorway, which would be a significant bilateral
project between both countries.

Let me conclude by saying that any success in
Kosovo and in Serbia will not be found in handshakes
and headlines. It will be found in the committed
implementation of all agreements that can lead to
tangible results on the ground. We expect Serbia to
refrain from any kind of rhetoric or action regarding
the international campaign against the recognition of
Kosovo or its membership of different international
organizations. Any violation of that basic expectation
would harm mutual trust and would be against the spirit
of dialogue.

Kosovo is dedicated to building a future in peace
and harmony with our neighbour, and we will remain
a partner in that historic process. Therefore, we firmly
believe that future normalization of relations with
Serbia is our destiny and that it contributes to our mutual
and regional best interests. We strongly believe that the
normalization of relations at the political level should
serve as a foundation for the future reconciliation of
our two societies.

