The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the Republic of Korea.

It is a great pleasure for me to welcome Baroness
Ashton to the Security Council.

The Republic of Korea highly appreciates the
positive contributions that the European Union
(EU) has made to the work of the Security Council,
with its expertise in the areas of conflict prevention,
crisis management, peacekeeping and peacebuilding,
and respect for human rights. Given the scope of the
challenges we face today, such effective cooperation
between the two Organizations is of utmost importance
in managing crises across the world.

In that regard, we welcome the active role played
by the European Union in maintaining international
peace and security in its region and beyond, from the
Balkans and the Caucasus to the Middle East, North
Africa and Asia. Above all, we applaud the EU's
increased role in promoting political dialogue and
peaceful reconciliation.

Particularly worthy of note is the ongoing
EU-facilitated dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade.
We welcome that the presidents of Kosovo and Serbia
have held their first meeting, mediated by Baroness
Ashton. We believe that that first highest-level meeting
is itself a meaningful step towards the normalization of
bilateral relations, and we encourage the EU to continue
its efforts in that regard.

The EU has also made great efforts towards
resolving issues relating to the proliferation of sensitive
nuclear activities on the part of the Islamic Republic
of Iran. Those efforts have included the EU sanctions
regime and the dialogue with Iran within the framework
of E3+3 Governments negotiations. We hope that the
EU's efforts will bear fruit in the near future.

The Republic of Korea appreciates the firm position
that the European Union has consistently demonstrated
regarding North Korea's nuclear programme. North
Korea's recent third nuclear test - the two previous
tests were in 2006 and 2009 - constitutes a clear
and blatant violation of relevant Security Council
resolutions and other international norms. We are quite
confident that the Security Council, along with the
international community, remains united in resolutely
reacting and taking firm measures. Sharing a strong
sense of solidarity in that regard, we look forward to
the EU's continuing role in presenting the position of
the international community towards the North Korean
nuclear weapons development programme.

The Israeli-Palestinian issue is another important
agenda item. The Israeli general election will soon
result in the formation of a new Government. Fatah and
Hamas are once again moving towards reconciliation.
At this juncture, my delegation is of the view that now
is the right time for the parties to reinvigorate the peace
process by taking a new initiative.

As Baroness Ashton highlighted, the deadly
clashes in the Syrian Arab Republic demand our
constant attention. In Syria the death toll is still rising,
and the number of people in need of external assistance
is increasing every minute. Although recently the
possibility of negotiations has been cautiously
suggested by actors in Syria, the positions of each
side still seem far apart. Both the United Nations and
the EU have critical stakes in resolving the crisis in
Syria and in preventing the situation from spreading
into a regional conflict. Despite internal disagreement,
the Security Council will continue its sincere efforts
to forge common ground with a view to making an
appropriate response.

Another situation of special interest to the Republic
of Korea is that of Mali. We value the contribution of the
EU in addressing the crisis in Mali in close cooperation
with the United Nations and other regional partners. In
that regard, we welcome that the EU, together with the
United Nations, the African Union and the Economic
Community of West African States, convened a
ministerial meeting of the Support and Follow-up Group
on the Situation of Mali on 5 February in Brussels. The
EU's financial support for the rapid deployment of the
African-led International Support Mission in Mali and
the economic development of Mali demonstrates its
commitment to support the people of Mali on their path
back to freedom and development. We also commend
the EU's initiative to share its military expertise by
deploying a military training mission for the Malian
forces in the coming days.

We also appreciate the crucial role that the EU is
playing in maintaining and strengthening peace and
stability in Somalia in cooperation with the United
Nations.

Before concluding, the Republic of Korea would like
to applaud the EU's positive contribution in addressing
global threats and challenges and sincerely hopes that
it will further strengthen its close partnership with
the Security Council, thereby making a substantial
contribution to international peace and security.

I now resume my function as President of the
Council.

I now give the floor to Baroness Ashton to respond
to the comments.

