Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for allowing my delegation to share
its views with the Security Council. Let me start by
congratulating Venezuela on assuming the Security
Council presidency for the month of February, for the
proposed programme of work and for initiating this
important debate. I would like to also thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing this morning.

I must underscore that, while the theme of our
debate today is self-explanatory, respect for the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations is clearly an obligation to which everyone must
adhere bona fide. However, we note that political will
retains significant effect in terms of respect of those
principles and their interpretation. Seventy years
after the signing of the Charter of the United Nations,
collectively preventing threats to peace and developing
friendly relations among Member States based on
respect for the principle of the equal rights and self-
determination of peoples remain purposes and goals to
be sought by all.

Since the signing of the Charter, the United
Nations has made a substantial contribution to peace
and security, although many of us continue to expect
more. Numerous peoples have freed themselves from
the scourge of colonialism and have shared their
contributions to global peace and security. Recognition
of the United Nations and adherence to its purposes
and principles was very often - if not always - the
first act undertaken by liberated States in proclaiming
themselves Member States. Needless to say, the purposes
and principles of the Charter are still immensely valid.

Today, we encounter new difficulties in dealing
with threats to international peace and security. The
lack of solutions in prevailing cases of uncertainty,
such as the lingering decolonization cases or long-
term conflicts, such as in the Middle East, demand our
renewed and truly effective commitment. If we are to
recognize and respect the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations in the maintenance
of international peace and security, we must ensure
equity, transparency, accountability and effectiveness.
The relevance and legitimacy of the work and missions
of the United Nations are at stake. In that regard, we
believe that a reinvigorated General Assembly in a
more responsive environment, exerting its full role and
authority, would significantly contribute to improving
international governance in questions relating to
international peace and security.

It is evident that the Charter must be interpreted in
the light of its purposes and principles. In that context,
allow me to briefly highlight some aspects.

First, the Security Council is primarily responsible
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
Nevertheless, in accordance with Articles 11 and 99 of
the Charter, the General Assembly and the Secretary-
General each have a respective role in recommending
and bringing to the attention of the Council any matter
related to the maintenance of international peace and
security. That role is not always and not sufficiently
carried out, thus diminishing the effectiveness of the
United Nations.

Second, the founding fathers of the United Nations
were visionary in giving regional organizations - which
lacked importance and even existence in 1945 - a
specific role; under Chapters VI and VIII, they have
a crucial role in connection with the maintenance
of international peace and security. Therefore, the
partnership between the United Nations and regional

organizations, including the African Union, should be
articulated in full respect of those provisions, notably
when it comes to the need to support regional efforts in
matters of peace and security.

Third, the cornerstone of our strong attachment to
the United Nations is, and must always be, the peaceful
settlement of disputes, and therefore prevention. In
that context, the use of force should always be the last
recourse, when deemed necessary and after obviously
exerting all possibilities for a peaceful settlement. It
must receive United Nations approval, specifically
of the Security Council. The Council and the United
Nations must, in all cases, think, prepare and act for the
day after and the impact of any sanctions, or legal use
of force on the countries and regions affected. The cure
cannot be more harmful than the illness.

Fourth, specific and unexpected threats to
international peace and security, such as those involving
non-State actors and terrorism, should be addressed
according to the Charter. Moreover, we strongly believe
that in such cases the States affected, in particular
Member States in the vicinity of the areas affected,
should be associated accordingly in all decision-making
processes of the Security Council.

Fifth, we strongly believe that respect for human
rights and non-interference in internal affairs are
not incompatible. We cannot accept meddling in the
internal affairs of Member States. And we say very
clearly that we simply cannot stand still before mass
atrocities, regardless of where or by whom they are
committed.

Sixth, we need to look into the issue of United
Nations reform with renewed spirit and resolve. Respect
for the purposes and principles of the Charter today calls
today for an accelerated reform of the United Nations.
It means that, as we strongly advocate in the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries and beyond, we should first
reform the Security Council, both structurally and its
working methods - an issue which we have recently
debated here. The specific question of the so-called
veto power is a multifaceted one. But whatever angle
one looks at it from, even historically, it was in no way
meant to impede effective action.

Seventh, and finally, as has been the case with
other open debates on issues of this kind, and in order to
assist in related debates, we fully support the principle
of a summary to be produced by the presidency and
circulated as an official document of the United Nations.

We understand that the trail is arduous, but it is
necessary if we really want to preserve the relevance,
efficiency and, beyond that, the legitimacy and respect
that should always accompany the work, missions and
goals of the United Nations.

