Mr. Jacob (Israel): At the outset, allow me to
welcome you, Madam President, and to wish you much
success as you guide the deliberations of the Council
on this issue. I wish also to thank the Secretary-
General, the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and the Director-General of the
International Committee of the Red Cross for the
important statements they made this morning.

Israel is pleased to be taking part in today's
debate and welcomes the increased attention being paid
by the international community to the issue of
protecting civilians in situations of armed conflict.

Israel also welcomes efforts to increase the
effectiveness of the work of the United Nations in this
regard. In particular, we support the steps taken to
consolidate the work of various departments and
agencies, and to increase coordination and cooperation
among different sectors of the Organization whose
work relates to the protection of civilians. We are
encouraged by the fact that the Security Council has
taken an active role in seeking to reduce the intolerable
impact of armed conflict on innocent civilians.

The most recent report of the Secretary-General
on this topic represents yet another step forward. Israel
is pleased to see the report focus on the new challenges
posed by sexual exploitation, commercial exploitation
of resources, and the rise of terrorism. Establishing
guiding principles and accepted standards of behaviour
in all these areas will greatly enhance the protection
afforded to civilian populations.

The focus on sexual exploitation of women and
girls in situations of armed conflict arises out of an
increased awareness in recent years of the disparate
effects of conflict on men and women. As a country
that has taken great strides to mainstream gender in all
sectors of society, Israel believes that the increased
participation of women in decision-making at the
highest level will serve not only to promote our
common interest in advancing the status of women, but
also to mitigate some of the disproportionate effects of
armed conflict on women.

Similarly, the focus on commercial exploitation
comes from the recognition that the illegal exploitation
of natural resources serves to fuel conflicts that might
otherwise have petered out. This is a particularly
worrisome concern on the African continent. Israel has
joined with other nations participating in control
regimes intended to stem the illicit revenue generated
by the illegal export of natural resources.

Finally, the growing threat of terrorism poses
unique challenges to our efforts to protect civilians
from the ravages of conflict. Terrorism blurs the
fundamental and critical distinction that must be
maintained between civilian and combatant, an issue
which the Secretary-General's report covers in some
detail.

Terrorists seek to blur this distinction not only in
the objects they target - which are often crowded
public places, office buildings and modes of mass
transit - but also in their non-combat operations. In
choosing locations for training and organization,
terrorists routinely situate themselves in the midst of
civilian areas for the express purpose of defending
themselves against possible preventive action.
Restoring respect for the essential distinction between
combatants and civilians, as required by international
humanitarian law, is critical to our efforts both to fight
against international terrorism and to protect civilians
from its deadly effects.

Access of humanitarian workers and assistance in
areas of conflict is also of great importance. Israel
recognizes the need to provide such assistance as well
as the potential long-term benefits of a humanitarian
presence in areas of conflict. But the Secretary-
General's report also recognizes that humanitarian
workers and the access routes they use can be
employed in a manner that poses a threat to other
civilian populations. It is imperative that measures be
taken to ensure that humanitarian workers are
empowered to perform their functions but are also
protected from exploitation by any local actors whose
objectives and tactics are the very antithesis of those of
humanitarian personnel.

These considerations highlight the difficult
dilemmas facing States engaged in the global campaign
against terrorism. How are States to effectively fight
terrorist organizations that deliberately endanger both
the civilian populations they target and those behind
whom they shield themselves? How can States exercise
their legitimate right to take defensive measures
against terrorism without causing undue harm to the
civilian population? How can States secure a sufficient
supply of food, medicine and assistance while ensuring
that supply lines are not compromised by terrorist
elements?

There are no easy answers to these questions. All
States must endeavour to strike a proper balance
between their obligations to fight terrorism and protect
their citizens, and their responsibilities under
international humanitarian law. This process would be
greatly advanced if the international community took
care to ensure that it places primary responsibility for
the harm caused to civilians in such situations on the
shoulders of those who have deliberately obscured the
distinction between civilian and combatant. Failure to
hold accountable those armed groups that abuse the
protected status of civilians and thus endanger civilian
lives will only encourage terrorist groups to increase
their reliance on this reprehensible tactic.

Our goal must be to explore ways to isolate
terrorists from the civilian populations they endanger.
This is a task fraught with difficulties - difficulties
which are compounded by the tireless efforts of
terrorists to make our task as hard as possible. This is
especially so in relation to the horrific phenomenon of
suicide terrorists, who have shown utter disregard for
any civilian life and who pose a unique challenge to the
mechanisms of prevention and deterrence available
under international humanitarian law. This does not,
however, relieve us of the obligation to continue to
improve our counter-terrorism techniques and
strategies so as to avoid putting civilian lives at risk.

