Mr. Yeremenko (Ukraine): My delegation would
like to express sincere gratitude to Jordan for organizing
this high-level debate on the role of youth in countering
violent extremism and promoting peace.

Extremism and terrorism nowadays pose a serious
threat to peace, security and stability in the world. We
fully agree that there is a need to intensify our common
work to address this issue and place youth at the centre
of the global agenda to counter Violent extremism.
Radicalization among youth should be prevented and
stopped, yet the achievement ofthis goal will be possible
only through concrete strategies aimed at consolidating
all existing efforts and strengthening close cooperation
among all stakeholders.

The United Nations, in particular the Security
Council, as well as other United Nations bodies and
entities, including the Office of the Secretary-General's
Envoy on Youth, have to play a key role in preventing
violent extremism. Of high importance in this regard
is ensuring the effective implementation of resolutions
1624 (2005) and 2178 (2014).

Unfortunately, young people constitute one of the
strata most vulnerable to factors leading to radicalism
and extremism. There are many such factors, yet one
of the most important, especially vis-a-vis youth, is
propaganda. Violent extremist groups actively exploit
this tool through media and social networks. In our
opinion, the most dangerous situation emerges when
manipulative propaganda is elevated to the rank of
State priorities.

For more than a year, Ukraine has suffered from
the aggression of its big neighbour, the Russian
Federation. Russia has temporarily occupied and
made an attempt to annex a part of the territory of
Ukraine - the Autonomous Republic of Crimea - and
continues hostile and subversive actions against our
country in the Donbas. Still, the military component
of the aggression is far from the most dangerous one.
Fierce, deceitful propaganda disseminated by the
State-controlled Russian media and through numerous
other means is one of the key elements of the ongoing
aggression against Ukraine.

The international community has to be alarmed
by the fact that this Soviet-style propaganda machine
works very well, first and foremost on youth. There are
reported cases of teeagers participating in the activity
of the pro-Russian terrorist gangs in certain areas of
eastern Ukraine. Some are 15-years old and even
younger. There is also credible information that the
Russian-coordinated and sponsored terrorist groups are
trying to force students into their ranks using different
means of influence. Moreover, there is testimony that
such means as promising to annul criminal records or
to repay loans are practiced in the Russian campaign to
recruit mercenaries into the terrorist gangs operating in
the Donbas. Young people are common Victims of this
recruiting campaign.

Apart from comprehensive efforts to eliminate the
social, economic, cultural, religious and other grounds
for the spread of Violent extremism among youth,
the United Nations has to take the fight against the
propaganda of intolerance and hatred to a new level.
To reach this goal, we might need to explore ways of
establishing an international mechanism to reveal
such facts in real time, condemn them, and above all
identify the means of discouraging those spreading
such propaganda. As a country experiencing first-hand
the grave consequences of such vicious propaganda
coming from its neighbour, Ukraine is ready to actively
contribute to taking this initiative forward.
