Judge Meron: I shall try to be brief, and it is
indeed my intention to group questions together. Let
me start briefly by expressing my gratitude to the
members of the Council for their interest in the subject
that is so important to all of us - international justice
in the former Yugoslavia. I find your questions
important and will try to answer them briefly and as
well as I can.

The first question I will address was asked by the
Ambassador of Germany regarding the prospect for
transfer or devolution of cases - going beyond the
Sarajevo Chamber, which we discussed yesterday and
today - in other words, to Belgrade and Zagreb.

Let me start by saying that I, and I believe very
many of my colleagues who are judges, believe that
war crimes trials have the greatest resonance when they
take place close to the area where crimes have been
committed, close to the places of residence of the
victims. That is certainly something all of us would
like to encourage. But, as the Ambassador of Germany
pointed out, there are conditions for this devolution or
transfer. Basically, we must be satisfied that the courts
in a particular area or State conform fully to
international due process and human rights. We will
not cooperate with the transfer of cases to jurisdictions
which might be tainted by ethnic, religious or national
bias. But I believe that we are moving forward on all of
those requirements in the States concerned.

Let me now say specifically a few words about
Belgrade. As I have already pointed out, I myself
visited the venue of the new Special Chamber in
Belgrade. I believe that Chamber will have quite a few
candidates for trials who are in the territory of Serbia. I
do not believe that they will lack work; they are
already beginning.

I believe the Prosecutor has given us today some
extremely useful information on page 2 of her
statement, where she speaks of the cases of 62 suspects
whom the ICTY does not intend to indict and who
presumably would never be transferred to The Hague.
Those cases are intended for investigation and
prosecution in the various States of the former
Yugoslavia. As you see, she gives us facts and figures
on those transfers that I find very useful.

As far as I know, Zagreb does not have a special
chamber, but in Croatia there has been quite significant
development of a law on war crimes. The absence of a
special chamber should not lead us to conclude that
devolution or transfer would not be possible in
appropriate circumstances.

One thing which must be made clear, as the
Prosecutor has, I believe, correctly pointed out, is that
people who are covered by the existing indictments
that she and I referred to are the senior cases. Those are
cases of such seniority that they would not be
appropriate for transfer to local jurisdictions. Those
cases would create too many pressures on the local
social and political environment. However, having said
that, I would like to reassure the Council that we are
keeping this question under constant review.

As the situation in the former Yugoslavia
becomes more normalized, we will be - and I am sure
the Prosecutor will agree with what I am saying -
reviewing our figures and data and perhaps identifying,
in due course, additional candidates for transfer.

The representative of Russia asked a related
question about our work in encouraging further
development of judicial systems in the area in order to
allow for additional transfers. I would like to assure
him that we are working on that very seriously and
consistently.
The ICTY is only one of the international
institutions involved in legal assistance to the countries
of the area. For example, when Serbia and Montenegro
recently adopted its war crimes code, it was aided very
significantly by the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and by the
International Bar Association. We in the Tribunal have
been sending regularly to States in the area our
comments about how to improve their proposed drafts,
and we will continue to do so.

The delegate of France asked whether we have
established specific mechanisms to follow
implementation of the completion strategy on a regular
basis. I would like to assure him that we are very much
aware of the need to go that way, and indeed we have
already established a number of committees whose
principle obligation is to deal with this question. Those
committees include bodies charged with the short-term
and long-term planning of cases and also long-term
forecasts of how quickly, and with what difficulties, we
will move forward in implementing our policy of
completion strategy.

Moreover, bodies that we already have, such as
the Rules Committee and the Coordination
Committee - which, as you know, brings together the
President, the Registrar and the Prosecutor * deal with
these questions on a daily basis. There is practically no
day when I do not meet with my staff to look at the
results of those Committees and try to resolve
immediate problems that have arisen. I regard this as
my personal responsibility and not only the
responsibility of the institution. We will continue
working very hard on this.

The United Kingdom delegate asked me to clarify
a statement I made regarding a certain matter between
the Council and the Prosecutor. He referred specifically
to the Council's expectation in its resolution 1503
(2003) that the Prosecutor would complete all
investigations by the end of 2004 by concentrating on
the prosecution and trial of the most senior leaders
suspected. That is a directive that the Council gave to
the Tribunal and, more specifically in this case, to the
Prosecutor.

Those directions are the Council's directives;
hence it is the responsibility of the Council and of the
Prosecutor to interpret them in good faith. The
interpretation of these directives is not, according to
resolution 1503 (2003), an appropriate judicial function.
That is why I said that this is a matter between the
Prosecutor and the Security Council.
But let me add one word here. It is entirely
appropriate for the Security Council to define such
broad goals and directives. I must say that it would not
be appropriate for the Council to go into great detail in
such directives, because such directives should not
encroach upon on the prosecutorial independence of
the Prosecutor. In other words, broad guidelines, yes;
specific guidelines that encroach on her prosecutorial
independence, no.

Having finished with the specific questions, there
is only one concluding point I would like to make, and
I apologize if I have forgotten some questions. Several
representatives, and especially the representatives of
Cameroon and, in a way, of Guinea, asked questions
that have a bearing upon our strategy for eventually
concluding our work. The only thing I would like to
say about that today is that we have started to study
various structural factors that will be required - and
about which we will one day brief the Security
Council - in order, one day, to change the shape of the
Tribunal by, for example, finishing our trials and
perhaps establishing another appeals chamber, as there
will be an accumulation of appeals. Those are the sorts
of long-term issues that I feel it is our responsibility as
judges to start thinking about and, eventually, share our
ideas and material with the Council.

