Mr. Belinga-Eboutou (Cameroon) (spoke in French): My delegation is pleased to see you,
Mr. President, presiding over this public meeting of the
Security Council on the situation in Ethiopia and
Eritrea. Norway's contribution to conducting the
Security Council's recent mission in those countries
and to its success is incalculable. Well-deserved tribute
should be paid to Ambassador Kolby for his great
human qualities and for the tact, skill, flexibility,
adroitness and spirit of circumspection with which he
conducted the mission. Above all, tribute should be
paid to him for his great ability to listen. Likewise, I
wish to extend my congratulations to his entire team
and to all the members of the Secretariat who
participated in the mission and devoted themselves to
its success.

The report that has just been presented to us by
Ambassador Kolby, the observations and
recommendations of which we support, illustrates the
value and importance of the meetings held by the
delegation. Above all, it underscores the importance
and potential of this Security Council mission in
Ethiopia and Eritrea.

The mission took place a few weeks prior to the
publication of the decision of the Boundary
Commission, which is expected at the end of this
month. The importance of that decision has become
evident, but what is even more important for the future
of the two countries is for them to accept and in good
faith implement the Commission's decision. They
committed themselves to doing so in the Algiers Peace
Agreement, and their highest authorities reaffirmed this
on the occasion of the mission's visit.

The international community expects the two
countries to take, in a concerted manner, every
necessary step to make it possible for the demarcation
operations to be conducted rapidly. The international
community expects them to refrain from any unilateral
action that could re-ignite tensions. We encourage the
two countries to elaborate confidence-building
measures and fully to implement the provisions of the
Algiers Agreement, in particular as regards the
immediate release of prisoners of war and of all
persons detained as a result of the conflict.

My delegation is gratified by the calm that has
prevailed since the signing by the two countries on 18
June 2000 of the Agreement on Cessation of Hostilities
and subsequently of the Algiers Peace Agreement. In
this respect, we want to commend their leaders for
having displayed restraint and for having opted for a
peaceful settlement of their border dispute.

The role of the United Nations Mission in
Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE) in stabilizing the
situation and in creating conditions conducive to the
strengthening of the peace process has been, and
remains, vital. In this respect, we wish warmly to
congratulate the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ambassador Legwaila Joseph
Legwaila, and all of the staff of UNMEE for their
constructive and well-balanced approach to the task of
fulfilling the mission's mandate and for their resolute
commitment to working with the civilian population,
which is the victim of the conflict.

Local United Nations agencies and non-
governmental organizations are also doing outstanding
work in this context - work that deserves our full
encouragement and that inspires respect. It is
undeniable that UNMEE's fundamental role can only
increase following the decision of the Boundary
Commission, and therefore it seems vital that it be
maintained as a guarantee of positive developments in
future. That is why Cameroon strongly supports the
renewal of UNMEE's mandate for a further six-month
period. Naturally, that mandate should be adapted as
necessary, so that UNMEE can provide the support
expected of it for the demarcation process.

The role of the guarantors of the peace process, of
the facilitators, of the friends of Ethiopia and Eritrea,
and of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) is a
crucial one. It is important that those entities, together
with the parties, engage in an intensive dialogue,
encouraging them to cooperate in good faith with
UNMEE with a View to the implementation of the
decision of the Boundary Commission, the full
implementation of the Algiers Agreement, the
development of confidence-building measures, and the
normalization of relations between the two countries
and the two parties.

The international community, and in particular
the donor community, must rally now more than ever to
strengthen the peace process. Consistent support for
demarcation activities, for mine clearance, for the
reintegration of displaced persons and refugees, and for
the reconstruction and the economic and social
recovery of the two countries is more necessary than
ever.

This kind of support will, in any event, make it
possible to make major progress in establishing a
lasting peace in the region. The publication of the
decision by the Boundary Commission at the end of
March will represent a decisive stage in the history of
relations between Ethiopia and Eritrea. Cameroon
appeals urgently to the leaders and the peoples of those
two fraternal countries to write a new chapter in the
history of their relations. It is worth recalling that those
relations must be relations of peace, of harmony, of
fraternity and of shared prosperity - which they never
should have ceased to be. Peace between Ethiopia and
Eritrea is necessary. This is a historical and
geographical imperative. Peace between Ethiopia and
Eritrea is possible, and the recent meeting between the
religious leaders of the two countries bears witness to
this.

May the seeds that have now been sown
germinate and bear fruit. Today more than ever the
Ethiopians and the Eritreans, having learned well from
the past, have the option of building the future with
optimism. In this regard, and bearing in mind the
profession of faith and hope of Antonio Machado, who
said that the future is no more fixed than is the past, let
me say that it is true: the future is not yet written. The
building of a future of peace between Ethiopia and
Eritrea cannot be the result of chance. Peace can come
to that region of Africa only if all Ethiopians and all
Eritreans agree to make peace and non-Violence their
primary ethical values - their motto for life. Peace can
come about only if the Ethiopians and the Eritreans act
together to transform the current situation, which is
dominated by discord and violence, into a culture of
peace, of solidarity and of development.

