Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
December and by assuring you of my delegation's full
cooperation in the discharge of your demanding duties.
We are fully confident that given your wisdom and well-
known leadership qualities, we can be assured of

 

substantial progress. I should like also to congratulate your
predecessor, His Excellency Ambassador Al-Khussaiby of
Oman, for his skilful stewardship during the month of
November.
The Indonesian delegation would like to express its
deep appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive and insightful report (S/1995/1002)
concerning the current situation in Rwanda. We are
encouraged by the report that some definite progress has
been registered regarding political and socio-economic
developments and that, as a result, a climate of relative
security has continued to prevail in Rwanda. This progress
is reflected by the recent re-establishment of the national
judicial system through, inter alia, the appointment of the
Supreme Court and the establishment of "triage
committees" by the Government of Rwanda. In this context,
we applaud the Government of Rwanda's efforts in
fostering peace and security, especially in its determined
efforts to reconstruct and rehabilitate the country. We are
confident that the Government of Rwanda and the
international community will continue their commitments to
maintain and build upon the important progress already
achieved.

While we fully recognize the important progress that
has been made, we are nevertheless very concerned by the
continuing atmosphere of tension and instability prevailing
throughout the region. This is due in particular to persistent
acts of insurgency, infiltration and sabotage perpetrated by
the former Rwandese Government Forces in refugee camps
along the Zaire-Rwanda border. It cannot be denied that the
problems now confronting Rwanda are of a very complex
nature and thus require an integrated approach that takes
into account the many underlying aspects and
considerations.

In my delegation's view, a stable and lasting peace
will continue to be elusive until protracted problems such
as refugee repatriation and national reconciliation are
adequately addressed. In this regard, we support the suitable
approach set forth in the draft resolution, which includes a
modified role for the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Rwanda (UNAMIR). In particular, we can foresee the
possibility of transferring non-lethal equipment to the
Government of Rwanda, as expressed in paragraph 7 of the
draft resolution, as it assumes greater responsibility in
refugee repatriation and national reconciliation. My
delegation is confident that through continued cooperation
between the Government of Rwanda and UNAMIR, the
difficult tasks that still lie ahead will prove to be less
cumbersome. We believe that this close cooperation will

 

more than adequately compensate for the concerns
associated with the reduction in the number of UNAMIR
personnel, as mandated in the draft resolution.

Additionally, these endeavours can be bolstered by
the rehabilitation and reconstruction of Rwanda, which
constitute the key elements for a lasting peace.

We therefore call upon United Nations agencies and
non-governmental organizations to continue to lend their
valuable assistance to the Government of Rwanda.

Having said this, and upon careful reflection and
deliberation, my delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution before us today. The draft, in our opinion,
provides for good offices and logistical support for the
voluntary and safe repatriation of Rwandan refugees, and
should contribute to the promotion of a climate of mutual
trust and confidence through the performance of
monitoring tasks. Moreover, we also endorse the call for
United Nations agencies and non-govemmental agencies
to continue their critical support in the essentially
important area of humanitarian assistance. Needless to
say, these objectives would be significantly promoted if
they were implemented within a secure and safe
environment, the maintenance of which is primarily up to
the Government of Rwanda, a sovereign nation.

In conclusion, we believe that this draft resolution
offers a renewed hope of fostering peace and prosperity
for Rwanda after years of deprivation and a tremendous
toll in human suffering. Furthermore, it should contribute
greatly to the prospects that one day the people of
Rwanda and throughout the Great Lakes region will be
able to advance their lives in a more productive and
peaceful environment, free from fear and the ravages of
war.

