Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Egypt
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2325
(2016). Allow me to express our sincere appreciation
to the Government and the delegation of Spain for their
leadership of the comprehensive review of resolution
1540 (2004). Today's resolution is a well-deserved result
following the efforts by the members of the Committee,
including Spain's membership and chairmanship. The
timing of the conclusion of this comprehensive review
coincides with increasing security challenges posed
by armed groups and terrorist groups, including their
proven use of chemical materials as weapons. We
cannot exclude the possibility that such groups could
obtain technologies to develop other weapons of mass
destruction (WMDs).

The situations in the Middle East, North Africa
and the Sahel face genuine threats from the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant and other terrorist
organizations using WMDs in terrorist attacks against
targets both in those regions and beyond in Europe and
elsewhere. Terrorism recognizes no physical borders
or moral strictures. Therefore, our main concern
must remain comprehensively combating terrorism,
including by preventing terrorists from obtaining
or developing dangerous materials by successfully
recruiting people with specialized knowledge on
technologies related to chemical, nuclear, biological
and radiological applications.

The comprehensive review of resolution 1540
(2004) included important debates on ways to further
the current regime in order to make it more responsive
to those challenges. We should therefore streamline our
ambitions onthe scope ofthe regimebyrefiningthenature
of the commitments emerging from the comprehensive
review so as to safeguard their preventive nature while
avoiding impractical mechanisms and instead focusing
on developing cooperation mechanisms with national
Governments, international organizations, regional
organizations and non-governmental organizations,
as well as improving awareness-raising activities and
transparency. We should respond to emerging dual-use
technologies. We should close the funding gap by using
the trust fund of the Office for Disarmament Affairs
related to the activities of the 1540 Committee.

In conclusion, Egypt will spare no effort in
promoting the working methods of the Committee
and developing its performance in order to ensure
the faithful implementation of resolution 2325 (2016).
We are committed to pursuing our national efforts to
develop our response to contemporary challenges. In
that regard, I stress our belief that the one and only way
to prevent terrorists from obtaining weapons of mass
destruction is to rid the entire world of all such weapons
in all their forms. That is the goal we shall continue to
work towards, in cooperation with our partners in the
United Nations.
