Mr. Burian (Slovakia): This briefing covers the
six-month period since the last joint briefing to the
Security Council held on 22 May, 2007. It also outlines
some of the forthcoming activities for promoting full
07-59786
implementation of the provisions of resolution 1540
(2004).

On 14 September 2007, the 1540 Committee
adopted its sixth programme of work, for the period
from 1 October 2007 to 28 April 2008. It is essentially
a continuation of the programme from last year,
covering all aspects of resolutions 1540 (2004) and
1673 (2006). In addition, it includes the preparation of
the Committee's report for the second biennium on
compliance with resolution 1540 (2004) through the
achievement of the implementation of its requirements,
to be submitted by 18 April 2008 for consideration by
the Security Council.

The submission of national reports remains
among the top priorities for the Committee, as it is
essential to its mandate of reporting to the Security
Council on the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). National reports also assist States in taking
stock of the measures already in place and in planning
additional measures to achieve full implementation of
the resolution.

Since the last briefing, one additional State,
Mauritius, has submitted its first report and a few other
States have sought advice in preparing their first
reports. The total number of reporting States has
reached 137. Fifty-four States, mostly in Africa, the
Caribbean and the Pacific Islands region, have yet to
submit their first reports. Of the 85 States that had
already submitted relevant additional information,
four - Argentina, Cyprus, Mexico and the United
States - have provided supplementary information on
new legislation, administrative arrangements or action
plans they have put in place.

The Committee held a thematic discussion in July
to assess the problem and to adopt an approach to
speed up the process. As part of this approach, the
Committee has sent letters to all Members States of the
United Nations to remind them of the reporting request
and to seek additional information. Included with the
letters were copies of the States' matrices, which were
prepared under the direction of the 1540 Committee.
The information in the matrices originates primarily
from national reports and is complemented by official
Government information, including data made
available to intergovernmental organizations.

In the case of States that have not yet submitted a
first report, a draft matrix was sent to facilitate the
preparation of a report. The Committee has requested

all Member States to reply by 15 December 2007, so
that in preparing its April 2008 report to the Security
Council, the Committee may present a more complete
picture on the status of implementation of the
resolution.

The Committee relies heavily on outreach
activities to promote full implementation of resolution
1540. Through tailored dialogue, seminars and
workshops, it seeks to generate a momentum and to
promote implementation of the resolution, to
encourage the reporting process and the sharing of
relevant national experiences, as well as to facilitate
assistance geared towards implementation. A thematic
discussion held in October recognized the need to
pursue a phased approach to the Committee's outreach
activities and determined that future activities would
focus less on the issue of reporting and more on
assisting States to fully implement the resolution.

During the past six months, the Committee has
engaged in three types of outreach activities.

First, the United Nations Office for Disarmament
Affairs organized three workshops on the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) during this
period. One workshop, which focused primarily on
reporting by Caribbean States, was held in Jamaica
from 29 to 30 May 2007. The second, on the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) by Arab
States, was held in Jordan from 4 to 5 September, and
the last, to focus on reporting by African States, is
scheduled to be held in Botswana from 27 to
28 November.

Secondly, common strategy workshops on
reporting for West and Central African States have
been held. One subregional workshop, sponsored by
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC), was held in Senegal from 25 to
27 September. It was the first workshop jointly
organized by the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, the 1267 Monitoring Team and
1540 Committee experts, with the UNODC as a
co-organizer. The workshop brought several officials
from each country to Dakar to discuss with the three
expert groups the issue of reporting. A similar
workshop for Southern African States is scheduled for
Botswana from 29 to 30 November, following the
Office for Disarmament Affairs workshop.

It should also be mentioned that the Committee's
experts have been participating in other UNODC-

sponsored events, including a workshop jointly
organized with the Pacific Islands Forum in Fiji, in
June.

Thirdly, some outreach events have been initiated
at the invitation of other bodies. The Chairman and
1540 Committee experts have actively participated in a
number of seminars and workshops of direct relevance
to the Committee. It has sought to generate wider
support for the objectives of resolution 1540 (2004)
within different areas of implementation. The
Committee expresses its appreciation to the host
countries and the sponsors of these outreach activities.

In view of the importance of organizing technical
and other assistance for the full implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), an effort is made in all the
Committee's outreach activities to explain the need for
States to be specific in their requests so as to facilitate
matching needs with our offers of assistance.

Following its thematic discussion in May on
assistance, the Committee adopted a set of decisions on
assistance-related issues and is currently developing a
template for helping States to submit detailed requests
for assistance. In July, a meeting of selected assistance
providers, which was organized with the assistance of
the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs,
took place to discuss ways in which the Committee
could increase its role in assisting States with the full
implementation of the resolution. The meeting was
attended by the representatives of a number of States
and international and other intergovernmental
organizations active in this area. It became clear from
this meeting that specific information on both requests
and offers for assistance would enable the Committee
to better fulfil its clearing-house function.

Under the common strategy arrangement, the
Committee and its experts are broadening their
cooperation with the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
the 1267 Committee and their respective experts, with
valuable support from the joint events organized by
UNODC, including the funding for a consultant to
advise Caribbean Governments on the preparation of
reports to the three Committees.

Efforts to develop cooperation with the relevant
international organizations are ongoing. Visits by the
Chairman and the Committee experts to Brussels, The
Hague and Vienna, pursuant to the Council's debate on
the subject in February, have resulted in the
identification of specific areas for day-to-day, practical
cooperation with the European Union, the World
Customs Organization, the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and the International
Atomic Energy Agency.

