The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.

I thank Mr. Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations; Mr. Chergui, Commissioner
for Peace and Security of the African Union (AU);
and Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director of
UN-Women, for their briefings.

I welcome the United Nations-African Union joint
visit, which will be helpful in tackling African regional
hotspot issues through United Nations-AU cooperation.

Progress has been made recently in terms of the
implementation of the revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan. China welcomes these developments. However,
there is a still a long way to go in achieving durable
peace and stability. The international community
and the Security Council must fully recognize the
complexity of the issues involving South Sudan and
provide constructive help in tackling the difficulties it
is currently facing.

I wish to stress the following two points.
First, it is important to fully respect South Sudan's
leadership in managing its domestic affairs, while
encouraging the South Sudanese Government to be
more proactive in terms of initiatives. The international
community should provide assistance that is in line
with the needs of the Government and the people so as
to avoid imposing a solution.

Secondly, it is important to continue to support
the good offices of the African Union and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD).
The focus should be on ensuring that the parties
effectively honour their commitments, achieve a
complete cessation of violence, gradually implement
the various provisions of the Agreement and facilitate
confidence-building among political parties.

Women are a major force in the maintenance of
international peace and security. China believes that
the South Sudanese Government should play a major
role in the implementation of the revitalized Agreement
and supports it in its efforts to provide full protection
for the rights of women and children.

The implementation of the revitalized Agreement
will be a lengthy process. As a country ravaged by
protracted conflict, South Sudan has seen setbacks
in its economic and social development, leading to
substandard living conditions in many parts of the
country. In addition, the conflict has created large
numbers of internally displaced persons. These issues,
ifnot dealt with in a timely fashion, will affect peace and
stability in the country. The international community
must therefore ramp up its humanitarian assistance and
economic support to the country, and, in conjunction
with promoting the peace process, help the South
Sudanese Government with its national reconstruction
and enhance its development capacity. The focus should
be on agriculture, energy, infrastructure, education
and health.

At the same time, attention should be paid to the
full participation of women and young people. China
commends the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) for the important contribution that it has
made in maintaining peace and stability in South Sudan
and supports the Mission in its efforts to continue to
discharge its functions in line with the Council's
Mandate, so as to provide support to the political
process in the country.

China supports peace and development in South
Sudan, and, under our commitment made at the Beijing
Summit of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation,
we recently provided RMB 300 million in aid to the
South Sudanese Government and RMB 100 million in
emergency humanitarian food assistance. In order to
help improve medical care, in particular to enhance the
level of service to women, we provided assistance in
the construction of the Juba teaching hospital and the
Rumbek women's hospital.

China will, as always, actively support and
constructively participate in the peace process in South
Sudan and play a constructive role in the realization
of durable peace and sustainable development in
the country.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of South Sudan.

