I would like to thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing. We congratulate Israel on the formation of the new Government. As an immediate priority, we call on the new Government and the Palestinian Authority to continue their coordination regarding the continued threat of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and to guarantee the delivery of humanitarian aid to those in need. In that context, we recall the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire, as well as the joint appeal by the five United Nations special envoys to the Middle East. We welcome the efforts by the United Nations, including the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, in supporting the fight against the virus. Secondly, the initiative taken by the United States has given us the impetus to revive the Middle East peace process. We urge parties to make efforts to resolve the conflict. We call on Israel and Palestine to take steps towards resuming direct and meaningful negotiations, in line with the relevant United Nations resolutions, leading to anegotiated two-State solution and taking into account the legitimate aspirations of both parties and Israeli security concerns. We hope that the international community, regional actors and the Middle East Quartet will continue efforts towards finding a lasting solution. We encourage the parties to engage in constructive negotiations. Estonia is concerned that unilateral steps, such as the annexation of parts of the occupied Palestinian territories, could undermine the viability of the two- State solution and increase instability in the region. We are worried about the announcement by President Mahmoud Abbas yesterday with regard to terminating agreements with Israel and the United States. We call on the Palestinian Authority to reconsider the decision and to remain committed to its obligations based on those agreements, especially those related to security. Estonia strongly urges the parties to refrain from acts of violence, terror and incitement. We condemn the firing of rockets from Gaza into Israel, as well as any other form of violence targeting the civilian population. Finally, to engage in direct negotiations, both parties need Governments with legitimate and democratic mandates. We also expect Palestinians to announce elections. We encourage all Palestinian factions to work towards reconciliation, which would enable them to address common challenges, as well as the needs and expectations of the Palestinian population. That is a necessary element in reaching a two-State solution.
