Mr. Sen (India): Please, Madam, accept our
warmest congratulations to a fellow Commonwealth
country on holding the presidency of the Council and
our appreciation of the manner in which your
delegation is conducting the proceedings.

Climate change issues loom large in today's
global environment agenda. The international
community needs to be vigilant about moves that
would, so to speak, make global warming cool again.

We have read with interest and attention the
United Kingdom concept paper on energy, security and
climate (S/2007/186, annex). We must confess, with all
respect, that we have some major conceptual
difficulties. We of course know the obvious: climate
change is not a threat in the context of Article 39 of the
Charter; nor can we contemplate Article-41 measures.
High per capita carbon emitters are in debt to those
with low per capita carbon emissions because they are
exploiting much more than their share of the
environmental space: space in the carbon sink that does
not belong to them. An international economic system
that has historically been based on externalizing the
consequences of pollution is both unjust and
impracticable. The main responsibility to take action to
reduce the threat of climate change rests with the
developed countries, in accordance with the principle
of common but differentiated responsibility, as
enshrined in the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change.
In this topsy-turvy world, just as the Swiss linear
formula in the World Trade Organization demands
more than full reciprocity from developing countries,
so also a careful reading of the Stern report on the
economics of climate change suggests that between
now and 2050, all the greenhouse gas abatements
proposed would take place in developing countries,
with developed countries taking credit for greenhouse
gas reductions effected solely by commercial
investments, with the increased cost of the energy
service being borne by the developing countries and
Clean Development Mechanism-type transfers of
credits. This would negate the present global compact
on climate change, affect growth in developing
countries and increase insecurity.

The Stern report has been read with interest in
India. It cites Richard Nordhaus extensively. Neither
Nordhaus nor Professor Stern have overcome the
uncertainty and difficulty of calibrating catastrophic
scenarios. In fact, strong uncertainty is ignored. The
result is thus to present a political argument as the
outcome of an objective scientific modelling process.
Nordhaus himself has concluded that the Stern review
is a political document. That this objection applies
equally to Nordhaus's work only makes it more telling.
These catastrophic scenarios therefore cannot be
treated as threshold events that are known in the real
meaning of the word. Hence, their possible
consequences in terms of border disputes, migration,
energy supplies, societal stress and the like can hardly
be discussed in any meaningful manner.

In marked contrast, a more immediate and
quantifiable threat is from possible conflicts arising out
of inadequate resources for development and poverty
eradication, as well as out of competition for energy.
By mitigating the potential for conflict, poverty
eradication has positive implications for global peace
and security. Reduction of greenhouse gas emissions in
developed countries also has a potentially significant
positive impact on security, by moderating the impetus
for privileged access to energy markets. Efforts to
impose greenhouse gas commitments on developing
countries would simply have an adverse impact upon
the prospects of growth in developing countries. On the
other hand, cooperation by developing countries
through the carbon market would be conducive to their
growth. However, a prerequisite for greenhouse gas
abatement in the carbon market is enhanced, legally
binding commitments by developed countries.

Considered solely in the context of climate
change, poverty alleviation is dependent on climate
change adaptation measures. Far more important than
an uncertain international security threat is the
existential threat to many small island developing
States, and it is, therefore, crucial to mobilize resources
and technology for immediate adaptation measures
there.

To tackle the problems that may lead to conflict,
action is required on resource flow, adaptation and
technology. Diversion of official development
assistance resources from economic growth and
poverty eradication in developing countries is not the
answer.

Energy is a critical input for development. For
developing countries, a rapid increase in energy use per
capita is imperative if national development goals and
the Millennium Development Goals are to be realized.
It is essential that developing countries have the policy
space to address their energy needs in the light of their
individual circumstances. At a conference in New
Delhi earlier this year on Mahatma Gandhi's idea of
non-violent resistance, one of our leaders said that to
be equitable, economic growth has to be sustainable.
To be sustainable, economic growth has, in turn, to be
all-inclusive. It is actually sarvodaya, or the rise of all.
Mahatma Gandhi insisted that such a rise must be
respectful of land and in harmony with nature and the
Earth's long-term future. For those delegations who are
interested, I am appending to my written text some
facts on India's implementation of sustainable
development.

The appropriate forum for discussing issues
relating to climate change is the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change. Insofar as
international peace and security are concerned,
developed countries reducing their greenhouse gas
emissions and energy consumption will considerably
reduce such threats through a reduction in the need for
privileged access to energy markets. Nothing in the
greenhouse gas profile of developing countries even
remotely reflects a threat to international peace and
security, yet their taking on greenhouse gas mitigation
targets will adversely impact their development -
development being the best adaptation to the adverse
impact of climate change - and thereby increase
insecurity. Conceptually and logically, even if one
assumes that catastrophic scenarios are certain, which
is not the case, the only context in which to discuss
what can be done about the physical effects of climate
change is, again, the Framework Convention. The
Security Council does not have the expertise and may
not have the mandate: to make an uncertain long-term
prospect a security threat amounts to an informal
amendment of the Charter. That can be done only
through procedures outlined in Articles 108 and 109.
While preventing a far-reaching adverse change in the
climate of the world we have to promote a far-reaching
change for the better in the climate of the Security
Council. This too requires procedures under Articles
108 and 109.

