Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of October. I would also like to express
our appreciation for the way in which Ambassador
Yafiez-Barnuevo conducted the Council's deliberations
last month. I would like to thank you and, through you,
the other members of the Council for promptly
responding to the request to convene this meeting to
address the Israeli aggression against the Palestinian
people in the occupied Palestinian territories.

My delegation would like to associate itself with
the statement made by the Permanent Representative of
Tunisia in his capacity as Chairman of the Arab Group.

If it is true that this meeting was long overdue, it
is also true that an opportunity remains for the Council
to shoulder its responsibilities by adopting measures
that would end the crimes mercilessly perpetrated by
Israel against a defenceless, unprotected people. These
acts are being committed without any respect for
international law or for the 40 Security Council and
more than 600 General Assembly resolutions on this
subject.

Days and weeks have passed, and Israel continues
its barbaric military actions against the Palestinian
people. Israel has not hesitated to use against civilian
targets the latest weapons in its arsenal, including
missiles, tanks, fighter jets, bulldozers and various
types and classes of internationally banned weapons.
This has left behind a trail of death and destruction in
all parts of the Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem.

Such attacks have become commonplace. The
situation on the ground continues to deteriorate, while
Israel pursues its illegal destructive policies and
practices against the Palestinian people. The toll
among Palestinian citizens killed by Israel in recent
days stands at 83, many of whom were children or
elderly people; eight more have been killed today. The
Israeli military machine continues cutting a swath of
death and terror that has led to the wounding of more
than 350 people and to the destruction of many homes,
schools, health centres and United Nations facilities.
This is a war crime that deserves the international
community's deterrence and condemnation to prevent a
spillover in the Middle East and the rest of the world.

According to figures provided by the Secretariat,
the number of Palestinians killed by the occupation
forces in the past four years stands at about 3,500.
Israel's killing and destruction in the occupied
Palestinian territories constitute collective punishment
against the Palestinian people living under brutal
occupation.

Many questions beg for answers. How long will
the Security Council remain incapable of condemning
Israeli terrorism and of adopting a position in favour of
justice and equality among peoples, free from double
standards? How can we explain the negative position
taken by the Security Council in the face of flagrant
Israeli defiance and arrogance and its flouting of all
norms and practices of international law? How long
will Israel be allowed to remain above the law as a
result of the negative position of the Security Council
towards its daily killing of Palestinians?

We have repeatedly warned against the plans of
the head of the Israeli Government and his attempts to
mislead the international community. At a time when
he claims to be adopting measures to withdraw from
the Gaza Strip, we find him amassing his forces in
various parts of the Strip. He is increasing the number
of settlements in the West Bank and continuing to build
the racist separation wall, in defiance of the opinion of
the International Court of Justice.

Furthermore, Israel, the occupying force,
reiterates that the attacks it carries out are part and
parcel of an overall military operation, and, according
to a statement made by its Prime Minister this
afternoon, it plans to continue, and even escalate, such
operations in the coming weeks.

While Israel says it plans to withdraw its forces
from Gaza, we see that it is asking for measures to be
taken and guarantees to be provided. It wants to exact a
high price for such a withdrawal, which, in effect,
constitutes a violation of international law and of the
resolutions of the Council. Therefore, withdrawal from
Gaza becomes a pretext for Israel to kill many people
in Gaza, to besiege them, deprive them of sovereignty
over their territorial waters and air space, and
undermine their relations with their neighbours.

Therefore the so-called giving back of Gaza
becomes a reason for Israel to demolish it, with its
occupants still in place. It becomes a reason to target
and assassinate one leader after another to prevent any
negotiations or even the establishment of a Palestinian
State. The Israeli Government will not do what it takes
to realize a just and comprehensive peace; it is shirking
its responsibilities; it has rejected United Nations
resolutions relevant to the occupied Arab territories;
and it is ignoring the Arab peace initiative. This
shirking, this avoidance, this rejection, this defiance -
they cannot conceal the fact that Israel is a Government
of occupation and expansion whose actions are taken at
the expense of the Palestinian people.

In conclusion, the Security Council must urgently
condemn Israel, its war crimes and its policy of State
terror. It has become clearer than ever that peace in the
region cannot prevail unless Israel can be made to
fulfil its commitment to the realization of a just and
comprehensive peace based on the implementation of
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973), the principle of land for peace, the Madrid
terms of reference and the Arab peace initiative.

