Mr. Trautwein (Germany): At the outset, let me
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council. We are convinced that
the Council will be under able and skilful leadership
this month, and we wish you every success.

Let me also thank you, Sir, and other delegations
for the kind words about the German presidency of the
Council last month, especially those expressed to
Ambassador Pleuger, which I will relay to him.

My delegation is grateful for the comprehensive
briefing by Assistant Secretary-General Danilo Tiirk on
the situation in Bougainville. Germany commends the
success achieved by the parties and the United Nations
Observer Mission in Bougainville (UNOMB). We
believe that Mr. Tor Stenbock and his one-person team
are doing a remarkable job in the process leading to the
election of the Bougainville autonomous government.
It would be positive to see the mission accompanying
the electoral process to its end. We also thank Mr. Noel
Sinclair for his efforts for the people of Bougainville.

The adoption of the constitution will be a
milestone in the process leading to the elections. We
therefore welcome the work of the Bougainville
Constitutional Committee, as well as the intention of
the Government of Papua New Guinea to send envoys
to Bougainville in order to resolve the issues
outstanding in the third draft now on the table. We
hope that the constitution can be adopted by the
Constituent Assembly of Bougainville and approved by
the Government of Papua New Guinea this summer, as
has been agreed by the parties.

We commend the efforts by Papua New Guinea in
setting up a ministerial committee to promote a
proactive approach and to finalize the constitutional
process. We also commend the assumption of political
responsibility for peace and autonomy by James Tanis,
Vice-President of the Bougainville People's Congress,
in the Interim Provincial Government.

The success of the political process will

essentially rely on completion of the disarmament
programme. We therefore welcome the decision by the
Peace Process Consultative Committee, chaired by the
Observer Mission, to destroy the collected weapons, as
set out in Stage III of the disarmament process. We are
pleased to learn from Mr. Tiirk that substantial progress
has been made in this field. We call upon all parties to
continue to remove weapons from ex-combatants, thus
allowing the destruction of all illegal weapons in the
country.

We welcome the decision by the Bougainville
Revolutionary Army and Bougainville Resistance
Force, as constructive participants in the Peace Process
Consultative Committee, to agree to and participate in
the destruction of all arms. We also welcome the
reconciliation between the Bougainville Revolutionary
Army commanders last week and hope that south
Bougainville will soon join in Stage III.

We continue to encourage Francis Ona and his
movement to fully join the peace process and to
cooperate in all areas. In order to bring sustainable
peace to a country and to yield long-term success,
peace processes have to be inclusive, taking on board
as many political factions as possible.

As the constitutional process leading to elections
and the disarmament process seems to be making the
necessary progress, it is timely for the parties and the
international community also to address the social and
economic problems in Bougainville.

Let me conclude by commending the efforts of
New Zealand, Australia, Fiji and other Pacific
countries, as well as, inter alia, the European Union
and the United Nations Development Programme, for
their efforts in this regard. We believe that the people
of Bougainville deserve a positive perspective for their
future. Only then can sustainable peace be achieved.

