Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): I would like to
join other colleagues in thanking Under-Secretary-
General Pascoe for his comprehensive briefing. I
would also like to thank the Permanent Representative
of Israel and the Permanent Observer of Palestine for
their statements, of which we have taken careful note.

The debate today has really been an extension of
the Council's continuing attention to Palestine and
related issues, and my remarks will basically focus on
that.

The situation in the Middle East continues to be
grim, with no sign of movement in peace talks. The
expectation that the Quartet would meet on 15 April
and come up with a statement that would enable
Palestinians and Israelis to resume talks has again not
materialized. The lack of progress in even holding talks
is also contributing to an increase in violence.

And yet it is imperative that the hopes raised for a
Palestinian State during the past two years not be lost.
The State-building efforts of the Palestinian Authority
have received commendations from various quarters,
including financial institutions such as the
International Monetary Fund and the World Bank. The
April 2011 report of the United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process is the
latest to endorse the achievements of the Palestinian
Authority.

The report makes it amply clear that the progress
made in the areas of the rule of law and human rights,
livelihoods and productive sectors, education and
culture, health, social protection, infrastructure and
water are now sufficient for a functioning Government
of a State. The Palestinian Authority has therefore
shown its determination to persist with Prime Minister
Fayyad's plan for achieving statehood. As we approach
September 2011, these developments on the
governance front should inject a sense of urgency into
international efforts to resume peace talks.

The main hindrance to a resumption of peace
talks is lack of mutual trust. Statements on the
existence of Israel emanating from time to time from
various sections of Palestinian society serve only to
aggravate that lack of mutual trust. The perception that
such statements, and the continuing rocket attacks from
the Gaza Strip on Israel, increase Israel's vulnerability
must be seen in this context. The recent spate of
violence, including retaliation on Gaza after an attack
on a school bus in southern Israel, clearly shows the
divisions that exist. Such events deserve our strongest
condemnation; we also condemn the killing of an
abducted Italian national in Gaza last week.

While we commend the achievements in the
territories administered by the Palestinian Authority, it
is equally important to note the reason for the
deplorable situation in Gaza, where even essentials are
difficult to come by. The blockade of Gaza is adversely
affecting its population, which barely has access to
essential commodities. Gaza's access to such
commodities is imperative, since the situation is also
driving militant elements to vent their frustration
through violence. Given the situation, humanitarian
assistance to Gaza and its delivery should not be
allowed to exacerbate the precarious security situation.
It would be prudent to use established channels for
delivering humanitarian assistance. At the same time,
those channels must improve the efficacy of their
delivery systems and look for stronger and more
effective mechanisms for delivering humanitarian
assistance.

We concur with the sense of the international
community that freezing settlement activity in the
Palestinian territories could enable the peace talks to
resume. Lack of unity among Palestinian factions is
another major issue. We note the recent initiatives
aimed at promoting intra-Palestinian unity and hope
they will result in a meaningful rapprochement among
various Palestinian groups.

Equally important are other issues enmeshed in
the conflict relating to Arab lands that remain under
Israeli occupation. Progress in the Lebanese and Syrian
tracks is core to achieving a comprehensive and
durable peace in the region. In a region witnessing
protest movements all around, a continuing impasse in
the peace talks could have a destabilizing effect on a
much larger area. If the peace talks do not recommence
quickly, India fears that unilateral steps taken by the
parties would only increase the distance between them
and further complicate the situation. We therefore call
on the Quartet members to intensify their collective
and individual efforts to break the stalemate.

India has a long-standing tradition of solidarity
with the Palestinian people. India has supported the
Palestinian people's struggle for a sovereign,
independent, viable and united State of Palestine with
East Jerusalem as its capital living within secure and
recognized borders, side by side and at peace with
Israel, as endorsed in the Arab Peace Initiative, the
Quartet Road Map and relevant Security Council
resolutions.

India has been contributing to the capacity- and
institution-building of the Palestinian people with its
material and technical assistance programmes. India
has also extended assistance through the India, Brazil
and South Africa forum. India is also contributing
$1 million to the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
continuing our solidarity with the Palestinian people in
their pursuit of legitimate goals and their quest for
development based on dignity and self-reliance.

In conclusion, let me quote from a letter our first
Prime Minister, Pandit Jawarharlal Nehru, wrote on
11 July 1947 to Albert Einstein.

"I do not myself see how this problem can
be resolved by violence and conflict on one side
or the other. Even if such violence and conflict
achieve certain ends for the moment, they must
necessarily be temporary. I do earnestly hope that
some kind of agreement might be arrived at
between the Arabs and the Jews. I do not think
even an outside power can impose its will for
long or enforce some new arrangements against
the will of the parties concerned."

These words were relevant more than 60 years
ago. They are even more relevant now. Agreement
must be reached between the parties through direct
negotiations for it to endure. To that end, we hope that
the parties will restart talks without further delay. Our
expectation is that the talks would lead to a final and
comprehensive resolution of the Middle East conflict,
in which several generations in the region have been
mired. We all owe it to future generations that they do
not remain mired in this conflict. We therefore reiterate
our call to both sides to show a spirit of flexibility,
compromise and political will to reach that end.
