Mr. Gertze (Namibia): As I have not yet had
the chance to speak before the Security Council this
month, I congratulate the People's Republic of China
on its assumption of the presidency of the Council for
the month of November and thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this open debate on the important
topic of peace and security in Africa. I would also
like to thank the Secretary-General and the African
Union Commissioner for Peace and Security for their
insightful briefings.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Venezuela on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and with
the statement delivered by the representative of Cote
d'Ivoire on behalf of the three African countries that
are members of the Security Council.

Nine days ago, the world stood still for a moment
to celebrate the hundredth anniversary of the end of
the First World War. While it is indeed a moment to
celebrate the armistice with Germany that came into
effect on 11 November 1918, that annual day has also
become a moment for the world to stand still and
reflect on and commemorate the countless lives that
were lost during that war and so many other subsequent
conflicts. Following the recent shootings of innocent
young people in a bar in California and the unthinkable
attack on worshippers in a synagogue, a grief-stricken
mother of a young woman cried out for people to stop
sending her thoughts and prayers, for nothing would
take away the pain and sorrow caused by the cruelty of
violence and death.

This is the world we live in today, it is one where
we all hate that we are confronted with what seems
to be never-ending conflicts, death, destruction,
terrorism, violence and threats to peace and security.
It is in that real world where we, the United Nations
and in particular the Security Council, now more than
ever have our work cut out to live up to our obligations
under the Charter of the United Nations to promote,
encourage and seek peaceful means to end conflicts.
My delegation therefore commends you, Mr. President,
for affording us this opportunity today to reflect once
again on the important topic of peace and security.

At the General Assembly's recent general debate
(see A/73/PV.8), His Excellency Mr. Hage G. Geingob,
President of the Republic of Namibia, referred to
peace and security as the bedrock of our collective
determination to achieve sustainable development. He
recognized that partnerships are key to achieving the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and that
strategic partnership between international and regional
bodies, such as the United Nations and the African
Union (AU), are fundamental for the realization of our
common objectives and desires for peace and security.

There are currently eight United Nations peacekeeping
operations on the African continent. Strengthening the
partnership between the United Nations and the AU is
key to strengthening those peacekeeping operations. In
April 2017, the United Nations and the AU signed the
Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for an
Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security. As stated
in the concept note for this debate (S/2018/1004, annex),
the Framework provides guidance for deepening peace
and security cooperation at all levels between the
two organizations. Security Council resolutions have
also underscored the important United Nations-AU
partnership with regard to peacekeeping cooperation.
The capacity of the United Nations and the AU to
cooperate on matters of peace and security has been
demonstrated. The organizations have successfully
cooperated in various ways - in Somalia with the
African Union Mission in Somalia and in Darfur
with African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur.

Africa has assumed its full share of peacekeeping
contributions, and due recognition should be given to
the contributions of African countries and for their
peacekeepers who have valiantly stood in harm's way
and on innumerable occasions laid down their lives
for the cause of keeping peace in the world. In that
regard, we wish to pay tribute to the peacekeepers
from Tanzania and Malawi who lost their lives in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo just last week. Their
sacrifice should only strengthen our resolve to continue
pursuing peace.

The African Union's commitment to finance
25 per cent of its peace activities bears further witness
to its unflinching commitment to securing peace on
the continent. Namibia supports the call by the AU
and the African members of the Security Council
for predictable financing for AU-led peace support
operations authorized by the Council through United
Nations-assessed contributions. Namibia remains fully
committed to the African Union initiative to silence
the guns in Africa by 2020 as a step towards reducing
conflict and war.

Namibia reaffirmed its commitment to peacekeeping
by endorsing the Secretary-General's Action for
Peacekeeping initiative during the General Assembly
high-level week. As a small country with a population
of approximately 2.3 million people, Namibia has been
a long-standing troop- and equipment-contributing
country. Namibia is close to achieving the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations target of 15 per cent of
women participating in peacekeeping missions by the
end of December, as 13.3 per cent of deployed Namibian
peacekeepers are women.

Women played an incalculable role in Namibia's
long-fought liberation struggle. That, in part, is what
led us to vote in favour of resolution 1325 (2000). The
resolution reaffirms that peace processes, mediation,
conflict resolution and negotiations are far more likely
to be successful if women are included. While progress
has been made since the adoption of the resolution, 18
years ago, much remains to be done, as was highlighted
during the annual open debate on women and peace
and security (see S/PV.8382), held a month ago in the
Chamber. Given the new developments on the African
continent, including the appointment of Ethiopia's first
female President and the increasing participation of
women in politics across the continent, we trust that
that will lead to more countries embracing gender
equality. There can be no sustainable peace, security
or development without gender equality and the full
participation of women and young girls.

Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to
remind members that, on 10 and 11 April 2019, Namibia
will host, in Windhoek, the third capital-based Focal
Points Network Meeting. The theme for the event
will be "Women, Peace and Security: Towards Full
Participation". All Member States and members of civil
society are invited to participate in Namibia.

