Spain aligns itself with the statement made on behalf of the European Union. I would like to thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, the President of the International Committee of the Red Cross, Mr. Peter Maurer, and the Nobel Peace Prize Laureate, President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, for their briefings. Today's open debate on the protection of civilians comes at an unusual time. We are dealing with a global pandemic that has had effects on multiple levels, and this crisis overlaps with other political challenges, including the protection of civilians in armed conflict. The spread of the virus has affected millions of people, increasing the risk that tensions, conflicts and divisions in the world will worsen. This is a sensitive time that requires restraint, commitment and determination. The current crisis calls to mind three important lessons. The first is that we are deeply interconnected. The second is that prevention works. The third is that international cooperation is key to overcoming common challenges. These lessons are applicable in all areas, including in achieving the objectives we pursue in the protection of civilians. I will try to explain this idea with a concrete example in the second part of my statement, but first let me refer to the Secretary-General's report (S/2020/366). The picture that the report paints is frankly bleak; it sets out figures that show the darker side of our species. The problem is very serious, and if we are to address it with well-targeted concrete actions, as the Secretary-General puts it, we must be aware of it. We therefore believe that our best strategy is as follows. We must remain vigilant so that international humanitarian law and Security Council resolutions on the protection of civilians have a real impact on the protection and lives of people. Since urban conflicts have accentuated the impact of these attacks on the civilian population, it is essential that all parties to the conflict comply with their international obligations and that they are otherwise held accountable for violations. If that is not possible, the Security Council must play a key role in ensuring accountability for serious violations of international law. Because children are twice victims of armed conflict and deserve special protection, we consider maintaining the presence of protection officers, especially for children and gender, to be essential and, if possible, their presence in peacekeeping missions should be strengthened. As we have an obligation to prevent attacks on schools, medical facilities and humanitarian workers who carry out exclusively medical work, these attacks must be systematically and forcefully condemned, keeping in mind the duty to protect victims and the obligation to bring those responsible to justice. Sanctions regimes and counter-terrorism measures must allow for principled humanitarian action and compliance with international humanitarian law. The foregoing actions are just a few of the actions consistent with the Secretary-General's report, but we know that there are many others. In choosing among them, we must take advantage of those that light the path for us to follow. In this context, I would call to mind the lessons that the current crisis has brought in one area related to the protection of civilians: education in conflict situations. The first lesson resides in our mutual interconnectedness. We can say today that the Safe Schools Declaration and the related actions taken are saving lives by preserving the right to education for all, even in the most difficult circumstances. This is because those who push for the actions are now linked with those whose lives have been saved. Even a match extinguished in the sea warms the ocean. The coronavirus disease pandemic has also shown us once again that prevention works, especially in terms of the protection of civilians. The report on attacks on education by the Global Coalition to Protect Education from Attack, which is being presented tomorrow at the margins of today's open debate, shows this. Politically driven and resourced awareness and control actions create the conditions for preventing these attacks. The reduction of attacks on schools in recent years has opened future opportunities for entire generations. The third lesson points to the power of change that international cooperation provides. The third International Conference on Safe Schools, which Spain organized in Palma de Mallorca just a year ago, showed how important it is to stimulate international cooperation and boost political support for meeting this challenge. A growing majority of Member States and regional organizations have endorsed the Declaration which, for us, marks a clear step towards its universalization. We encourage those who have not yet done so to endorse the Declaration, and we welcome the draft resolution on the International Day to Protect Education from Attack, which Qatar has introduced and Spain has co-sponsored. Allow me to share three final considerations that seem to us to be central to the protection-of-civilians agenda. First, we are convinced that a gender perspective is vital to seeking concrete solutions and successfully addressing this challenge. We must therefore continue to promote this agenda in an ongoing and cross-cutting manner, prioritizing actions towards protection and respect for human rights and its close link with international peace and security in accordance with resolution 1325 (2000). Secondly, we need to strengthen our actions in the area of humanitarian diplomacy. The Spanish Government is determined to maintain the protection of civilians as one of the priorities of its foreign action and humanitarian action, working with national and international actors while strengthening actions in humanitarian diplomacy. We will continue to take concrete steps to strengthen compliance with international humanitarian law and to work on the commitments made at the thirty- third International Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent, in Geneva. Thirdly, we need to persevere in the fight against impunity. We must guarantee the mechanisms that bring perpetrators of atrocious crimes to justice, including the International Criminal Court (ICC). That is the best way to honour the victims, do justice and deter future attacks. We encourage those States that have not done so to sign the Rome Statute and accept the jurisdiction of the ICC. I would also like to highlight in this regard the work that can be done by the International Humanitarian Fact-Finding Commission, in collaboration with the United Nations, to prevent violations of international humanitarian law. Allow me to conclude by thanking the Secretary-General and, through him, all the people who comprise the United Nations family for their work and dedication and for their commendable efforts in favour of the protection of civilians in the most difficult of circumstances. Far from their loved ones, they are risking their own lives to make this world a better, more humane place. We must also acknowledge the excellent work of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, Virginia Gamba, and that of the Security Council Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, including its recent conclusions on Yemen, the Central African Republic and Afghanistan. The United Nations can count on Spain to make progress in achieving the objectives set forth in the Secretary-General's report by implementing its recommendations.
