Mr. Lowcock: As the conflict in Syria evolves, one
fact remains - it is the people of Syria who continue
to bear the consequences of eight and a half years of
war. Across the country, more than 11 million remain in
need of humanitarian assistance. That is more than half
the estimated population.

Today I want to, first, update the Council on the
humanitarian response; secondly, cover the situation in
the north-west; thirdly, flag some points on the north-
east; fourthly, brief Council members on the findings of
my recent visit on the cross-border operation; and fifthly,
remind the Council of the wider regional situation.

First, with regard to the humanitarian response, the
United Nations and other humanitarian organizations
work through all possible avenues to reach as many
of the people in need as possible every month. So far
this year, we have reached an average of 5.6 million
people a month in all parts of Syria. We try to prioritize
the neediest. Over half of the response takes place in
areas under Government control. It takes place with
the Government's agreement and acceptance and in
coordination with it. This year, the United Nations and
humanitarian organizations are delivering assistance
from within Syria to an average of3 million people every
month. Most of the beneficiaries are people in the most
acute need and in communities with a high concentration
of people in need. The assistance provided by the
United Nations and other humanitarian organizations is
tailored to meet people's needs, based on independent
assessments. Despite the administrative and security
challenges we continue to face from within Syria, the
United Nations conducted more than 5,500 missions
between January and September to assess needs, deliver
aid and monitor the impact of our work. In addition to
the United Nations coordinated humanitarian response
in Government-controlled areas, we are regularly
made aware of bilateral humanitarian assistance from
Member States, including the Russian Federation.

Secondly, I remain very concerned about the
situation in the north-west. In recent weeks, there
has been an increase in air strikes and ground-based
strikes, mostly in parts of southern and western Idlib,
which, the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights (OHCHR) reports, have caused a high number of
civilian casualties. In the past two days, there have been
reports of over 100 air strikes in Idlib and surrounding
areas. The Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights reports that four separate health facilities were
damaged on 4 and 6 November, including the Kafr Nabl
hospital. An increase in shelling out ofthe area has also
been reported.

Not only do civilians in those areas have to endure
the impact of hostilities, but continue to suffer under the
presence of Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, a United Nations-
listed terrorist organization. We are following with
concern the situation for civilians in Kafr Takharim,
where civilians were besieged and shelled following
protests against Hayat Tahrir Al- Sham. Reports indicate
that civilians have been killed. More broadly, we are
seeing that civilian infrastructure is being dismantled
and sold in areas under Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham control,
including water and electrical infrastructure, as well
as rail lines. Removing civilian infrastructure affects
basic services now, but will also make any future
recovery all the more difficult.

More than halfofthe people in Idlib have had to move
from other parts of the country. Hundreds of thousands
are living in camps and informal shelters close to the
border with Turkey. There is little space left to absorb
additional displacement. The onset of winter - with
the rain, the cold and the mud it brings - compounds
the dire humanitarian situation. In that context, the
internal United Nations Headquarters board of inquiry
established by the Secretary-General has begun its work
to investigate a series of incidents that have occurred in
north-west Syria since September 2018. I would remind
the Council of the Secretary-General's request that all
relevant parties extend their support to the board in the

conduct of its duties.
Thirdly, I continue to follow developments in north-
east Syria very closely. Hostilities have decreased since
the agreements were reached on 17 and 22 October, but
clashes continue in border areas, particularly around
the Ras Al-Ayn and Tel Abyad districts. OHCHR has
verified reports that 49 civilians have been killed by
a combination of air strikes, ground-based strikes,
sniper fire and executions carried out by armed groups.
OHCHR has also verified that 31 civilians have been
killed by improvised explosive devices or explosive
remnants of war since the beginning of October. About
200,000 people left the border areas between Turkey
and Syria in the early phases of hostilities, mostly
heading south. Most of them have now returned, but
more than 70,000 remain displaced.

Civilian infrastructure has also been affected. The
WorldHealth Organizationhasreportedthatfive medical
facilities have been affected by fighting. The Allouk
water station, which provides water services to 460,000
people in Al-Hasakah, has been repeatedly put out of
service due to hostilities. The Government of Turkey
has responded to requests to support humanitarian
operations. A number of cross-line missions have been
facilitated by Turkey, whereby technicians came from
Al-Hasakah to Allouk to do repairs to the water station
and the power supply. Turkey has also sent its own
technicians. While the water has again been restored,
it is important to have sustained access to ensure the
ongoing operations of those critical facilities.

More broadly, I remain concerned about the
impact that changes in administrative control could
have on humanitarian operations in the north-east.
With 1.8 million people in need, it is critical that
there be continuity of life-saving essential services
and humanitarian aid deliveries, regardless of any
changes in control. That has particular implications for
displacement camps like Al-Hol, where needs for the
68,600 residents are high. The camp includes Syrians,
Iraqis and third-country nationals. It is more important
than ever that States Members of the United Nations,
including members of the Council, repatriate their
nationals for reintegration or for prosecution under
national legislation, as appropriate.

Across northern Syria, 4 million people are
supported by the United Nations cross-border
humanitarian assistance mechanism, including
2.7 million in the north-west who cannot be reached
from within the country. That brings me to my fourth
point. In October, I went to Turkey and Visited our
cross-border operations. I was able to see the delivery
of assistance, assess the work of the United Nations
Monitoring Mechanism and talk to people we are
helping inside Syria. Since 2014, the United Nations
has sent nearly 30,000 truckloads of humanitarian
assistance across the four border crossings named in
resolution 2165 (2014). Civilians have been provided
with food assistance, water, medical assistance, shelter
and other help. More trucks are using the cross-border
mechanism today than ever before, with more than 900
passing through in October. More people are being
reached than ever before. In October alone, the United
Nations provided 1.1 million people with food through
cross-border deliveries, which is double the number
in January. The operation from Turkey has grown by
more than 40 per cent since this time in 2018, due to
the increase in humanitarian needs. It is through those
operations that we have been able to stave off an even
worse humanitarian crisis in northern Syria.

I can confirm that the operation mandated by
resolution 2165 (2014) is one of the most closely
scrutinized aid delivery systems in the world today.
The movement and delivery of humanitarian aid is
monitored at four distinct levels: at the border, at the
warehouses inside Syria, at distribution points and after
distribution. The humanitarian nature of United Nations
cross-border assistance is monitored and verified by the
United Nations Monitoring Mechanism. Monitors of 15
different nationalities verify the humanitarian nature of
the cargo being shipped. The monitors, whom I met,
climb into every truck. They open boxes, cut into bags
of rice and inspect vehicles before clearing assistance
to cross the border.

When aid arrives at warehouses inside Syria,
it is examined by third-party monitors contracted
by the United Nations. They check the items being
offloaded against the waybill. Third-party monitors
have conducted almost 2,000 assessments of aid so far
this year. In addition to monitoring the arrival of aid at
warehouses, they have observed the direct distribution
to affected people and deliveries of aid to schools
and hospitals. They have conducted post-distribution
monitoring, using community feedback mechanisms
and individual interviews with beneficiaries. Their
monitoring has not identified any evidence of systemic
aid diversion.

We are also using new technologies to monitor
the delivery of aid. Through video and time-stamped
geotagged photos, we can monitor the delivery process
every step of the way. Commodity tracking systems
using barcodes on each box of aid allow assistance to
be followed from the border to the warehouse and on
to the individual beneficiary. Those same boxes have
phone numbers printed on them to allow beneficiaries
to report back by phone or WhatsApp if everything
they are expecting is not delivered or if there are other
things they need. A call centre has been established,
allowing anyone with questions about aid deliveries to
get in touch.

Nothing in life is completely risk-free, but I can say
with confidence that the United Nations knows what
is going across the border under our programme and
where it is going. We know that help is reaching the
civilians who need it. Therefore, I can be clear that
there is no alternative to the cross-border operation. A
renewal of the provisions of resolution 2165 (2014) is
critical. There is no plan B. Without the cross-border
operation, we would see an immediate end of aid that
is supporting millions of civilians; that would cause a
rapid increase in hunger and disease. A lot more people
would flood across the borders, making an existing
crisis in the region even worse.

That brings me to my fifth and last point. With
more than 5.6 million Syrians living in neighbouring
countries as refugees, the crisis has had an enormous
impact on the entire region. The responsibility that
refugee-hosting countries bear is heavy. When I
visited Turkey last month, I had the opportunity to
express again my deep admiration and gratitude to
Turkey's Government and people for their exceptional
and prolonged hospitality to the refugees. The same
gratitude is due to Jordan, Lebanon, Iraq, Egypt and
others. I urge the international community to be more
generous in supporting them all in shouldering the
burden they have taken on.

