Mr. Sersale di Cerisano (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish): The Council has just adopted a resolution
that puts an end to the United Nations operation in
El Salvador. The 30th of April 1995 is the date for the
conclusion of an operation that can be called successful
beyond doubt. It was a multifaceted mission that
combined peace-keeping, observing, human rights
promotion and protection and, first and foremost,
consolidation of the peace after the conflict.

 

Peace in the region of Central America as been
strengthened through the efforts that the international
community channelled into the United Nations Observer
Mission in El Salvador (ONUSAL). That is why this is an
opportune moment to pay homage to all those men and
women who have participated in this joint effort. They have
carried out the mandate entrusted to them is a responsible
and serious manner and in a spirit of helpfulness.

It should nevertheless be recognized that some
undertakings provided for in the peace agreements have yet
to be fulfilled. The small group of officials proposed by the
Secretary-General will have to go on approaching the
parties in their mission of good offices and verify that those
areas where there has been partial progress continue to be
prosecuted successfully, with the backing of the
Government and of the Frente Farabundo Marti para la
Liberacion Nacional (FMLN). Also, the international
community will have to continue its involvement by
reactivating the promised cooperation so that El Salvador
can strengthen its democratic institutions and solve its
problems of economic growth and sustainable development.
In this, the programmes in the system that have operational
activities - in particular the United Nations Development
Programme because of its catalytic and coordinating role
and the system's specialized agencies, particularly the
International Monetary Fund and the World Bank - have
a special role to play in the economic rehabilitation
activities that characterize this phase of E1 Salvador's
reconstruction process.

Obviously, the efforts of the United Nations will
continue with the same emphasis although their focus and
direction will be different. Now is a time for capitalizing on
the benefits of peace and democracy for economic and
social development. Also, the legal, political and economic
institutions will also have to be strengthened by reaffirming
the sway of human rights, boosting the professionalism of
the Armed Forces and police and by giving priority to
strengthening the judiciary.

Lastly, the Salvadoran people are facing a critical
phase now: the key responsibility for bringing peace,
democracy and development lies with the Government and
people of El Salvador, and we do not doubt that this
fraternal nation will more than rise to the challenge before
it in this historic opportunity.

