Mr. Somavia (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish):
We would like today to express our appreciation and full
support for the active work carried out in recent months
by the Head of the United Nations Special Mission to
Afghanistan, Mr. Norbert H011, and by his entire team
representing the Secretary-General. They have the
difficult and complex task of trying to turn the
international community's aspirations for peace into
concrete fact on the ground. We congratulate them on
their determination and we understand the obstacles they
face.

My delegation attaches great importance to the series
of meetings of the Intra-Afghan Working Group, in which
representatives of the Taliban and the Supreme Council
for the Defence of Afghanistan participated for the first
time. We think that it is necessary that a concrete plan
should be established as soon as possible as a result of
these meetings to allow for the formation of a broad-
based government in which all sectors are represented.

Similarly, the meeting at which broad consultations
were held among some interested States by the Secretary-
General at Headquarters last November was another
important event. We consider it to be very positive that
such consultations will continue at the meeting scheduled
for this week.

We would also like to reiterate our belief that it is
only through negotiations and political dialogue that a
lasting solution can be found to this long-running conflict.

 

Agreement on a lasting cease-fire is essential as an
immediate preliminary task in order to create conditions
which will make it possible for there to be progress in the
peace negotiations. However, this is not happening. The
leaders are not agreeing. It is always painful to note the
indifference of leaders at the suffering of their own
followers and the peoples that they claim to represent in the
conflicts before the Security Council. We are again
encountering this situation in Afghanistan. The conflict
continues and is deepening, to the cost of the most
unprotected. It is always the leaders who suffer the least. It
is always the leaders who escape shortages. Hardly ever are
their lives at risk.

This Council and the Secretary-General's team have
made wise proposals that provide a foundation for a
peaceful political solution to the conflict. We urge the
leaders to move ahead in this direction.

Those who continue to prefer a military solution to the
conflict are deceiving themselves, and this will do nothing
but prolong the suffering of their own people. Worse yet,
it would appear that the parties are getting ready to resume
armed operations of greater magnitude once the winter
snows have melted. They are preparing for a violent spring.
We, like others, would like to see a springtime of peace.

However, this recourse to arms is occurring in part
because the international community, despite all its
speeches and treaties, continues to recognize the use of
force as a source of international legitimacy. For example,
and very sadly, it would not seem strange to anyone that if
one of the factions were finally able to prevail by force and
conquer all Afghan territory, its delegate would then
represent Afghanistan at the United Nations.

If this is contemporary political reality, it should come
as no surprise that the factions are reluctant to negotiate
and seek peaceful solutions. They all know that military
victory would be more advantageous domestically than a
negotiated peace. Today, either solution is equally
acceptable to the international community. There is no
incentive from the international community to choose a
political solution over one imposed by force.

This being the case, a military victory makes it easier
to consolidate domestic power and cause no loss of
international recognition. The current state of law and
international relations seems, therefore, to be either an
implicit or an indirect stimulus to solutions by force, except
for the possible use of sanctions, the effectiveness of which
is very questionable.

This perverse logic results, moreover, in increased
internationalization of conflicts, because in today's world
no faction gets involved in a civil war without external
support. This is certainly the situation in Afghanistan.

We are sorry to have to reiterate today the concerns
that were already expressed by my delegation on previous
occasions in connection with continued foreign
interference in internal Afghan affairs. We hope that in
the future this reality will not impede the negotiating
process and will not make it more difficult for the good
offices and constructive dialogue encouraged by the
United Nations to be successful.

The supply of arms to the factions and the utilization
of Afghan territory for illicit activities such as terrorism
and drug trafficking are very negative manifestations of
such interference. This situation points up the urgency of
putting an end to interference. We appeal to all the
countries involved to cooperate with the United Nations
to ensure that the Afghan crisis will not spread and
threaten stability in the region.

While we firmly encourage the continuation of
political activities aimed at achieving peace, we cannot
hide our concern about the humanitarian problems that
still persist. We reiterate the objections that we have
raised about the trampling of human rights, whether they
be caused by the Taliban or by any other Afghan group.
Nothing justifies the restrictions on the access of women
to education and employment. We also encourage the
factions to take measures without delay that will make it
possible for refugees and displaced persons to return to
their communities of origin. We know very well that
respect for the various ethnic and religious groups is an
indispensable basis for peace.

Allow me to address specifically the situation of
women, and particularly in the territories occupied by the
Taliban. First and foremost, I wish to point out that this
is not merely an obsession of some sectors of the Western
press. It is a real and deep concern of a significant
number of Member States of the United Nations, as was
clearly demonstrated in last week's discussions in the
Commission on Human Rights in Geneva. The same
holds for many sectors of civil society.

For his part, Mr. Choong Hyun Paik, Special
Rapporteur on Human Rights for Afghanistan, reported to
the Commission on Human Rights that the Taliban policy
has resulted in serious violations of human rights,
particularly those of women, who have been prohibited

 

from working or attending school. The Special Rapporteur
has reported that they have been severely beaten with
various objects, such as car antennas, chains and hoses, for
not complying with the dress code that has been imposed.

Paragraph 73 of the Special Rapporteur's report
indicates that prohibition against women working has had
a significant impact on the work of United Nations agencies
and non-governmental organizations that employ a large
number of women. He draws attention in paragraph 82 of
his report to the feminization of poverty, which results from
the current marginalization of women.
Those of us who do not profess the Islamic faith, but
have great respect for it, cannot understand how this
deplorable treatment of women can be justified by religious
reasons. There are many Muslim countries that follow
different policies. We should also like to emphasize that
there is an international system for protection of human
rights, which must be respected. The 1993 Vienna World
Conference on Human Rights made it clear that the rights
of women are human rights. Accordingly, we would like
these practices to be re-examined.

The Government of Chile considers that the
recommendations to overcome this situation contained in
the report of the Special Rapporteur should be put into
practice, particularly the appeal for the United Nations to
speak with one unified voice on all questions of gender
equality.

But why am I talking at such great length about
women in a Security Council debate? Because Chile and
many other countries in the world do not want to see the
rights of women sacrificed on the altar of peace. This is
what we wish to prevent by calling attention to the matter
today. We do not want this Council, or the United Nations,
to look the other way if a political agreement is achieved
that would allow women to be subjected to the practices
that we are condemning today. This is not a matter we
consider negotiable for the sake of a political agreement.

Peace is not only the end of hostilities and a stable
distribution of political power. Peace is also a society living
in peace, where all citizens can enjoy their fundamental
human rights and feel safe in their lives, customs and property.

In conclusion, we would like to express our sincere
appreciation to the humanitarian-assistance organizations for
their valuable work. We would also like firmly to reject and
condemn those who have tried to prevent them from doing
their work now and in the past.

Finally, we appeal to all the leaders of the Afghan
factions to cooperate in good faith pragmatically and
flexibly with the Special Mission and to support the
initiatives urged by the United Nations to put an end to
this fratricidal war and to inaugurate without delay an era
of peace and reconstruction for good of their people.

