Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates Uruguay's initiative to organize this
ministerial-level open debate on the question of the
Middle East and welcomes Foreign Minister Nin Novoa
to preside over this meeting. I thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for his briefing and commend his active
engagement in promoting the Middle East peace process.
China carefully listened to the statements delivered
by the observer of Palestine and the representative of
Israel.

At present, the Middle East remains beset by
conflict and war. The history of the Middle East has
shown time and again that there can be no winner in the
conflict and that peace is the ultimate and irresistible
historical trend. Chinese President Xi Jinping recently
Visited the Middle East, where he reaffirmed China's
Middle East policy and called for focused efforts
towards peace and development. He stressed the need
to resolve differences through dialogue and for the
people of the region to choose a development path that
takes their particular conditions into account. He put
forward a Chinese solution based on a holistic approach
that addresses both the symptoms and the root causes of
the conflict. His solution enjoys the broad appreciation
of the countries of the region. China stands ready, to
continue to work with the international community to
achieve peace, stability and development in the Middle
East.

The question of Palestine lies at the root of
everything affecting peace in the Middle East.
Currently, peace talks between Palestine and Israel
remain deeply deadlocked. Conflict is intensifying
and the security situation is deteriorating. It is the
joint responsibility of the international community
to safeguard the legitimate national rights of the
Palestinian people. Achieving a comprehensive and just
solution to the question of Palestine would serve the
interests of all parties concerned. China hopes that the
international community will address the issue through
attending to the following priorities.

First, the international community should urge
Palestine and Israel to take immediate action to establish
a ceasefire, end the Violence and ease tensions. As the
party with the upper hand, Israel should take the lead
in that regard. At the same time, the legitimate security
concerns of the countries of the region should be given
due attention.

Secondly, the international community should
take more robust measures and reactivate the political
peace process so as to bring both parties back to the
negotiating table as soon as possible. At the same time,
it is necessary to uphold justice and redress historical
injustices as soon as possible. Thirdly, the international
community should further consolidate consensus and
establish a new mechanism for peace in the Middle
East. It should support the efforts of the League of Arab
States and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
in that connection. The United Nations should urge
Member States to effectively implement the relevant
General Assembly resolutions on the question of
Palestine and Israel. The Security Council should
actively respond to the legitimate demands put forward
by Palestine and the Arab States and seriously consider
the question of providing international protection to the
Palestinian people.

Fourthly, the international community should
continue to promote the economic and reconstruction
process, enhance its economic assistance to and
cooperation with Palestine and alleviate its humanitarian
situation so as to bring hope to the Palestinian people.

China is a firm supporter ofpeace between Palestine
and Israel. In his recent speech at the headquarters
of the League of Arab States, President Xi Jinping
reiterated China's firm support for the restoration of
the legitimate national rights of the Palestinian people.
China supports the establishment of a Palestinian State
with full sovereignty, based on the pre-1967 borders
with East Jerusalem as its capital, and understands its
legitimate demands to join the international community
as a State. In order to improve the livelihood of the
Palestinian people, China has decided to provide gratis
assistance in the amount of¥50 million. China is ready,
together with the international community, to play its
part in pushing forward the Middle East peace process.

With regard to the question of Syria, China
commends the mediation efforts carried out by Special
Envoy Staffan de Mistura and supports the leading
role the United Nations plays in mediating a political
solution on the question of Syria. The search for a
political solution is now presented with an important
window of opportunity, and China hopes that the new
round of peace talks in Geneva can be held shortly. The
international community should continue to support
the efforts of the United Nations to encourage both
parties to the negotiations to take the future and greater
good of their country into consideration, proceed based
on the fundamental interests of the Syrian people,
demonstrate sincerity, seek common ground and resolve
their differences so as to ensure that the peace process
stays the course and achieves positive results. We hope
that the international community will work jointly to
maintain the current positive momentum towards a
political solution.

Cooperation in international counter-terrorism
requires the international community to strengthen
its consensus in this field. China calls on the relevant
military alliances on counter-terrorism to strengthen
communication and cooperation. Counter-terrorism
cannot be subject to double standards and terrorism
should not be linked to a specific ethnicity, religion or
civilization. We support the efforts of the international
community to further strengthen coordination in
accordance with the principles and purposes of the
Charter of the United Nations and other recognized
basic norms of international law, and to create synergy
in counter-terrorism efforts within the United Nations
framework.

