Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Kubis
for his informative briefing. I also thank him and his
entire team at the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for their steadfast and
professional work supporting the Afghan people and
their Government at this critically important juncture.

I welcome Executive Director F edotov of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to the Council
today, and thank him very much for his briefing.

Once again, I thank Ambassador Tanin for his
presence and for his remarks.

We are meeting at an historic time for Afghanistan.
Millions of Afghans have gone out to vote not once,
but twice, in recent months, in an election that will
eventually determine the first democratic transfer of
power the country has ever seen. It has been an act of
immense courage on the part of Afghan voters, who
braved real threats to assert their most basic democratic
right. And, I would argue, there are reasons to be
optimistic beyond the ink on millions ofpeople's fingers.
Many of the Afghan institutions that have developed
over the past decade played a key role in the electoral
process. Presidential candidates engaged in vigorous
televised debates that raised public awareness of their
positions. Their campaigns were covered by a maturing
and independent national press. Nearly 70 Afghan
organizations fielded more than 18,000 observers to
increase transparency, and Afghan security forces
provided security throughout the process.

Perhaps no one has seen a bigger change than
Afghanistan's women. Under Taliban rule, Afghan
women were completely excluded from public life. This
year, more than 2.5 million women cast ballots in the
first round of voting. But that is not all. Female election
observers monitored polling stations and women ran
for and won seats on provincial councils. The Afghan
people can be proud of that progress.

Even as we recognize steps forward, we are
mindful of the challenges that remain. One of those
challenges is evaluating allegations of electoral
fraud. To that end, we urge both candidates to remain
engaged with Afghanistan's electoral institutions - the
Independent Election Commission and the Independent
Electoral Complaints Commission - and to present
them with any evidence of fraud. We call on those
institutions to ensure that all allegations they receive
are given prompt, thorough and impartial review and
adjudication, and we call on all stakeholders to refrain
from violence and to condemn violent acts if and when
they occur. Further, we believe that UNAMA can play a
critically important role in facilitating that process and
in maintaining the dialogue between the candidates and
the Afghan electoral bodies.

Without regard to which candidate emerges
victorious, the United States is committed to working
with the next President of Afghanistan in order to help
the Afghan people build a more stable, peaceful and
prosperous country. That is why President Obama
announced last month that we are ready to keep
approximately 9,800 United States service members
in Afghanistan at the start of 2015. Those troops will
help to train, advise and assist the Afghan National
Security Forces as part of the NATO Resolute Support
mission and pursue the remnants of Al-Qaida. That
support depends on the conclusion of the bilateral
security agreement that both Afghan candidates have
committed to signing.

International assistance will remain vital to
ensuring Afghanistan's future stability. The Afghan
people can be confident that the United States will do
its part to provide long-term, multifaceted support.
That will include financial assistance for sustaining
and professionalizing the Afghan National Security
Forces, humanitarian aid to tackle endemic problems
such as the country's massive displaced population, and
key investments in Afghan institutional and economic
development. That support will be critical to shoring up
the gains made over the past decade.

Afghanistan will also need the help ofits neighbours.
Just as a more stable Afghanistan is essential to security
in the region, so is the region's enduring engagement
in building peace and stability in Afghanistan. It is
important that regional partners continue to promote
Afghanistan's development through initiatives such
as the Istanbul Process on Regional Security and
Cooperation for a Secure and Stable Afghanistan. In
that regard, we recognize China's leadership in hosting
the forthcoming Heart of Asia Ministerial Conference
in August.

Afghanistan's progress will also depend on
continuing international support for a robust UNAMA
mission so that the United Nations can continue to
work on crucial issues ranging from coordinating
humanitarian aid to fostering regional diplomacy, and
from monitoring human rights practices to supporting
the development of key institutions such as the justice
system. We look forward to discussing the future of
that mission with the new Afghan Government and
with Security Council colleagues.

Let me be clear - outside support alone cannot
guarantee that Afghanistan will realize its full
potential. Ultimately, the hardest choices about the
country's future will fall on the shoulders of its leaders,
who will need to build upon the important gains made
over the past decade. As the bravery and determination
of the Afghan people in the recent election have shown,
Afghans are willing to take great risks in order to build
a more stable, peaceful and prosperous country. We
must continue to support them.

