Ms. Landgren: The report ofthe Secretary-General
now before the Council (S/2012/64l) continues to reflect
this year's particular focus on the evolution of United
Nations engagement in Liberia. Since 2003, Liberia
has transformed itself from a failed State into one well
along the path to democracy and lasting peace. The
country has made remarkable progress in institutional
rebuilding, economic recovery and consolidation of its
democratic processes. The presidential and legislative
elections of 2011 demonstrated its capacity to manage
a politically and logistically complex event. The
subsequent peaceful formation of a new Government
signaled the country's increased stability.

With Liberia on the verge of becoming a true
success story, the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL) must walk a delicate balance, applauding
successes and pulling back its support while continuing
to accompany Liberia in areas crucial to lasting peace.
The United Nations continues to provide security
support to Liberia on a significant scale. But, as the
Secretary- General notes in his report, security measures
alone will not create lasting stability in Liberia. The
reinforcement of the national security sector should go
hand in hand with national reconciliation and structural
changes aimed at addressing the underlying causes of
past conflict. Achieving that, however, will take both
political commitment and financial resources.

During its visit in May, the Council saw first
hand both Liberia's promise as well as the remaining
challenges. The Government is firmly committed to
taking on the security responsibilities now performed
by the Mission. On the basis of a recent joint transition
workshop held by the Government and UNMIL, we
have updated our joint planning structures and are
reviewing the linkages between these structures, donor
coordination mechanisms and Liberia's development
frameworks for greater coherence. We have designed
a graphic road map to help illustrate phase by phase
the demands on the Liberian security sector and to give
the Government the necessary lead time to adjust its
security posture.

Addressing capacity gaps in the security sector
will be important to a successful and well-managed
transition. As the technical assessment mission
concluded, national security agencies are not yet able to
maintain stability without the support of UNMIL. The
technical assessment mission also set out other areas
that continue to need attention.

How best to address capacity needs was a major
theme of our recent workshop, and Liberia's international
partners - including Ambassador Tillander, the
Chair of the Liberia country configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission - were heavily engaged.
With a growing annual budget - at $672 million for
2012-2013, up by nearly a quarter on last year - Liberia
is increasingly able to find national resources to help
finance the security sector. But the country has many
competing priorities. The recent public expenditure
review of the Liberian security sector, conducted by
UNMIL and the World Bank, concluded that it would
take another six or seven years until Liberia can cover
these costs independently. In the meantime, donor
support will be essential.

The Liberia National Police (LNP) has made
headway, recently doubling its physical capacity at the
police academy and, in June, deploying to the C6te
d'Ivoire border with the Armed Forces of Liberia. But
given the relatively large burden the police will bear
as UNMIL transitions, considerable attention should be
given to increasing police professionalism and logistics
capacity. Also, increased resources will be needed for
recurring costs. After the transition workshop, the
Government was able to identify additional resources
for the police, reportedly as much as a 26-per cent
increase from last year. Of particular concern, however,
is a decreased allocation for the police training academy
at a time when the need is so great to scale up LNP
recruitment and training.

The Police Support Unit and the Emergency
Response Unit - specialized bodies responsible for
riot control and quick reaction - will become central
to national response to security incidents as UNMIL
draws down. The strength of the Police Support Unity
needs to grow to at least 1,000, of which it is currently
over 25 per cent short, mindful always of maintaining
quality and professionalism.

Given the porosity of Liberia's borders and the
security and political challenges in the Mano River
Union, supporting the Government to form an effective
and professional immigration service is a high priority.
The United Nations Police will form a dedicated unit to
work with the Government on the strategic plan of the
Bureau of Immigration and Naturalization. Through
this, the Bureau should emerge with better-defined
functions and a rationalized structure. Vetting of
Bureau personnel is also central to these reforms.

Building the capacity of the security sector needs to
be properly framed. As important as numbers is police
professionalism. Liberia's national security strategy,
and a drive to implement the security related legislation
signed into law last year, can help to achieve this. A new
police law, a civilian complaints board and legislation
on gun control are part of the scaffolding for a sound
security sector, joining last month's establishment of a
national small arms commission.

Strengthened security capacity and regulation will
need to be matched with a strongerjustice system if the
public is to have confidence in the State's capacity to
protect and provide justice. The Justice and Security
Joint Programme, agreed among all rule oflaw actors in
December 2011, coherently captures national priorities,
and will guide the development of this sector over the
next three years. The programme includes five justice
and security hubs, the first of which is soon to be
completed with funding from the Peacebuilding Fund.
These hubs decentralize justice and security services,
historically centred in Monrovia, bringing them closer
to rural populations.

Constitutional reform and national reconciliation
are recognized as central to peace consolidation in
Liberia. In August, the President appointed a five-
person constitution review committee, whose members
represent various political, ethnic and religious
backgrounds. The scope of the committee's task has
not yet been made public. Separately, a constitutional
reform initiative has been advanced by a group called
the Political Consultative Forum, composed of all
major political parties, including the ruling party, and
civil society groups. The Law Reform Commission
and the Governance Commission are also engaged,
and the Liberia Bar Association has recently made
recommendations in this area.

Views differ on whether Liberia should engage in
comprehensive constitutional reform or simply amend
selected provisions. Any revision must be endorsed
by referendum, which implies a high degree of public
awareness. A truly inclusive and consultative process
holds one of the keys to overcoming the structural
imbalances and injustices that continue to present risks
for the stability of the country.

As the Secretary-General's special report of this
April (S/2012/230) underlined, a highly centralized
system of governance is rooted in the current
Constitution. Reform opens the door to greater
decentralization and to allowing all Liberians to enjoy
dependable access to services and greater political
inclusion. Such reforms are also manifestly a factor in
national reconciliation.

A draft reconciliation road map is currently under
review and due to be launched in October. Coordinated
by the Ministry of Internal Affairs, the road map
covers some principal recommendations of the Truth
and Reconciliation Commission, including the "Palava
Hut" programme, where perpetrators can seek public
forgiveness. Other elements recommended by the
Commission, such as those on impunity, remain largely
unaddressed in the draft road map. As this process
moves forward, the United Nations would encourage
full, inclusive consultation and public discussion,
allowing all Liberians to feel part of a national healing
process. The United Nations would also like to see
an invigorated Independent National Commission on
Human Rights, and UNMIL is ready to offer support
to this end.

The Liberian Government has continued its efforts
to mitigate security threats at its border with Cote
d'Ivoire. Both Governments and the two Missions
met in June to discuss enhanced border security
and protection of civilians. Following this, Liberia
deployed Operation Restore Hope, in which the Armed
Forces of Liberia, the Emergency Response Unit and
the Bureau of Immigration are taking part. This is the
first major deployment of the Armed Forces of Liberia.
The operation has been conducted in border areas
with only limited localized support from UNMIL.
The Government has taken additional measures,
including the closure of the border, with exceptions on
humanitarian grounds.

The Mission and the Government have long
received reporting of alleged training and recruitment
of armed groups on Liberian soil, including in reports
of the Panel of Experts, some of these alleging the
involvement of Ivorians residing in refugee camps in
Liberia. A comprehensive national strategy to address
the issue of mercenaries and foreign combatants is
still needed. When I visited the FTP refugee camp in
Grand Gedeh county last month, refugee leaders and
local authorities all called for greater camp security.
Several measures that were previously agreed have
yet to be implemented, including an unarmed National
Police presence at the camps and adequate screening
of arriving asylum seekers by the Liberia Refugee
Repatriation and Resettlement Commission.

UNMIL and the United Nations Operation in Cote
d'Ivoire (UNOCI) have strengthened our inter-mission
cooperation on border issues. The missions remain
ready to work with both Governments on a shared border
strategy, as the Council has called for in resolution
2062 (2012), including not only security measures but
also longer-term elements of reconciliation, justice and
employment.

Since June, the missions have conducted mirrored
patrols, and have held five meetings under a revitalized
Operation Mayo, which includes civilian participation
in joint border meetings to build confidence and draw
on the strong community ties on both sides of the border.
UNMIL and UNOCI have secured the approval of their
host Governments to conduct cross-border air operations
and aerial reconnaissance missions, which may also

have a deterrent effect when employed in response to
known threats. We are also setting up hotlines between
sector commanders to share information as quickly as
possible at the field level

UNMIL is able to begin the transition because of
the progress that Liberia has made since 2003. The
Mission represents nearly a decade of major investment
by the international community. That investment has
paid handsome dividends, supporting Liberians with a
time and space free of war. That has made possible two
democratic elections and steps towards national reform
on a large scale. Liberia is becoming a nation at peace
with itself and with its past, a nation able to channel its
vast economic potential into the better lives its people
have waited for.

In the context of a carefully managed transition,
the Council's own calls for a coherent approach to
peacekeeping and peacebuilding are particularly
important. As UNMIL works with the Government and
partners to chart a critical path towards an exit strategy,
Liberia's stability must remain the top priority.

I look forward to working closely with all Liberians
and with the Council in support of Liberia's continued
peaceful advancement. I would like to thank all of
UNMIL'S Liberian partners for having welcomed me
so warmly.

