Ukraine thanks Indonesia for organizing the present open debate on the linkages between international terrorism and organized crime. Terrorism, fuelled by the root causes of radicalization and violent extremism, is ever-more interlinked with organized crime and the trafficking in persons, drugs and arms, as well as with corruption. The common denominator between terrorist and criminal groups alike is that their activities are not limited to a specific region or State; rather, they have expansionary aspirations and a vast development agenda. Up until now, the international community has been exposed to constantly evolving threats from the so called "crime-terror nexus", with more sophisticated methods and tactics, including in the financing of transnational criminal acts. In this regard, Ukraine takes note of the joint report submitted by the Secretary-General in accordance with resolution 2482 (2019) on linkages between terrorism and organized crime (S/2020/754). Ukraine is among the States having contributed to that report by sharing their own experiences in countering this phenomenon at the domestic and international levels. Among the factors allowing terrorist and criminal groups to remain active and ambitious are the following: the misuse of technological advances and communication innovations; loosely controlled borders; the complex challenges with regard to returning and relocating foreign terrorist fighters from conflict zones; a lack of effective strategies in countering hostile propaganda and recruiting; and insufficient prosecution and punishment measures in place for those who provide funding or other support to terrorist and criminal activities in any form and by any methods. It therefore remains crucial to ensure the effective implementation of all international instruments in force for combating terrorism and transnational organized crime, namely the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, the International Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism, the United Nations Convention against Corruption as well as the relevant Security Council resolutions, the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and the Financial Action Task Force standards and recommendations. Ukraine wishes to reaffirm the importance of the Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocols in combating both existing and emerging forms of transnational organized crime, including armed robbery, kidnapping for ransom, money-laundering and corruption. Moreover, as Ukraine pays the utmost attention to the issue of combating human trafficking, since such crimes are often transnational, it can additionally address terrorists' role in human trafficking, migrant smuggling and illicit transfers of firearms. The fight against these crimes requires joint efforts and coordination of respective activities among countries. Ukraine therefore supports the establishment of an implementation review mechanism for the Convention and its Protocols. We believe that any mechanism that may be adopted should be transparent, efficient, non-intrusive and impartial, while aiming in particular at assisting in the effective implementation of this instrument's provisions. Moreover, there is an urgent need to find additional effective measures to counter the evolving trends in both terrorism and organized crime. In particular, having being unpunishably integrated into the policy of some States, terrorism and criminal components lead to brutal violations of international law, including to the commission of war crimes and crimes against humanity. Ukraine continues to experience such consequences in countering hybrid Russian aggression, now ongoing for more than six years. The reports of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe Special Monitoring Mission and of the United Nations Human Rights Mission in Ukraine confirm the continuous inflow of ammunition, weaponry and fighters from the Russian Federation into the temporarily occupied territories of Ukraine. These military assets are delivered either openly or under the guise of the so-called "humanitarian convoys". With this and other Russian support, more than 13,000 people were killed in Donbas, while nearly 1.45 million people were forced to leave their homes. In temporarily occupied Crimea, the aggressor State is discrediting international efforts - including those of the Security Council - to counter terrorism by producing fake accusations of terrorist activities and by illegally sentencing innocent people. The Russian occupying authorities just chose to fabricate the so-called Hizb ut-Tahrir cases against Crimean activists and civilian journalists, although no one is linked to any recognizable crime or even to planning to commit such a crime. Since 2014, Russia has being using its "terrorism" legislation to put systematic pressure on Crimean Tatars as well as exerting continuous repression on religious, ethnic and political grounds. Considering that Islamic extremism had never been part of the history of the Crimean peninsula before the current Russian occupation, the frequency with which the occupation authorities are using this accusation to justify their searches, detention and robust punitive actions strongly suggests that it is a pretext for discrimination, in blatant violation of the Convention on the Elimination on all Forms of Racial Discrimination. Those and other facts regarding violations of the international legal framework prove, time and again, that combating the activities of individual terrorists and terrorist groups will be insufficient if the problem of State-sponsored terrorism is not effectively and comprehensively addressed. Shifting blame, manipulation and propaganda, interference in the internal affairs of States, fuelling international conflicts by supplying weapons and financing of terrorism, killing civilians, including medical personnel - that is the modern political course of the Russian Federation. That is why the issue of holding to account not only individuals or organizations but also those States responsible for organizing, financing or otherwise supporting terrorist and criminal activities should be duly dealt with. The sanctions imposed on the aggressor-State should be maintained and further strengthened. Therefore, the only option for sanctions to be lifted is thorough complete halting of continuous violations of international law, including armed aggression, occupation and human rights abuses. Transnational criminal activity, including terrorism, must be not only condemned but effectively countered and punished.
