Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America): I too
welcome the presence of the Secretary-General.

The United States is deeply concerned by the
continuing violence in Gaza and southern Israel. We
support an immediate ceasefire that is sustainable and
implemented by all. Specifically, this means that
Hamas must stop its rocket attacks. There cannot be a
meaningful ceasefire without this step or without the
end of illegal arms smuggling into Gaza.

We have not yet seen any evidence that Hamas is
willing to immediately cease rocket attacks. The
decision by Hamas to break the Egyptian-brokered
period of calm - a decision, by the way, that was
announced immediately following the adoption of
Security Council resolution 1850 (2008) - led to
renewed rocket attacks into southern Israel from Gaza.
Knowing that it was intolerable for Israel to live under
the terror of rocket attacks, Hamas continued its
barrage, which involved dozens of rockets a day. As a
result, we face the crisis we are meeting about today.

The United States deeply regrets the loss of
innocent lives and the growing humanitarian
difficulties in the area. We need to address all
humanitarian suffering on an urgent basis. A ceasefire
will clearly help with this objective. To attain these
crucial results, my Government has been engaged in
intensive efforts with Governments in the region and
around the world to restore calm. These intensive
efforts continue and will not cease until calm is
restored.

We are faced with an extremely complex situation
that cannot be resolved by simple and one-sided
declarations or unbalanced initiatives. We welcome the
concrete efforts made by the legitimate Palestinian
Authority, the Government of Egypt, the European
Union, the Arab League and other groups to contribute
to a viable solution. For our part, we are working
incessantly to achieve the following urgent objectives:
first, an enduring ceasefire that is respected by all
parties; secondly, an end to smuggling of weapons into
Gaza; thirdly, increased transit of humanitarian goods
to aid Palestinian people; and, fourthly, the opening of
the crossings, with appropriate and legitimate
Authority control.

We call on all to join us by working for those
concrete objectives. Beyond that, as the Quartet stated
in the most recent statement, a lasting peace will be
reached through simultaneous and mutually reinforcing
efforts on three tracks: negotiations; building the
institutions of a Palestinian State; and implementation
of the parties' obligations under the Road Map, leading
to the two-State solution - Israel and Palestine. We

are committed to resuming efforts towards the
establishment of that lasting peace.

