Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Staffan de Mistura for
his briefing and we welcome the statement made by
Ambassador Tanin, Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan.

In general, we share the assessments contained in
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2011/l20*) on
the situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security. We would like to
touch on a number of points.

We are seriously concerned about the ongoing
high level of violence in Afghanistan, compelling
evidence of which is provided by statistics in the
Secretary-General's report. The terrorist activities of
Al-Qaida, the Taliban movement and other terrorist and
extremist groups continue unabated. We are also
concerned about their expanded use of asymmetrical
actions, which are resulting in an ever increasing
number of civilian victims, including women and
children. While we note the efforts of the international
military presences to reduce the number of civilian
losses, we share the deep concern of Afghan authorities
with regard to ongoing incidents involving civilian
losses, including children, during military operations.

There is a need to end situations in which
insurgents are pushed out of areas where counter-
terrorist activities are under way while instability spills
over into calmer areas. In that regard, we note in
particular the northern part of the country, where a
deterioration of the situation could have destabilizing
ramifications for neighbouring regions of Central Asia.

Those kinds of negative trends call for the utmost
prudence when implementing a reconciliation
programme, which will only be effective if it is carried
out with Afghan Government leadership. We therefore
support the intention of President Karzai to integrate
only those who decide to end violence, take part in the
building of a free and open society, respect the
Constitution, break with Al-Qaida and other terrorists
and work to seek political aims through peaceful means.

A crucial element in the reconciliation and
reintegration process - and in an Afghan settlement in
general - continues to be effective compliance with
the sanctions regime imposed by resolution 1267 (1999).

11-2662]
Afghanistan stands at the threshold of a new era
in its history. The process of Afghanization of
governance is now beginning. We support the ultimate
goal of a transfer of responsibility for security in the
country to national security forces by 2014. Among
other things, that goal implies effective measures to
increase and appropriately equip the Afghan armed
forces and police so that they can independently ensure
the security of their citizens. In that regard, the
withdrawal of the International Security Assistance
Force will be possible only once it has reported to the
Security Council that it has implemented its mandate.

Additional efforts are also needed to assist in the
social and economic rehabilitation of the country.
There is also a need to focus on the speedy
implementation of projects that are of vital importance,
above all in the areas of energy, transport, agriculture
and mineral extraction. In that connection, the role of
the United Nations continues to be crucial in
coordinating international civilian efforts to help
Afghanistan return to normal life. We are certain that
an updated mandate for the United Nations Mission in
Afghanistan, which is to be reflected in the draft
resolution now being drafted, will fully meet those
goals.

We have taken note of the assertion in the report
of the Secretary-General that expanding regional
cooperation and constructive participation by
Afghanistan's neighbours constitutes an important
element in implementing the Kabul process. We
believe that a useful coordinating role in that regard
could be played by such credible regional organizations
as the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and the
Collective Security Treaty Organization, which have
extremely interesting know-how and experience in
their activities in the Afghan area.

It is clear that a peaceful and democratic future
for Afghanistan cannot emerge without addressing such
a critical problem as the illicit production and
trafficking in drugs. The magnitude of this problem has
reached such dangerous proportions that the
international community has rightfully described this
scourge as a threat to international peace and security.
It should be recalled that drug trafficking continues to
be one of the central sources for the financial
underpinning of the subversive activities of terrorists
and extremists. Given the soaring prices for opiates and
the great likelihood that Afghan drug production will
increase this year, we again draw attention to the need
to adopt effective measures to destroy drug crops and
laboratories and stop the flow of precursors into
Afghanistan. The decision to list drug lords on the
Security Council sanctions list still needs to be
implemented.

The drug threat must be countered jointly. We call
on the Government of Afghanistan and the
International Security Assistance Force to immediate
undertake active counter-narcotics efforts. We also
reaffirm the readiness of the Collective Security Treaty
Organization to engage with them, within the context
of the Operation Kanal drug interception effort, to
implement initiatives - with the coordinating role of
the United Nations and the involvement Afghanistan's
neighbouring countries, of course - to establish a
comprehensive system of counter-narcotic and
financial security buffer zones. It is only by pooling
efforts that we will achieve our common goal of
building an Afghanistan that is a stable, democratic,
independent, neutral and prosperous State, free from
terrorism and drug-related crime.

For our part, we are prepared to continue to
provide this country multifaceted assistance in efforts
to stabilize the internal situation and ensure sustainable
economic development.

