Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina has attached great importance to
investigating the attack of 14 February 2005 that killed
former Lebanese Prime Minister Rafik Hariri and 22
others. We continue to believe that the planners,
authors and perpetrators of that brutal terrorist attack
must be brought to justice without delay. That is why
my delegation has from the outset supported the work
of the International Independent Investigation
Commission established by the Security Council, under
the leadership of Mr. Mehlis. We welcome the progress
made thus far and congratulate Mr. Mehlis on his
efforts.

Bearing in mind that this investigation has not yet
concluded, Argentina supported the Secretary-
General's decision to renew the Commission's mandate
until 15 December 2005. We hope that further progress
will have been made by then and that the next report
submitted to the Council will be illuminating and
definitive.

As Mr. Mehlis said on 25 October, if the
Commission is to finalize its work, it needs
collaboration and cooperation from all those who may
have relevant information, particularly the Syrian
authorities. That is why we believe that Syria will
provide the cooperation requested of it by the Security
Council. In that connection, we are pleased that Decree
96 was signed on 29 October, establishing a special
judicial committee to cooperate with the International
Commission and with the Lebanese judicial authorities.
We deem this is a positive initiative, and it is an
expression of the will on the part of the Syrian
authorities to get to the bottom of this matter.

We believe that the successful conclusion of the
investigation must be the main objective of the
Security Council in regard to this matter. For this
reason, from the outset of negotiations on the draft
resolution, my country has maintained that the Council
must adopt a constructive approach and avoid
confrontation, taking measures that could facilitate
cooperation on the part of all who might have any
information to bring to the investigation.

We also insist that the action of the Security
Council must respect the principles of due process and
the presumption of innocence, and that we should
avoid any reference to aspects that are outside the
mandate of the Commission.

On this basis, along with other members of the
Security Council, Brazil in particular, we submitted a
number of amendments to the draft resolution. Today
we are pleased to see that the vast majority of those
amendments have been included. We would also like to
express our thanks to the sponsors for their additional
efforts.

For this reason, within this framework, we agreed
to the adoption of the draft resolution through
unanimous support. That is why I would point out once
again the importance Argentina places on unity in this
Security Council. It seems to us that, on matters of
such importance such as this one, strengthening our
message depends not only on the content but also on
the unanimous adoption of decisions taken in the
Council.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate that my country
believes that the Security Council must place the same
priority on this matter as it has on other matters related
to the Middle East.

On this occasion, Argentina wishes to reiterate its
commitment to finding a just and lasting solution to the
various aspects related to the conflict in that region, in
accordance with the resolutions that have been adopted
by the Security Council.

