Mr. Verbeke (Belgium) (spoke in French): I
should like first of all to say how honoured my
delegation is by the presence among us of the Vice-
President of Iraq, Mr. Adil Abdal Mahdi. I would also
like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Qazi, for his briefing to the
Council, and Ambassador Wolfe for the statement that
he made on behalf of the Multinational Force.

Belgium shares the concern of the Secretary-
General as regards the danger that the violence in Iraq
poses to its society, institutions and political process -
all of which are still fragile.

We welcome the renewed efforts of the Iraqi
Government to meet the first obligation of any State
under the rule of law, namely, to ensure the security of
its citizens and full respect for their basic rights.
However, we are all aware that an approach based
solely on security will not provide long-term stability
for Iraq. It is for that reason that Belgium supports the
appeal of the Secretary-General for heightened
dialogue at the national, regional and international
levels.

Belgium has always emphasized the importance
of promoting inclusiveness in the political process in
Iraq. We hope that the adoption at the end of February
by the Council of Ministers of the draft law on
hydrocarbons will be the first step in that direction.

In addition, Belgium encourages Iraq and its
neighbours to expand their dialogue. Given the high
numbers of refugees, it is clear that the Iraqi authorities
are not the only ones suffering as a result of the
deteriorating situation in Iraq; nor are they the only
ones in a position to rectify the situation. It is therefore
by working together that Iraq and its neighbours must
resolve the problem - at least in part - so as to be
able to work towards the stabilization of both Iraq and
the entire region.

Belgium supports the efforts of the Secretary-
General and his Special Representative to promote
regional dialogue. We also welcome the meeting held
last weekend in Baghdad at the initiative of the
Government of Iraq. We hope that those various
contacts will soon be followed by specific
commitments that make a constructive contribution to
stabilizing Iraq.

With regard to the part to be played by the
international community, we believe its role should be
a dual one: to lend its full political support to efforts
aimed at the reconciliation and stabilization of Iraq and
to demonstrate our solidarity with the people of Iraq
through specific actions.

There will be two opportunities in the near future
for Belgium and the international community to
reaffirm their cooperation with Iraq. In April there will
be a welcome initiative by Mr. Antonio Guterres, High
Commissioner for Refugees, to convene an
international ministerial conference to raise awareness
about, and meet, the urgent humanitarian needs of the
many Iraqis who continue to flee from violence. And,
beginning tomorrow, a meeting will be held where the
Government of Iraq will present the latest
developments in the implementation of the
commitments made as part of the International
Compact with Iraq. Belgium believes that the Compact
is an opportunity to renew the partnership between the
international community and Iraq, as well as a chance
to remobilize efforts to rebuild Iraq. The Compact
should also provide for broader international support
for the Government of Iraq. However, security and
national reconciliation continue to be prerequisites for
Iraq's reconstruction.

