Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We thank Under-Secretary-
General Mark Lowcock and Under-Secretary-General
Jeffrey Feltman for their comprehensive briefings.

We would like to express our gratitude to the
United Nations and its humanitarian partners for
their continuing efforts to provide humanitarian
assistance to millions of Syrians. As Mr. Lowcock
said, the humanitarian crisis in Syria continues to be
a devastating one. Military activities in various parts
of the country, including eastern Ghouta, have affected
the ability of the United Nations to deliver lifesaving
assistance to all in need. As the report of the Secretary-
General (8/2018/138) says, the conflict and other
obstacles have had a disastrous effect on the level of
humanitarian access.

In order to address those challenges and to
alleviate the Syrians' suffering, the Security Council
unanimously adopted resolution 2401 (2018),
demanding the institution without delay of a cessation
of hostilities for at least 30 consecutive days throughout
Syria so as to ensure the safe, unimpeded and sustained
delivery of humanitarian aid and services and medical
evacuations. As we all emphasized on Saturday after
welcoming the resolution's adoption (see S/PV.8186),
what is now required is its full and comprehensive
implementation with the immediate engagement of all
parties and those with influence on them. Of course,
we understand and appreciate the fact that the United
Nations is ready to provide immediate humanitarian
aid across the country. However, as Mr. Lowcock just
highlighted, there are still military activities in various
areas. In that regard, we call on all the parties to fully
implement resolution 2401 (2018) for the sake of the
Syrian people, who have continued to bear the brunt of
the conflict for almost eight years.

We appreciate any measure taken by Member
States to facilitate the implementation of the ceasefire,
including the humanitarian pause and humanitarian
corridor announced by the Russian Federation. At the
same time, it is obvious that more needs to be done to
fully implement the resolution. It is therefore imperative
to take urgent and coordinated action to bring about an
immediate ceasefire, thereby ensuring that the United
Nations and its humanitarian partners have safe,
sustained and needs-based access in order to deliver
humanitarian aid to all Syrians in need of assistance.

In conclusion, it is ultimately a comprehensive,
Syrian-led political solution, facilitated by the United
Nations on the basis of resolution 2254 (2015), that can
sustainably end the humanitarian tragedy in Syria.

