Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to thank the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Martin Griffiths, and the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs,
Mr. Mark Lowcock, for their informative briefings. I
will focus my statement on two main issues, namely,
the status of implementing the Stockholm Agreement
and the humanitarian developments.

On the implementation of the Stockholm
Agreement, nearly two months have passed since the
Council's adoption of resolution 2451 (2018), which
endorses the Stockholm Agreement between the Yemeni
Government and the Houthis. That is an important and
vital step for a political solution that ends the crisis
and enables the alleviation of the human suffering of
our brotherly Yemeni people. Regrettably, the lack of
compliance with the Security Council resolutions on
Yemen and their full implementation continues to be
a salient characteristic of the situation, starting with
resolution 2140 (2014) and ending with resolution 2452
(2019), including resolutions 2201 (2015) and 2216
(2015). If those resolutions had been implemented,
we could have put an end to the political crisis in that
brotherly country.

In the interim, we have not seen a constructive
approach for the implementation of the Stockholm
Agreement on Al-Hudaydah. Indeed, no tangible
progress has been made in the redeployment of forces,
beginning with the ports and cities of Al-Hudaydah,
Saleef and Ras Isa. That is compounded by repeated
obstacles hindering the work of the Redeployment
Coordination Committee, which has not been able to
carry out its tasks of monitoring the implementation as
defined by Security Council resolutions.

However, we underscore the important role of the
Committee in resuming its work, which ended two
days before its fourth meeting and made possible an
agreement on the implementation of the first phase
of the redeployment plan through the withdrawal of
forces from the ports of Al-Hudaydah, Ras Isa and
Saleef as well as from certain areas in the city so that
the second phase could be implemented according to
a well-defined and agreed time frame, pursuant to the
Stockholm Agreement, as endorsed by resolutions 2451
(2018) and 2452 (2019).

The political will of the two parties is extremely
important, as indicated by the Special Envoy, for
achieving the desired progress. However, it is also
crucial for words to be matched by deeds through the
full implementation of the Stockholm Agreement,
since that would enable the next phase of consultations
to be resumed, encompassing all remaining aspects
in order to put an end to the crisis on the basis of the
relevant Council resolutions, notably resolution 2216
(2015), the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and
its Implementation Mechanism and the outcome of the
comprehensive National Dialogue Conference.

On the humanitarian situation, which is increasingly
critical, we would reaffirm the importance of the full
implementation of the Stockholm Agreement in order
to alleviate human suffering through the opening up
of safe corridors to deliver humanitarian assistance to
those in need in all affected areas. The United Nations
and its specialized agencies would be able to access
the Red Sea Mills, which contain significant grain
stocks that would allow feeding nearly 3.7 million
people for 30 days. We also welcome the call of the
Yemeni Government to facilitate safe access to
those mills and open up the roads for the delivery of
humanitarian assistance.

The statistics put forward by Mr. Lowcock reflect
the acute deterioration in the humanitarian situation,
which needs 26 per cent more funding for the
humanitarian response plan than was needed last year.
The international community should redouble its efforts
to finance the humanitarian response plan for this year,
by participating in the high-level pledging conference
to be held on 26 February in Geneva. That contribution
must be constructive in order to reflect the importance
of addressing this crisis. In that regard, we recall the
important role of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the
United Arab Emirates, the United States of America,
the United Kingdom and Kuwait in financing 83 per
cent of last year's response plan. The state of Kuwait
looks forward to taking part in the conference within
the context of its ongoing humanitarian approach to
alleviate the suffering of the brotherly Yemeni people.

In conclusion, we reiterate our appeal to the parties
in Yemen to fully implement the Stockholm Agreement
on Al-Hudaydah and its three ports, as well as the
prisoner-exchange agreement and the statement of
understanding on the city of Taiz, so as to complement
the efforts of the Special Envoy with a view to
reaching a political solution based on the three agreed-
upon political terms of reference, namely, the Gulf
Cooperation Council Initiative and its Implementation
Mechanism, the outcome of the National Dialogue
Conference and the relevant Council resolutions,
especially resolution 2216 (2015). That would put
an end to this crisis and preserve the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Yemen, as well
as non-interference in its internal affairs.

