Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank the Under-
Secretary-General for his briefing. I also listened very
carefully to what President Vucie and President Thaci
said today.

We believe that Kosovo's development of its
own armed forces is within its sovereign right as
a self-governing independent State, and we urge
Kosovo to do it - and on this I agree with the French
representative - in close consultation with NATO
and the wider international community. I note from
Kosovo's announcement that this development is to
take place over the course of 10 years.

Since resolution 1244 (1999) was adopted, Kosovo
has become an independent, self-governing State
recognized by more than 100 members of the United
Nations, and its decision to extend the mandate of
the Kosovo Security Force should be viewed in that
context. The United Kingdom's interpretation of
resolution 1244 (1999) is that it does not - I repeat, it
does not - contain anything that precludes the future
transition of the mandate of the Kosovo Security Force.
In fact, I reread it at lunch time. I then went on to
read the document that followed it, the constitutional
framework and the United Nations Ahtisaari plan,
the so-called Comprehensive Proposal for the Kosovo
Status Settlement. I can assure the Council than
nothing in any of those three documents precludes
the transformation of the Kosovo Security Force. The
constitutional framework set up a Kosovo Protection
Force. The Constitution builds on that proposal and this
recent decision builds on the Constitution. I just wanted
to establish that. That said, we continue to urge Kosovo
to act responsibly, transparently and in consultation with
NATO allies, and to uphold its existing commitments to
arrangements with the Kosovo Force. What President
Thaci said about his assurances today in that respect
is welcome, but needless to say we expect to see it put
into action.

I have noted the claim that the transition of the
Kosovo Security Force represents a threat to the Kosovo-
Serb community. That claim is not borne out by Kosovo's
genuine efforts to make the Force a multi-ethnic force,
as NATO allies have requested, and we regret that those
efforts have been undermined by external pressure.
We encourage the Kosovo Government to continue its
outreach to the Kovoso-Serb community in order to
allay anxieties. It has been a long time since the Council
visited Kosovo, but I was on one of the earlier trips,
during which we visited the Kosovo-Serb community
in the north, where we heard from many people - but
not all of them - who supported the account given by
President Vucic' and the Russian Ambassador today.
Nor do we share Belgrade's perception that the Kosovo
Security Force's expansion in size and mandate over
the next decade risks jeopardizing regional stability.
We look to Belgrade to respond in a measured way,
including in public statements.

In the light of that, the United Kingdom considers
the assertions by senior politicians and officials about
the possible use of force by Serbia unhelpful, and
we reject the idea that even the notion of such use of
force might be floated. I think it is irresponsible that
one member of the Council has repeated them today. I
agree with that member that there is a risk ofa return to
turmoil, but it is not caused by that decision. It is caused
by those outside Kosovo who would seek to exploit it
for their own ends. However, I take encouragement
from hearing about Russian support for NATO today,
which I think may be a first in this Chamber.

As other speakers have noted, the fundamental
reason that we are here and that those problems persist
is because of the lack of normalization. At every step,
settlements and progress have been blocked. The United
Nations, the European Union (EU), the United States
and Russia have tried and, unfortunately, at every stage
of trying to settle the issue, there has been a blockage,
which I am sorry to say has come from Belgrade. The
only way forward is through normalization, and we look
to both Kosovo and Serbia to make progress in that way.
We note with optimism the resolution that the Assembly
ofKosovo adopted on 15 December establishing a cross-
party negotiating team. Ijoin my French colleague and
others in urging both sides to return to negotiations
through the EU-facilitated dialogue. Progress on the
dialogue is vital to stability, security and prosperity in
the two countries in the region. The final agreement
itself must also contribute to local, regional and global
stability. The two sides have to keep in mind that any
proposals they put forward through the negotiations
must enhance the safety and security of all - I repeat,
all - their citizens.

Obviously, I do not find it surprising, since I took
part in it, that a statement was delivered today on behalf
of the EU-8, the five EU members of the Security
Council - France, Netherlands, Poland, Sweden and
the United Kingdom - along with Italy, Belgium and
Germany. But the reason it is not surprising is because
it is our region. We still care very deeply about what
happens in the Western Balkans. While EU countries
and the EU itself have put a great deal of effort
into helping stability and security there, it is their
future - the future of Kosovo and Serbia. As other
speakers have done today, I urge them to take all the
steps necessary to normalize their relations through the
EU-facilitated dialogue. I call on all their leaders, who
have been elected to represent their people's interests,
to enable that to happen. Both countries must now focus
on a sustainable normalization agreement through the
dialogue, an agreement that enhances security, enjoys
popular domestic support and benefits both countries.
We stand ready, as we have always done, to support
such an agreement.

