Mr. Maurer (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank you, Sir, for this opportunity to
state my country's views on the situation in the Middle
East. I will confine myself to a few aspects of the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. I welcome and thank
Mr. Fernandez-Taranco for his very relevant briefing
this morning.

Switzerland is deeply concerned about the current
humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip. The recent
war and its severe consequences have made the living
conditions in that tiny and densely populated territory
increasingly precarious. Those consequences have
confronted the international community with a real
emergency situation. The near impossibility of
providing people with their basic needs, the lack of
electricity, the limited supply of drinking water and the
serious breakdown of the sewage treatment system are
all causes for alarm.

Switzerland recalls that, in conformity with the
obligations of international humanitarian law, Israel, as
the occupying Power, must ensure access for
humanitarian organizations to the civilian population
and the supply of basic necessities. Sixty years after
the adoption of the Geneva Conventions, respect for
international humanitarian law remains our best
response to the needs of the victims.

While respecting Israel's security imperatives,
Switzerland believes that a concerted effort must be
made to establish a mechanism to ensure humanitarian
access and reconstruction. Such a mechanism - the
development of which is called for in resolution 1860
(2009) - should be based on the framework for the
provision of minimum humanitarian assistance to
Gaza, proposed by the United Nations, and be
coordinated by a technical committee providing for
substantial and sustainable humanitarian access. Its
frame of reference should be the four principles
established by humanitarian practice and endorsed by
the international community in the Outcome Document
of the 2005 World Summit: humanity, neutrality,
impartiality and independence.

Under the auspices of the United Nations, that
neutral, independent and international body should
ensure the reconstruction and rehabilitation of the Gaza
Strip and establish a mechanism to monitor the
importation of goods. Switzerland is willing to
contribute to the establishment of such a body.

In the follow-up to a conflict, fact-finding
missions to investigate allegations of violations of
human rights and of international humanitarian law are
a necessity for the victims. We believe that such
missions ultimately help to bring about a lasting
settlement to the conflict in question and contribute to
preventing future violations. To achieve these two
objectives, they must operate on the basis of a balanced
mandate that takes into account the concerns of all the
parties to a conflict as well as all kinds of violation.

That is the intention of the Goldstone mission,
which was mandated by the Human Rights Council.
We await with interest its report on the alleged
09-42592
violations committed by all parties to the conflict. It
will then be necessary to determine the appropriate
follow-up to the report.

We welcome the renewed commitment of the
international community, in particular of the American
administration, to actively promoting a comprehensive
solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict. The Peace
Initiative of the Arab League and the determination of
the State of Israel to achieve a lasting peace with its
neighbours are encouraging signs. It is therefore
essential that the international community be actively
involved in helping put an end to that agonizing
conflict.

The parameters of a settlement are already well
known. A total freeze on the expansion of all
settlements is a decisive factor for guaranteeing the
peace process. The destruction in East Jerusalem of
Palestinian houses situated near the old city and the
planned eviction of Palestinian families must not
happen. At the same time and in order to launch a
genuine political process, it is essential to renounce
violence. The halt to the rocket attacks against the
Israeli civilian population must be maintained.

Switzerland is convinced that the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict cannot be resolved by military
means. The Clinton parameters, the Taba discussions
and the Geneva initiative clearly indicate the path
towards a solution. The creation of a viable Palestinian
State living side by side with the State of Israel,
existing within secure and internationally recognized
borders, is therefore the only path that can lead to a
lasting settlement of the conflict.

To conclude, I wish to stress the urgency and
importance of creating a mechanism for humanitarian
access and reconstruction in Gaza. We are counting on
the support of the Security Council in this process and
on the active participation of the Member States
concerned and the relevant entities of the United
Nations system.

