Mr. Ilnytskyi (Ukraine): I should like to join other
speakers in expressing our gratitude to all of today's
briefers for their important inputs into our discussion.

In March, the Security Council, following its
visit to the Lake Chad basin, adopted resolution 2349
(2017), which was a timely and dedicated instrument
for responding to the complex crisis in the region.

The Lake Chad Basin region continues to endure
a dire humanitarian and security situation. Extreme
poverty, severe food insecurity, weak governance,
climate change and the destructive activities of Boko
Haram all contribute to this disastrous state of affairs.

Boko Haram continues to pose a threat to the
civilian population in the region. Like a drowning man
grasping at a straw, terrorists resort to the use of all
available means, including suicide attacks. This only
proves that they are losing their combat capacity. In this
regard, we commend the efforts of the Multinational
Joint Task Force and other actors that are fighting this
terrorist group. But the countries of the region need
additional support from the international community to
prevail in this fight once and for all.

The United Nations and other relevant partners
should continue their efforts in helping the Force
prevent and address violations of international human
rights and humanitarian law in the context of their
military operations. In this regard, we commend the
efforts of the relevant United Nations entities that are
working closely in the region towards the establishment
of a human rights due diligence policy framework.

Without such an instrument, the countries of the
Lake Chad basin will face additional obstacles with
regard to the deradicalization and reintegration of former
Boko Haram combatants, as well as to reconciliation.

To ensure lasting peace in the areas liberated
from Boko Haram, the Governments of the Lake Chad
basin region need to rebuild critical infrastructure,
restore a State presence and grant unimpeded access
to humanitarian actors. The absence of governmental
involvement in these areas would mean that people
would continue to be compelled to leave their homes
and seek support and assistance in neighbouring
countries or, much worse, join the ranks of terrorists.

Another question that requires our attention is
the need for the Lake Chad basin countries to ensure
the full implementation of their commitments in the
area of the protection of internally displaced persons
(IDPs). We are concerned by the news that some
countries continue to undertake forced returns of IDPs.
Refugees should return to their homes only voluntarily,
once they are sure that it is safe to leave the camps. If
not, we are risking the creation of frequent back-and-
forth movements across the borders and other areas of
the region.

At the same time, we are encouraged by the efforts
of the Lake Chad basin Governments in responding
to the needs of the peoples affected, including those
in Nigeria. It is paramount that the region and the
international community be able to provide the urgently
needed support to the 10.7 million people across the
Lake Chad basin.

Last but not least, in resolution 2349 (2017) the
Council recognized the adverse effects of climate change
and ecological challenges among other factors affecting
the stability of the region, and emphasized the need
for adequate risk assessments and risk-management
strategies by the Governments of the region and the
United Nations. The issue of climate change was also
dealt with by the Council at the Arria-Formula meeting
on the security implications of climate change, which
was organized by Ukraine in April.

In this regard, we look forward to seeing this
problematic issue discussed in the upcoming reports of
the Secretary-General on the situation in the Lake Chad
basin region.

