Mr. Benard Estrada (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to congratulate the Republic
of Indonesia on assuming the presidency of the Council
for this month.

We thank you for convening this open debate,
Mr. President, and for circulating the concept note
(S/2019/359, annex) that serves as the basis for our
deliberations today. We are also grateful for the briefings
on the subject, which is very relevant to the successful
implementation of the Organization's peacekeeping
operations. We share the view expressed in the
concept note that we troop- and police-contributing
countries are committed to deploying well-trained
and -equipped uniformed personnel and fulfilling
our collective commitment to continually preparing,
training and equipping peacekeepers to an adequate
standard, including through innovative approaches,
such as the strengthening of triangular cooperation and
joint deployments.

My delegation recognizes that effective training
and discipline before, during and after deployment is
critical for the military and police forces to be able to
provide a proportionate and effective response against
the perpetrators of attacks on the civilian population
as well as for the defence of personnel involved in
peacekeeping missions.

It is worth noting that the Secretariat has developed
training guides and materials based on scenarios
for the protection of civilians, among others, but
is not equipped to assess whether the training has
been effectively delivered to all deployed military
and police personnel on the ground. We therefore
reiterate our position that the Secretariat is primarily
responsible for the development, implementation and
validation of standards, as well as for training guidance
for peacekeeping.

We stress the importance of translating specialized
training material on the protection of civilians and other
subjects into the official languages ofthe Organization,
which is essential for a proper understanding of the
standards and requirements applicable to peacekeeping

operations. While my delegation welcomes the
emphasis placed on strengthening the performance and
effectiveness of uniformed and civilian peacekeeping
personnel, I note that it entails responsibilities for both
the Security Council and the Secretariat. The Security
Council has recognized that training is one of the
critical factors for the effective implementation of all
peacekeeping mandates.

For our part, and in order to comply with its
obligations and commitments in this area, Guatemala
established its Regional Command for Peacekeeping
Operations Training (CREOMPAZ) in July 2004. We
have trained personnel composed of senior officers,
junior officers and specialist troops, both nationally
and from member countries of the Central American
Armed Forces Conference and other friendly
countries that have been selected to participate in
various peacekeeping operations under the standards
established by the Organization.

CREOMPAZ is one of the most important
training centres in Latin America, is part of the Latin
American Association of Training Centres for Peace
Operations and was certified by the United Nations
in 2014. The high level of training provided has been
demonstrated through the performance of our military
observers and staff officers in numerous peacekeeping
operations, as well as by the 19 Guatemalan special
forces contingents deployed in the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and previously in the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti. CREOMPAZ
also offers advanced logistics courses for United
Nations instructors, war correspondents and military
experts in peace missions, as well as courses on gender
perspectives in peace operations and civil-military
operations. To date, it has trained 5,880 nationals and
1,652 foreigners, for a total of 7,532 people. In addition,
it has trained 390 women.

We recall that Guatemala has a military education
system comprised of a group of educational institutions
that impart knowledge in the military sciences and
arts at various levels and modalities, as informed by
the philosophy and doctrine of the Guatemalan Army,
under the Higher Education Superior Command of
the Guatemalan Army, with the aim of promoting
and generating academic excellence and professional
performance based on military science and doctrine,
where we develop ethical and civilian competencies
and values for due compliance with international laws
and treaties, based on virtue and excellence.

We would like to highlight the daily efforts of our
Guatemalan personnel to fully carry out their mandates.
In order to continue to do so effectively, peacekeeping
operations must have financial and human resources.
We reiterate that the mandates of the Council must be
clear, realistic and achievable.

Finally, my delegation reiterates its commitment to
contributing properly trained and capable peacekeepers
in order to maintain our participation in peacekeeping
operations with high performance on the ground and
without reservations. We also take this opportunity to
reiterate our position that the mandates of the Security
Council are bolstered and updated by the work of the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations (C- 34), which includes a section entitled "Best practices
and training" in its annual reports. The C-34 mandate
updates the principle of ownership by troop- and
police-contributing countries in the peacekeeping
operations, thereby contributing to strengthening
the performance and effectiveness of uniformed and
civilian peacekeeping personnel.

