Mr. Belinga-Eboutou (Cameroon) (spoke in French): Today we are meeting to have an interactive
discussion on the necessary synergy and partnerships
that the Security Council and regional organizations
need to establish and develop in the light of the new
challenges to international peace and security. My
delegation is grateful to your country, Sir, which has
assumed the presidency of the Council, for including in
your programme of work this meeting, which you are
personally presiding over.

I am delighted at the presence at the beginning of
today's meeting of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi
Annan. We express our appreciation of his preliminary
comments, which were particularly illuminating. I
welcome the heads of regional organizations and thank
them for being able to attend this meeting.

The Charter of the United Nations confers upon
the Security Council primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Articles 52, 53 and 54 of the Charter recognize the role
that regional organizations can play in conflict
prevention and in the maintenance of peace. It gives
me pleasure to note today that regional organizations
want to be more involved and, indeed, are becoming
more involved in conflict-prevention and peacekeeping
operations carried out by the United Nations in their
geographical areas. That fact was aptly recognized and
described by the Secretary-General when, speaking
before the Council on 15 December 1999, he said,
"During this decade peacekeeping has acquired a
strong regional dimension virtually everywhere it has
been practised" (S/PV.408], p. 2).

Speaking after the Interim Chairman of the
Commission of the African Union, whose presence
among us and important contribution to this meeting I
welcome, I will, with your permission, Sir, focus my
statement on cooperation among the Security Council,
the African Union and subregional organizations.

In the course of the open Security Council
debates held on 30 November and 15 December 1999
and on 29 January 2002 on the situation in Africa, all
speakers acknowledged the gravity of the situation in
Africa and the need to help Africa to overcome its
current problems. Indeed, Africa is the region most
affected by armed conflicts, and its development has
inevitably been held up as a result of that. But Africa is
aware of that situation and does not accept it as
inevitable. That is why Africa is gradually organizing
itself to make up for its socio-economic deficiencies
and to ensure the maintenance of peace and security on
the continent, as was recalled just now by the Interim
Chairman of the Commission of the African Union.

The 1993 establishment of the Central Organ of
the Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management
and Resolution and, more recently, the creation in 2001
of the Peace and Security Council respond to that goal.
In order to become operational, those two organs,
which are essential to conflict prevention and
settlement in Africa, require the assistance of the
United Nations. That assistance should take the form of
capacity building, the training of personnel and
appropriate logistic support, in particular within the
framework of the implementation of an early warning
mechanism, and, more generally, the deployment of
African forces in theatres of conflict. Quite naturally,
that requires considerable financial backing, which
Africa expects of the United Nations and its other
partners.
During the open meeting of the Security Council
on the situation in Africa held in 1999, the Secretary-
General stressed most opportunely:

"It is only natural that African States are
expected to play a leading role in their own back
yards, and in many instances they have risen
bravely to the challenge

What is not natural, or indeed fair, is to
expect Africans to carry out those tasks without
help." (S/PV.408], p. 3)

Here, we welcome the establishment of the
Security Council's Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa, which
demonstrates the Council's determination to strengthen
its cooperation with the African Union in order to meet
the new challenges to international peace and security.
The recommendations of that Working Group provide
the blueprint for the appropriate cooperation and
coordination.

The appointment of special representatives and
envoys by the Interim Chairman of the Commission of
the African Union in theatres where the Security
Council is operational constitutes another step in this
direction. That was the case recently with Cote d'Ivoire
and Somalia.

We also welcome initiatives taken by the
Secretary-General to make the work done by the
United Nations in Africa more effective and to ensure
the better coordination of subregional efforts in the
area of conflict prevention and settlement.

The establishment of the United Nations Office
for West Africa is very important in that context. We
have always believed that this effort should be
followed up in other regions torn by domestic and
inter-State conflict. Naturally, I am thinking of Central
Africa. What I am about to say reveals the urgent need
for such a step to be taken in that subregion. Seven of
the 11 countries of the Central African subregion are in
the throes of devastating conflicts. Five of the 12
peacekeeping, peacemaking or peace-building missions
in Africa are operating there. Central Africa also has
six of the Secretary-General's Special Representatives
or Envoys currently in Africa.

Given this situation, the Security Council, in its
presidential statement of 31 October 2002,
recommended the dispatch to Central Africa of an
inter-agency mission to evaluate the situation in the
region and the potential areas and avenues of
cooperation.
I wish very briefly to note that Central Africa has,
within the Economic Community of Central African
States, a Council for Peace and Security backed by the
early-warning mechanism for Central Africa, the
Multinational Force for Central Africa and the Defence
and Security Commission. The capacities of these new
structures need to be strengthened by the international
community, the Security Council in particular, through
staff and troop training programmes and technical and
financial assistance. This intervention is so urgent
because Central Africa, which is already experiencing
so many conflicts, must also become involved in the
great struggle against terrorism and the illicit traffic in
and circulation of weapons. We will come back to this
topic during the informal consultations scheduled for
17 April.

These are the new challenges facing the United
Nations in general and the Security Council in
particular with regard to Africa, particularly Central
Africa.

I wish to end my statement with some questions
that may not be answered today, but will, I hope,
during the consultations to which I referred.

My first questions are addressed to the African
Union. What are the priority areas that require
immediate action by the United Nations? How can the
Security Council take into account African Union
decisions on African questions with which it is seized?
What contribution can the African Union and the non-
African regional organizations make in conflict
prevention and the maintenance of peace and security?

Turning now to the Secretariat, what is the
situation with regard to the idea, which we have always
supported, of establishing a focal point responsible for
all the United Nations work in Africa?

