Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the Permanent Representatives of
Germany, India and South Africa for their briefings on
the work of the Council's subsidiary committees.

Despite the best efforts of the international
community, terrorism remains one of the main threats
to international peace and security. We are reminded of
that by the never-ending terrorist attacks in the Middle
East, the Sahara and the Sahel, which every day take the
lives of innocent people, including children. We firmly
condemn terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
irrespective of the targeted location, be it Libya, Syria,
Iraq, Afghanistan or anywhere else.

Furthermore, we expect our partners to also
condemn unequivocally the global scourge. Double
standards or designating terrorists as either good or
bad - any and all attempts to justify such barbaric acts
by saying that they appear to target military goals - are
unacceptable.

In View of the current situation, it is more
important than ever to strengthen the central role of
the Security Council in the counter-terrorism sphere by
bolstering collective efforts to combat terrorist threats.
In that regard, the work of the Committees and the
strengthening of cooperation among them play a key
role in enhancing the effectiveness of the Council's
contribution to the fight against global terrorism.

We expect that the reform of the main assessment
mechanism of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) - namely, the preliminary implementation
assessment - and improving the working methods
of its Executive Directorate (CTED) following its
country visits will help the CTC to fulfil its mandate
more effectively by complementing the implementation
efforts of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force in that area.

At a time when various regions of the world are
undergoing transformation, it is important to prevent
both the radicalization of certain populations and the
triggering of sectarian or inter-religious clashes. In that
regard, we attach particular importance to implementing
Council resolution 1624 (2005), focusing on preventing
terrorism, limiting the range of terrorist activities, and
combating the spread of terrorist ideology and violent
extremism and the use of media and the Internet for
terrorist purposes.
We support strengthening of the CTC's contacts
with international and regional organizations in order
to expand the network of counter-terrorism cooperation
under the auspices of the United Nations. We note
the close and regular contacts of the CTC, as well as
the Committees established pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1540 (2004), with the Meeting of
Heads of Special Services, Security Agencies and
Law-Enforcement Organizations on terrorism-related
issues, which was initiated by the Russian Federal
Security Service. Early this year, we heard the most
recent briefing to the CTC by the representative of that
Meeting. We should maintain that practice.

We commend the role of CTED in providing
assistance to the CTC. Resolution 1963 (2010) renewed
the Directorate's mandate, which assigns important
tasks to that structure, while requiring the whole of
CTED, including its leadership, to deliver fully. Russia
will endeavour to enhance dialogue with the Executive
Directorate in order to significantly strengthen
its capacity. Russia also intends to foster closer
cooperation with potential donors, develop cooperation
with international regional organizations and expert
groups of the Council's committees, and continue the
practice of CTED field missions.

We commend the October visit by CTED experts
to the Russian Federation. The visit showed that Russia
remains at the forefront of international efforts to
combat terrorism and has significant experience that
may be transformed into best practices in that area. We
are prepared to share our experience with our partners.

It is our hope that the changes made in June 2011
to the sanctions regime of the Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), whereby
the anti-Taliban component was removed, and to the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988
(2011) will help to promote national reconciliation in
Afghanistan. It is still difficult to assess the impact of
that reform. Taliban activity is increasing. It remains
difficult to make a clear distinction between exponents
of Al-Qaida and pure Taliban, despite their individual
statements. Al-Qaida has no intention of leaving
Afghanistan and cutting its ties with the Taliban. It is
present not only in the eastern part of the country, but
also elsewhere. We can discuss whether the agendas of
those organizations differ or not, but it cannot be denied
that relations and interactions among them involving
terrorism remain.

We cannot fail to focus attention on the active
participation of Al-Qaida in the events of the Arab
world, where a breeding ground is being created for
them. In those conditions, the sanctions listing of the
1267 and 1989 Committee must appropriately reflect the
threats posed by Al-Qaida, which, in the light of recent
events in the Arab world, have in no way decreased.
We support the proposal to include new names provided
by Member States on the list. However, the practice of
using sanctions against individuals and organizations
involved in terrorist activities must continue to be based
on an individual approach with respect for appropriate
procedures.

The expanded powers of the Ombudsperson on
delisting, set out in resolution 1989 (2011), and the new
procedure for considering applications for delisting
have ensured an optimal level of transparency in the
Committee's procedures. On the eve of the adoption
of the new sanctions resolution on Al-Qaida in
December, it will be important, when considering
further improvements to the procedures, not to engage
in populism and not to have the Committee fulfil
functions that were not mandated to it, but rather to
focus on preventing the fundamental principles and
effectiveness of its work from being undermined. It is
equally important to improve the effectiveness of the
sanctions mechanisms, which are totally dependent on
States' compliance with their own obligations in this
area. I take this opportunity to underscore the fruitful
and highly professional work of the Monitoring Team
of the 1267 (1999) and 1989 and 1988 Committees.

An important challenge for the international
community is preventing all opportunities for weapons
of mass destruction and their delivery systems and
associated materials from falling into the hands of
terrorists. A key international legal instrument for
implementing this is resolution 1540 (2004), which
guides States in strengthening national non-proliferation
monitoring and control systems. Russia is in favour
of the full implementation of thie resolution by all
countries, bearing in mind the complex and long-term
nature of its requirements.

We welcome the start of work of the new group
of experts of the 1540 Committee. We expect that its
composition will be completed in the coming weeks
and that it will be able to assist the Committee fully. It
is important for the Committee to continue to prioritize
matters of assistance to States in implementing
resolution 1540 (2004), acting as a coordinator of the
relevant efforts of the international community. For our
part, Russia will continue to play an active role in its
efforts, including with regard to the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) in cooperation with members of
the Commonwealth of Independent States.

