Mr. Akram (Pakistan): I should like to thank
Assistant Secretary-General Hedi Annabi for his
briefing and his timely reminder that today is the fourth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1244 (1999).
However, the situation inside Kosovo today still gives
us cause for concern.

As others have done, I should like to condemn the
brutal murders of the Stolic family in Obilic on 4 June.
We hope that no effort will be spared to bring the
perpetrators to justice. We condemn all ethnically-
motivated acts and crimes in Kosovo. The culture of
impunity for such crimes must now come to an end.
Whether these crimes were committed six days ago or
six years ago, those who committed them should not be
allowed to escapejustice.

Since I do not wish to cover the same ground as
others have before me, I would like to focus only on
two issues: first, the immediate priorities inside
Kosovo and, secondly, Pakistan's position on the future
of that territory.

Inside Kosovo, as recent events have amply
illustrated, security and the rule of law remain the two
most vital issues which need to be addressed urgently.
Without security, there can be no freedom of
movement, no protection of minorities, no sustainable
return of refugees and no economic recovery. The rule
of law is central to progress towards justice,
reconciliation and self-governance. These are the two
essential pillars on which the success of the provisional
institutions and the future political stability of Kosovo
will be founded. We hope that the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo will give
these two issues the priority they deserve.

At the same time, we support the Secretary-
General's call on local leaders to work together to
consolidate these institutions by focusing on substance
and practical results instead of holding institutional
developments hostage to political or ethnic differences.
We echo his appeal to local leaders to work together
for a multi-ethnic Kosovo. We urge the full
implementation of Security Council resolution 1244
(1999) and the establishment of the standards that
should facilitate a solution for the political status of
Kosovo.

I would like to affirm that Pakistan regards the
"standards before status" formula as unique, applying
to Kosovo only. We hope in this regard that progress on
the status issue can also begin at an early stage. In this
process, we attach importance to the following.

First, no decision on Kosovo's future should be
taken without consulting and responding to the wishes
of the people of Kosovo. There can be no exception or
special exemptions to the application ofthe principle of
self-determination. And, yes, we very much have
Jammu and Kashmir in mind when we affirm this
principle.

Secondly, it is unacceptable to establish any
linkage between a resolution of the future political
status of Kosovo and the goal endorsed by the
international community: to preserve the territorial
integrity of other States in the region.

Thirdly, the resolution of the status issue should
be facilitated by a meaningful political dialogue
between the leaders of Kosovo and the Government of
Serbia. In that regard, we welcome the initiative by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General to
establish a dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina on
practical matters of mutual concern. We support efforts
to move that dialogue forward at the upcoming
European Union Summit in Thessaloniki. We hope that
the parties will soon develop sufficient confidence to
constructively address as well the difficult political
questions relating to the status of Kosovo in the near
future.

