Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. The candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Iceland,
Serbia and Albania; the countries of the Stabilization
and Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova, Armenia and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.

I would like to begin by expressing my appreciation
to the United States for convening today's debate. It is
important that the Ebola outbreak remain high on the
international agenda since it is not only an isolated
regional problem but a problem that affects us all.

We are deeply concerned about the crisis caused
by the Ebola virus. We deplore the loss of lives, both
among citizens of the affected countries and among
international responders. The best way to do them
justice is to act and prevent further victims. We pay
tribute to all humanitarian and health workers in the
front line who are working tirelessly to bring the crisis
to an end. We will continue to assist, in particular in the
most affected areas, and to work with the World Health
Organization (WHO), the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and other United
Nations, regional and non-governmental organization
partners to help tackle the disease as swiftly and
efficiently as possible.

We welcome the leadership shown by the WHO
in developing, in coordination with others, the Ebola
response road map. We also welcome the United
Nations coordination system created by the Secretary-
General to ensure that all relevant parts of the United
Nations system are activated and working coherently.
We encourage continued close cooperation with the
Emergency Relief Coordinator and humanitarian
partners.

As it stands, the European Union has pledged
€150 million, that is, nearly $200 million, for the
treatment of patients, training, measures to contain
the epidemic, medical laboratories, the maintenance
of basic health services and budget support. As part
of the package, the European Union has also provided
€5 million to the African Union to support its very
important efforts to provide assistance to the affected
countries. To that, one needs to add the very substantive
bilateral contributions made by member States of the
European Union, both in funding and in kind, as well
as through the secondment of specialists. Some of those
bilateral contributions are coordinated through the
European Union's civil protection mechanism.

Finally, the European Emergency Response
Coordination Centre has supported the EU efforts,
including the participation of some key partners, such
as WHO, Medecins Sans Frontieres, UNICEF, OCHA
and the International Federation of Red Cross and Red
Crescent Societies. The European Union and its member
States are working actively to find possible options for
reducing the growing isolation of the affected areas in
the region. The European Union will address the urgent
need to retain and re-establish links for transport and
necessary medical evacuation. For the steps ahead, the
we are preparing a comprehensive framework for our
response. That document, aligned with the WHO road
map, highlights the main challenges and in what ways
we have and will further assist with the response. The
other related impacts, notably the food crisis, the health
system crisis and the negative macroeconomic impact
are also being considered.
We all recognize the magnitude of the challenge
before us. On Monday, a high-level EU meeting on
Ebola took place in Brussels and Health Ministers are
meeting next week in Milan, where the Ebola crisis
will be addressed. The European Union and its member
States are committed to deploying all efforts to step up
support and assist in putting an end to the outbreak.

