Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): I thank you,
Mr. President, for taking the initiative to organize this
important open debate of the Council. I thank the
Secretary-General for his participation and his
statement.

My delegation has always strongly advocated the
convening of an open debate which would provide an
opportunity for all interested United Nations Member
States to share their assessments of the progress in the
implementation of the presidential note contained in
document S/2006/507 of July 2006 and contribute
ideas on how to further its effective implementation.

We share the views contained in the statement to
be delivered by the representative of Cuba on behalf of
the Non-aligned Movement (NAM), which stresses that
reform of the Security Council should not be confined
only to the question of the equitable representation on
and increase in the membership of the Council, but
should also address substantive issues relating to the
Council's agenda, working methods and decision-
making process. We further share the View of NAM
that transparency, openness and consistency are key
elements that the Council should observe.

From a body that used to meet only a few times a
month, the Council has turned into one that held
219 formal meetings and 177 consultations of the
whole between August 2007 and July 2008. We
commend the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions, as

well as the Secretariat, for their efforts to enhance the
implementation of the measures agreed upon through
the July 2006 note with a view to making the work of
the Council more efficient. We are encouraged by
positive developments to that end, particularly a
growing trend towards transparency, with an
unprecedentedly large number of open meetings held
by the Council, and more intensive participation by
non-member States in the Council's work than ever
before.

Regarding the commitment set out in paragraph
29 of the July 2006 note, during the first six months of
this year, the countries concerned spoke first on
25 occasions in 34 Council meetings with their
presence. We also appreciate the efforts of all Council
members to intensify consultations with the broader
United Nations membership, in particular interested
Member States, their neighbouring countries and
regional organizations and groups of friends. To further
the Council's work in this direction, while supporting
all the recommendations by NAM. contained in the
aforementioned statement, I wish to emphasize the
importance of the following measures.

First, due attention should be given to the
Council's regular consultations with the parties
concerned, including regional and international
organizations. We consider as useful practices such as
the President's briefings to the public and the media
and the July presidency's consultation with not only
Council members, but also the United Nations
membership at large, in the process of preparing the
annual report on the work of the Council to be
submitted to the General Assembly, and we believe that
such practices should become routine.

Secondly, Member States should be allowed - in
fact, they should be invited - to present their views
before the Council takes action concerning them. That
would make the Council's decisions accepted as more
legitimate and fairer, and thus more conducive to
cooperation by Member States in the process of
implementation.

Thirdly, more open debates, such as the one we
are having today, should be convened in order to give
the general United Nations membership greater
opportunities to express their views on related issues.
In order to avoid abuse in that regard and the
perception of double standards in any Member State's
support for that measure, it must be coupled with
efforts to avoid Council involvement in issues not
falling within the purview of its mandate, which is the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Transparency must not be promoted at the cost of
making the work of the Council overlap with that of
other bodies, such as the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and development
and other agencies, and hence of weakening their
coordination.

Fourthly, resort to Chapter VII of the Charter in
order to address issues that, by their nature, are not
threats to international peace and security must be
avoided so as not to create a confrontational
atmosphere or situations in which the Council cannot
act or speak with one voice, or even situations that
could lead to the possibility of vetoes. My delegation
and the majority of Member States believe that,
pending their eventual elimination, vetoes should be
confined to matters truly appropriate for consideration
under that Chapter.

As a responsible non-permanent member of the
Security Council, Viet Nam has been trying its best to
contribute to the improvement of the Council's
working methods, in the interest of the entire United
Nations membership and of international peace and
security. In carrying out our task as President of the
Council last month, we were guided by the
aforementioned concerns. We look forward to working
with the other members of the Council and of the
United Nations at large in that direction.

