Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): Let mejoin others in
welcoming Sweden's presidency ofthe Security Council
and in thanking Russia for its stewardship during the
previous month. We are also very pleased, Mr. Prime
Minister, that you have convened this open debate
today. It is very important for the Council to focus on
the protection of children as a key element of conflict
prevention and sustaining peace. Like others, I also
would like to pay tribute to Ms. Londofio's insight into
the effect of conflict. What she said about addressing
the root causes is a theme that has been repeated by
many speakers today. I also thank the Executive
Director of UNICEF and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for their efforts, internationally
and on the ground, to protect children and prevent them
from being the victims of armed conflict.

In that regard, the United Kingdom joins others in
welcoming the publication of the Secretary-General's
annual report (S/2018/465). Thanks to the courageous
and committed work of monitoring and reporting teams
all over the world, the report continues to produce a
reliable, evidence-based set of metrics, which the
Council, the United Nations and others need in order
to take effective action. But it also shows an alarming
trend - in 2017 the number of verified violations
against children in armed conflict increased by a
shocking 35 per cent. It is vital that the Council address
that trend, and to that end I welcome today's debate.

We have heard a lot about the next generation.
We were able to hear some very good news from Cote
d'Ivoire. I was interested in those experiences, as
well as in what is happening in Nigeria. But, as the
Council saw for itself on its mission to Bangladesh
and Myanmar, there are too many children who bear
the physical scars of armed conflict. We saw children
amputees, a poignant and disturbing reminder of what
conflict does to children. We need to take better care of
the next generation so that they can, in turn, take care
of their societies. There is no single answer to how we
do that. We have heard many ideas put forward today. I
will not repeat them. The United Kingdom shares many
of the suggestions made today but, if I may, I would like
to concentrate on one particular action that can have an
overwhelmingly positive effect on improving stability
and reducing conflict.

I am referring to Sustainable Development Goal
4, which has to do with making sure that everybody
receives a quality education. That is something
that Ms. Londofio and a number of Permanent
Representatives have drawn attention to. As we all know,
women play a vital role in the prevention and resolution
of armed conflict and in peacebuilding, including
in peace talks and in re-establishing the fabric of a
recovering society. Yet we know that conflict restricts
access to education, particularly girls' education. We
should see what we can do to ameliorate that situation.
Reintegration programmes should include education as
a core component, while disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration processes should be age- and gender-
sensitive in order to meet the needs of all children.
We need to ensure that worldwide girls receive the
education that allows them to fully participate in
governance towards the achievement of durable peace,
security and reconciliation - and hence, ultimately,
towards conflict prevention

A staggeringly small amount of humanitarian aid
was invested in education in 2016 - a mere 1.4 per
cent. It goes without saying that that is not enough. We
should all do more to place education at the heart of our
approach to security and development. For its part, the
United Kingdom is committed to providing educational
support to millions of children around the world in
need of education in emergencies and protracted
crises. In Syria and the wider region, following on
from UNICEF's No Lost Generation initiative, we
allocated $110 million to provide protection, trauma
care and education for children affected by the crisis
in that country and the wider region. We are the largest
bilateral donor to the Education Cannot Wait fund, and
we are committing $40 million this year to support
conflict-affected children in Uganda.

Finally, as other speakers noted, we need to
ensure that schools themselves are protected. While
international humanitarian law is the primary basis for
the protection of schools and educational facilities, the
Safe Schools Declaration, which the United Kingdom
recently endorsed, reflects our commitment to the
provision of, and access to, high-quality education in
humanitarian situations and protracted crises.

We align ourselves with the statement that will be
delivered by the representative of Argentina on behalf
of all those who have endorsed the Declaration. We
would like to take this opportunity to call on all of our
international partners to follow suit.

As set out in the first line of the Charter of the
United Nations - much quoted today - our goal is to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war.
We need to begin with our children, who are absolutely
vital to a better future.

