Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the Secretary-General for his
substantive statement. Despite some reduction in
tensions on the ground, the Palestinian-Israeli situation
remains problematic. Various incidents in the West
Bank and Jerusalem, as well as the sporadic aggravation
of tensions around the Gaza Strip show that the risk of
an escalation in the conflict is as high as ever.

Against the background of a stalemated settlement,
new initiatives aimed at finding ways to reignite
the peace process are appearing. Those ideas seem
reasonable and are at least aimed at achieving some
genuinely essential goals. Nonetheless, in our View they
should only complement the efforts being made within
the framework of the established mechanism of the
Middle East Quartet. Attempts to shift focus to other
forums will merely divert the international community's
attention from the Palestinian question. We concur with
those calling for a more active involvement in the issue
on the part of the Security Council, and maybe they
should take a more vigorous approach to promote that
idea.

On 22 September, on the margins of the general
debate in the General Assembly at its seventy-first
session, we will hold a ministerial meeting of the
Quartet. I would once again like to draw attention to
the recommendations in the report (S/2016/595, annex)
of the Quartet published on 1 June. We firmly believe
that if we can move forward on them we could create
the conditions for reviving Palestinian-Israeli relations
and a relaunch of the political process on the basis of
internationally recognized agreements. In that context,
we would like to emphasize the crucial significance of
the Arab Peace Initiative.

The lack of unity among Palestinians is another
obstacle to reviving the political process. All those
who wield influence on the Palestinian side should
urge them to unite without delay on the basis of the
Palestinian Liberation Organization's platform and the
principles of the Quartet.

The humanitarian and economic situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories, especially the Gaza
Strip, continues to be a serious concern. It exacerbates
dissatisfaction among the population, helps to radicalize
social attitudes and makes it harder to reach a negotiated
solution. The violence, and the incitements to violence,
must be stopped and the settlement activity must end.
We believe that a durable peace, based on a two-State
solution, can meet the aspirations of the Palestinians
to an independent sovereign State as well as Israelis'
desire for security. And it will help to normalize
conditions in the region as a whole.

For our part, we pursue our efforts to overcome the
negative trends in the Palestinian-Israeli situation and
to channel it towards a political and diplomatic solution.
We are working actively and directly with the parties
to the conflict and the concerned States in the region.
In our contacts in the past few weeks with President
Abbas of Palestine and Prime Minister Netanyahu
of Israel, they underlined their interest in meeting in
Moscow in order to discuss the best ways to unblock
the peace process without preconditions. Our activity is
based on the international efforts to arrive at a reliable
negotiating process between the Palestinian and Israeli
sides. Needless to say, those efforts will be conducted
further in close coordination with the Quartet partners
and key international and regional actors.

In conclusion, I would like to affirm our support
for the work of Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process.

