Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We believe the initiative to hold this meeting
to be a very timely one, especially in the light of events
in Gaza and the rising number of innocent civilian
deaths in other regions of the world. We are grateful to
Under-Secretary-General Holmes for the relevant
information he has provided on this issue.

Despite the existence of a host of international
legal instruments and normative mechanisms, entirely
innocent civilians continue to suffer in conflict

situations, including women, children and older
persons and humanitarian personnel providing
assistance to them. We are convinced that, in order to
address the situation, we must abandon selective
approaches to violations of international humanitarian
law. There must also be strict adherence to human
rights standards.

The relevance of that need was underscored by
the tragic events of August 2008 in the southern
Caucasus, when Russia's intervention alone prevented
ethnic cleansing in South Ossetia. I recall that, on the
night of 7 August, Georgian troops ruthlessly attacked
the town of Tskhinvali. Innocent civilians were
subjected to a barrage of heavy artillery and the
launching of numerous Katyusha rockets. The Zar
road, along which refugees were attempting to flee the
town to safety, was singled out for attack. Homes,
schools, kindergartens, hospitals and even ambulances
were fired at. In the first hours, many hundreds of
people were injured or killed. In recent months, those
facts have been convincingly corroborated by
documents as well as the media. However, certain
influential members of the international community are
in no hurry to provide a political assessment of the
situation, without which it is impossible to seriously
consider the issue of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. Of course, prosecuting those
responsible for those crimes continues to be an urgent
matter.

We strongly condemn deliberate attacks on and
the killing of civilians through the indiscriminate or
disproportionate use of force, which is a gross
violation of international humanitarian law. In that
regard, we are deeply concerned about the escalation of
the crisis in Gaza as a result of Israel's military
operation. The situation in Gaza is on the very brink of
a humanitarian catastrophe. The Russian Federation
has provided urgent humanitarian assistance to Gaza's
population through Egypt.

As a result of full-scale military operations, there
has been a sharp increase in casualties among the
Palestinian civilian population, more than a third of
which have been women and children. We are deeply
concerned about reports of Israel's use of cluster
bombs, whose use is prohibited in populated areas, the
destruction of infrastructure, including United Nations
schools, and the deaths of humanitarian personnel from
Israeli fire. Those actions are absolutely inappropriate
and are flagrant violations of international law. We call
upon all parties to comply with resolution 1860 (2009)
and to immediately cease fire.

Civilian populations continue to suffer in Iraq and
Afghanistan. That matter should receive greater
attention from the Security Council and other United
Nations bodies. There is no justification for armed
groups that attack innocent civilians, commit terrorist
acts or seize hostages. Unfortunately, civilians continue
to die in Iraq and Afghanistan with tragic regularity,
and not just as a result of their actions. Once again, just
a few days ago, 17 Afghan civilians, including women
and children, were killed during a coalition operation
in eastern Afghanistan. We underscore the
responsibility of all parties, including the multinational
forces, to ensure the security of civilians and comply
strictly with the norms of international humanitarian
law. We support a careful investigation into such
incidents, including punishment for the guilty. That
also applies to the activities of private security
companies. The holding of hundreds of children in
military jails in those countries on the basis of arbitrary
accusations and without access to civilian justice is
unacceptable.

We are also very concerned about the situations
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Somalia,
where civilian lives are under serious threat from the
criminal actions of armed groups.

The situation of Darfur's civilians is also
difficult. There is hope for improvement as a result of
the political process of negotiations, including the full
deployment of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur.

The protection of civilians is a top priority for the
Governments of States involved in conflict, but the
responsibility to provide for the safety and security of
civilians is borne by all parties to an armed conflict. In
order to resolve such situations, the international
community must effectively seek scrupulous
compliance by all parties with the norms of
international humanitarian law and the relevant
decisions of the Security Council.

