Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Assistant Secretary-General Wane
for his substantive briefing. We are also obliged to the
Secretary-General for the balanced assessment he has
given once again in his monthly report, and grateful to
President Mogae for his detailed statement.

We share the view that the situation in South Sudan
can be stabilized only through a sustainable ceasefire
and the start of an inclusive national reconciliation
process. The South Sudan crisis has already had
severe humanitarian consequences. The worst impact
of its escalation has been in the subregion, where it
has resulted in a significant increase in the influx of
refugees into neighbouring countries. In that regard,
we would like to note the constructive attitude of
South Sudan's neighbours, particularly the Sudan, in
helping to alleviate the humanitarian situation. We
also do not think it fair to blame the ongoing violence
exclusively on Juba, which had already announced a
ceasefire unilaterally. It is crucial to ensure that the
opposition takes similar steps. We continue to believe
that the threatened sanctions will not help to solve
the crisis, and they might in fact make it worse - a
view that coincides with that of the African Union, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
and other countries of the region.

We note that advance units of the Regional
Protection Force began deploying to South Sudan in
May. We assume that IGAD and the United Nations
Secretariat will continue to work with the South Sudan
authorities on mutually acceptable modalities for that
operation. We would like to point out that Juba has
maintained its constructive position on the issue of the
Regional Protection Force, as the Government's decision
on providing plots of land for its bases testifies. We
urge South Sudan and its troop-contributing countries
to work together to enable the Regional Force to reach
operational readiness.

We are hoping for success for the national dialogue
initiated in May by President Kiir with the participation
of all ethnic groups, political stakeholders and
population sectors, with the goal of achieving national
reconciliation and an end to the conflict in South Sudan,
and we urge everyone to give it their full support. We
would like to note the personal efforts of Secretary-
General Antonio Guterres in this area, and we welcome
the coordinated efforts that regional actors are making
to facilitate a settlement in Southern Sudan. Nor should
we neglect to mention the initiative launched at IGAD's
June Summit for the revitalization of the South Sudan
peace Agreement and the regional stakeholders' efforts
to implement it.

We trust that the Ugandan-mediated contacts
with South Sudanese parties will also bear fruit.
At the same time, we would like to caution against
excessive optimism. The political process is only just
beginning. There is a great deal of laborious work that
lies ahead if we want to see a convergence of positions
and seek compromises. We hope that the cooperation
among the United Nations, the African Union and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development will
demonstrate its effectiveness.

