I would like to express my sincere appreciation to the Russian Federation for convening today's open debate. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his tireless efforts to address the implementation of this important resolution, and wish to welcome today's briefers. The adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) was a landmark moment in the history of the United Nations, representing a widespread normative shift in how we talk about women in the context of international peace and security. Resolution 1325 (2000) called on Member States to move women to front and centre in peace and security processes, to stop talking only about women as victims and, instead, to begin conversations about the importance of women's agency and participation. Resolution 1325 (2000) established a bold agenda in which gender equality was recognized as the foundation of peaceful and inclusive societies. However, a significant gap remains between our good words, agreements, discussions and events, on the one hand, and our actions, on the other. As a consequence, change - as stated by the Secretary-General last year - is coming at a pace that is too slow for women and girls whose lives depend on it, and for the effectiveness of our efforts to maintain international peace and security. Costa Rica therefore welcomes the stress placed on implementing our common commitments and delivering fully on the ambition of the existing framework of women and peace and security resolutions, rather than producing more texts. In that regard, Costa Rica would like to focus on one particular issue. The original intent of resolution 1325 (2000) was not simply to promote female soldiers, but rather to reap the rewards obtained when women become equitable participants in all peace and security deliberations and solutions. That includes women's representation at international meetings and multilateral forums dealing with arms control, disarmament and non-proliferation. Research has shown that at meetings of international treaties and processes that address disarmament and weapons issues, only about one quarter of participants are likely to be women. Less than a fifth of statements made are likely to be given by a woman. In many instances, almost half of all national delegations are composed entirely of men, despite the fact that women often suffer disproportionate or differential harm from the development, use and trade of weapons. It is crucial to confront women's underrepresentation and other patterns of marginalization in those forums, alongside other objectives, such as ensuring the participation of those who have been most directly impacted by the trade and proliferation of weapons, and the full consideration of their humanitarian consequences. Costa Rica encourages States, in accordance with their commitments under resolution 1325 (2000), to intensify their efforts to fulfil this promising aspiration and to reaffirm our commitment to promoting the leadership and full, equal and significant participation of women in all disarmament processes - including meetings that are held virtually - and to strengthening analyses and approaches that take into account the gendered impact of weapons and weapons systems. Empowering women and increasing women's participation remain among the most effecting tools for advancing global peace and security.
