Ms. Gilles (spoke in French): The Fondasyon Je Klere (FJKL), which I have the great honour of representing here, is pleased to participate in this meeting of the Security Council on the situation in Haiti. In accepting the invitation to deliver this briefing on the overall human rights situation in Haiti to the Council under the Belgian presidency, I seek to embrace the values that the FJKL upholds.The FJKL is an active Haitian human rights organization that prepares Haitians to become responsible leaders and to participate in public life in order to revitalize a nation State that is founded on the principles of human rights and sustainable development. Our organization conducts a human rights training programme at the national level. The FJKL also aims to promote and protect human rights in Haiti through its programme for the monitoring of public institutions such as Parliament, the judicial and penal systems, the executive and the police. It conducts inquiries and denounce grave human rights violations, and it provides legal assistance to the voiceless and the underprivileged. Haiti is today facing widespread and systematic violations of human rights. State authorities are failing to uphold both their positive and negative obligations to protect and respect human rights. The right to life has been cheapened. Appalling killings and heinous crimes are committed daily, with total impunity. To date this year we have already noted 31 violent deaths, but the actual figure is likely higher. The State is losing its monopoly of the use of legitimate violence. Entire areas are controlled by armed gangs, which are often better armed and better equipped than law-enforcement authorities. The authorities, in an attempt to survive politically, often rely on gangs and use gang-warfare strategies. That is what we have been seeing for two years in the Martissant area, some 3 kilometres from the Palais de Justice and less than 5 kilometres from the presidential palace. The same situation exists on national road No. 1 and in the Carrefour Shada area, which is controlled by the Chiens Mechants gang, which has ties to the authorities and whose rival is the Tete de Mort gang. The same situation prevails in other areas. More than 150 armed gangs are active throughout the country. In Port-au-Prince alone there are 23 active gangs; in Petion-Ville, 30; in Croix-Des-Bouquets, 17; and in Artibonite, 20. Nearly a third of the national territory is controlled by armed gangs. Freedom of movement is not guaranteed, nor is the right to the physical integrity and dignity of the human being. Roads are dangerous. As armed-gang fiefdoms have become inaccessible to the police, the gangs have taken full control of the civilian population living in those areas and of those they have kidnapped, who are often subjected to the worst atrocities. They are carrying out numerous appalling acts - murders, beheadings, rapes, kidnapping for ransom, diversion of supplies, abductions and forcible confinement. Young university students, schoolchildren and the civilian population, gripped by terror, hesitate to go outside. Kidnapped persons and those seized while using national roads are abused and forced to pay ransoms that further impoverish their families. Women are gang-raped both anally and vaginally. Such scenes are sometimes filmed and posted on social networks by armed gang members with their faces covered, in an act of defiance to law-enforcement authorities, which are powerless in the face of the fast-rising tide of such acts of cruelty. In Haitian culture, gang rape and anal rape are the worst crimes that can be committed against women, so rape is used as a political weapon. The courts in Port-au-Prince, the largest jurisdiction in the country, have been closed since September 2019. There has therefore been a considerable increase in incidents involving prolonged preventive detention and the illegal release, without due process, of criminals arrested by the police, as aresult of political interventions with respect to Government representatives within the judiciary and unscrupulous prosecutors. Access to judges, the right to a fair and equitable trial and the right to be tried within a reasonable time frame are now just empty words. Such rights do not exist. Everyone knows that death squads are a form of State terrorism. We witnessed a wide range of acts similar to those carried out by death squads during the "lock mode" period and when major anti-Government demonstrations are taking place. People in vehicles with no registration plates are opening fire on demonstrators, as well as on groups of people viewed as opposing the authorities, in Port-au- Prince, Cap-Haitien and Saint-Marc and many other areas of the country, killing and injuring many. Beheadings and mutilations of captured political adversaries are filmed and posted on the Internet by armed gangs known to have ties to the authorities. All of this, and this is just a partial list, reflects the fact that these crimes are being committed with the support, at least tacit, of the Government, and the perpetrators enjoy official impunity. I wish to draw the Council's attention to the need for good governance and the fight against corruption inHaiti. Haiti is one of the rare countries in the world where a man or a woman who has never worked a day in his or her life and who takes up an elective post in Parliament or the executive branch can become a millionaire in two or three years. They can openly display their wealth without any fear. Indeed, in February 2018, as a result of the efforts of the international community, the law on wealth declaration was adopted in order to contribute to transparency in public life. However, an inquiry carried out by FJKL from February 2008 to February 2018 on political figures, civil servants and other public servants who had declared their wealth showed that the implementation of the law deviates from the practices and norms set out therein. Nearly 90 per cent of the individuals working in the executive branch had not filed their assets disclosures upon leaving office, along with 93 per cent of Senators and Deputies. The management of the PetroCaribe funds, following the performance audit by the Haitian administrative court, is marked by cases of mismanagement, overcharging, theft, corruption, embezzlement, favouritism and illicit enrichment. That funding, at nearly $4 billion, would represent a significant opportunity for Haiti. Yet the current Head of State was implicated by the court in those acts of corruption, which constitutes the greatest obstacle to the holding of fair and equitable trials on the management of those funds - a trial that the Haitian people very much want to see. The country has been operating without a budget for two years, with a Government that resigned almost a year ago. The constitutional order broke down in January due to the failure to hold elections on the constitutionally prescribed dates. The country therefore finds itself in an undeclared state of exception, which is liable to reinforce personal power, administrative mismanagement, theft, the plundering of scarce State resources and corruption. Against that backdrop, the country is facing a grass-roots uprising against the Haitian National Police hierarchy. Just yesterday, police officers attempted to set fire to the law firm of the Chairman of the Board of Directors of Fondasyon Je Klere. They set fire to five vehicles, two generators and motorcycles in the firm's parking lot. Although the movement is controlled by the mafia sector of the Police, the claims presented are nevertheless fair and deserve consideration. That body, which was established 25 years ago, needs to be audited. The efforts of the United Nations in recent years to strengthen it have proved to be a bitter failure. From that perspective, the Fondasyon Je Klere has the following recommendations for the Security Council to help Haiti. First, it must contribute to the success of the transition period in order to ensure a return to democratic order, broken since 13 January. Secondly, the firepower of armed gangs must be weakened. Thirdly, it must help organize the trials of PetroCaribe, the La Saline and Carrefour-Feuilles massacres and cases of rape. Fourthly, we need to effectively wage the fight against corruption. Fifthly, we need to audit the police with a view to boosting its credibility among the people and ensure that it can discharge its mission to protect and serve. I apologize for going on so long; as they say, I could not be brief.
