Mr. Fonseca (Brazil): Allow me, Mr. President,
to join previous speakers in thanking you for having
organized this open meeting on East Timor. Your
diplomatic skills have been an important asset in
conducting the business of the Security Council during
this month, and we are also grateful to you for that. I
would also like to express my appreciation to the
Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Annabi, for the briefing the Council
heard today on the latest developments in East Timor.

East Timor has to complete several transitions: a
transition from oppression to self-determination and
independence; from economic backwardness to
sustainable development; from fear and terror to
stability and tranquillity. There are no easy solutions,
and those transitions require patience, to be sure, but
also resolve and determination. They also require close
cooperation between the East Timorese people and the
international community.

Tomorrow, 30 August, the East Timorese will be
celebrating the first anniversary of the popular
consultation organized by the United Nations. The
massive participation of the East Timorese under very
difficult circumstances reaffirmed to the international
community their commitment to independence and to
democracy. Although the violence that followed the
announcement of the results of the popular consultation
claimed lives and left its marks in the territory, and
although some of its gruesome effects still linger, the
popular consultation was a milestone in East Timor's
long quest for independence. The Brazilian people wish
to pay tribute to the East Timorese on this important
occasion.

Given the devastation of the territory following
last year's popular consultation, the progress achieved
under the wise leadership of the Transitional
Administrator and Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, is really
remarkable.

It is true that the security environment has
improved sharply since the deployment of the
International Force in East Timor (INTERFET) and its
transition to the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET), but much
remains to be done. The tragedies involving the death
of peacekeepers are examples of the destabilizing
potential of the incursions made by militias and armed
extremists into East Timor's territory. I would like to
express our deepest sympathy to the families of those
killed in the line of duty, and to the Governments of
Australia, Bangladesh, Nepal and New Zealand.

There have been reliable reports of an increasing
number of militiamen infiltrating East Timor from
West Timor, spreading fear among villagers. Those
who are committed to violence as a political means
should not be allowed to succeed in putting at risk the
progress so painfully achieved. There must be zero
tolerance towards those who want to bring back the
dark old days and to engulf East Timor in a new spree
of violence. There is no alternative to the democratic
process. That is the message that the international
community should convey, loud and clear, to the
extremist groups.

The cooperation of Indonesia is also crucial to
putting an end to the activities of the militia. We expect
the Government of Indonesia to expedite the
implementation of the important agreements it has
signed with UNTAET in the areas of security and
border control. It is fundamentally important that
further efforts be undertaken to disarm, disband and
arrest the extremists who use West Timor as their base
for attacks perpetrated in East Timor.

Brazil strongly condemns the attacks that took
place on 23 August on staff of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) at
the Naen camp. The authorities in charge of security in
the region must bring to a halt such cases of
intimidation and harassment against relief workers and
refugees alike. We thus favour a thorough investigation
into this chain of events, and we hope that work of the
UNHCR in the camps will resume very soon so as to
make it possible to proceed smoothly with the
repatriation activities. The comprehensive action plan
to close down the refugee camps near the border within
six months may improve security, but it should be
implemented while taking into account the right of
refugees to a sustainable livelihood.

At the same time, the military component of
UNTAET must be given the means to counter the threat
represented by highly armed militia members who are
eager to attack and ambush peacekeepers. As Mr.
Sergio Vieira de Mello recently declared, "We are not
going to allow our soldiers to become sitting ducks for
these guys to aim at". Brazil is taking part actively in
UNTAET, and intends to continue to contribute to
diminishing tensions and circumscribing their effects.

The construction of a solid democracy depends
not only on the legal framework to be adopted but also,
first and foremost, on a sense of belonging to a
community of rights and obligations. For democracy to
take root, the people must feel that it is at the helm of
the process. We are confident that the first congress of
the National Council of East Timorese Resistance
(CNRT) will prove to be an important step forward in
that regard. The international community should
welcome the proposals put forward last week by Mr.
Vieira de Mello in his speech during the CNRT
congress. He outlined the possible next steps, from the
setting up of the National Council to the appointment
of a constitutional commission to prepare a first draft
of a constitution, the establishment of a legal
framework for political and electoral processes, and the
election of a constituent assembly.

All these steps are going to be discussed in depth
with the East Timorese people, and various options are
available and remain open. It is essential, though, to
start discussing these issues as a matter of priority with
the active participation of civil society. The urgency
has to do with the need to create, from the beginning,
the sense of belonging that I mentioned. Such a sense
is easier to get when there is a clear horizon ahead,
with independence as a watershed for the consolidation
of democratic institutions.

Much has already been said about the complexity
of the task of building a country almost from scratch
after a wave of violence that wreaked havoc throughout
the territory. It is essential, however, to stress again and
again that a future independent East Timor will need
the continued cooperation of the international
community. Independence will have to be shored up by
the international community, in particular by donor
countries, in order to lead to the consolidation of
democratic institutions and the improvement of the
well-being of all the Timorese people.

There can be no solid democracy amidst
destitution and despair, and no development can be real
without respect for human rights. Despite budgetary
constraints, Brazil is ready to start cooperation projects
in East Timor. Our office in Dili has been instrumental
in this regard. The Brazilian Agency for Cooperation
undertook a mission to East Timor in late July and has
set the parameters for cooperation in education,
capacity-building and public health.

East Timor as we know it exists today only
because the international community decided to display
its solidarity in a timely manner. We cannot let that
solidarity fade away when it is needed most. Let us
keep alight the flame of hope that has guided the
extraordinary people of East Timor through its ordeal.
Let us keep alive the spirit of human solidarity that is
the guarantee of better, brighter and happier days for
East Timor.

