Mr. Thiebaud (France) (interpretation from French):
Nearly two years ago the Security Council decided to
establish the United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia
(UNOMIL). The operation was created to follow up on the
agreement between the Liberian parties concluded at
Cotonou on 25 July 1993. When it adopted resolution
866 (1993), the Security Council thought that peace would
soon be restored in Liberia and that free and democratic
elections would soon be held there.

Two years have gone by, and unfortunately nothing
has happened. To the contrary, the situation in Liberia
continues to deteriorate. Following the Cotonou agreement,
other agreements have been signed, first at Akosombo, then
at Accra on 21 December 1994. These agreements have
been systematically violated. The cease-fire was broken as
early as September last year. The humanitarian situation has
become increasingly alarming. And UNOMIL is no longer
able to fulfil the mandate entrusted to it by the Council.

Yet it cannot be said that the international community
has not been patient. Perhaps it has been a little too patient.
The resolution we have just adopted has the virtue of
stating things clearly. It underscores three basic elements.
First of all, it recalls that a final settlement of the crisis in
Liberia depends primarily on the determination of the
factions to reach an agreement. We consider, indeed, that
the factions bear full responsibility for the situation of
hundreds of thousands of civilians, who have had to leave
their villages to seek refuge in the capital or in
neighbouring countries.

Secondly, it gives the Liberians a further two and a
half months to sit down at the negotiating table and fully
implement the Akosombo and Accra agreements, including
the installation of the Council of State, the re-establishment
of the cease-fire, the disengagement of all forces, and the
creation of a new timetable for the implementation of the
peace agreements, in particular the disarmament process.

Finally, if the factions make no effort to overcome
their differences, the Council will take the logical step of
ending the existence of UNOMIL.

The Council's message is therefore crystal clear: the
factions must understand that we consider 15 September
to be a sort of ultimatum. If wisdom prevails over
conflict, however, the United Nations will continue to
help Liberians restore peace and democracy in their
country. Hence, we take one final opportunity to
encourage all those of good will - first and foremost the
faction leaders, but also the leaders of countries of the
region - to seize the opportunity presented by this
resolution.

My delegation expresses its warm gratitude for the
efforts made thus far by President Rawlings and by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Nyakyi, who is our line of communications with all
parties in the field.

The war in Liberia has continued for more than five
years. It has cost some 150,000 lives. An entire country
has been ravaged. It is shocking to note that the warlords
seem to be satisfied with this tragic situation. My
Government hopes that the appeal of the Council will be
heeded, and that Liberia will soon return to the path of
progress and reconciliation.

