Mr. Xu Zhongsheng (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks you, Mr. President, for convening
today's meeting, and expresses its appreciation to the
Uruguayan presidency for leading the work of the
Security Council to a smooth conclusion in January.
With regard to the work of the Council this month, I
wish to focus on three points.

The first is the situation in the Middle East.
Currently, peace talks between Palestine and Israel
have come to a stalemate. The conflict is intensifying,
and the security situation is worsening. It is the shared
responsibility of the international community to
safeguard the legitimate national rights of the Palestine
people. The international community should continue
to urge for an immediate ceasefire and end to the
violence so as to ease the situation. Meanwhile, more
vigorous action should be taken to kick-start peace
talks and promote an early resumption of negotiations.
The international community should create a new
mechanism for the restoration of peace, and support
the efforts of the League of Arab States and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation. The Security
Council should respond positively to the legitimate
demands of the Palestinians and other Arab States and
consider seriously such questions as the provision of
international support to the Palestinian people.

Secondly, China appreciates Special Envoy De
Mistura's mediation efforts in Syria and supports
the role of the United Nations as the main channel
for mediation in the quest for a political solution
there. At the moment, there is a significant window
of opportunity for achieving such a solution. The
international community should continue to support
United Nations efforts and work together to maintain
the current positive momentum for a political solution,
encouraging all Syrian parties to proceed from the
overall interests of the nation and its people, and to
demonstrate good faith, identify their common interests
and resolve their differences so as to enable the current
round of talks in Geneva to yield positive results.

Thirdly, positive progress has recently been made on
the political process in Somalia. Efforts to build a federal
system are making steady progress. China welcomed
the convening of a national consultative forum for all
Somalis and the consensus that has been reached on the
modalities for the elections to be held in 2016. We hope
that all the Somali parties will continue to be united
in promoting national reconciliation and advancing a
political process that is Somali-led and Somali-owned.
The international community should continue to
provide Somalia with humanitarian assistance and help
to ease the humanitarian situation. In accordance with
Somalia's needs, we should increase our contributions
in the economic and security fields and help Somalia
strengthen its national capacity-building and embark
on the road to national development and prosperity as
soon as possible.

We would like to take this opportunity to wish
Venezuela, the incoming President ofthe Council for the
month of February, success in its work. We also thank
Mr. Movses Abelian for his important contributions to
the work of the Security Council in the past five years,
and wish him success in his new job.

