Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in F reach): I
already had the honour, on 26 June, to brief Security
Council members on the outcomes of our visit to
Kinshasa, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(see S/PV.5706). The visit was very useful. It was the
eighth time that Security Council members had
travelled to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the first time that they had done so in the new context
resulting from the first national democratic election
held in the country in 40 years and from President
Kabila's assumption of office on 6 December 2006. A
Prime Minister was appointed on 30 December. A
coalition Government was formed on 5 February 2007,
and that Government presented a programme to the
National Assembly on 22 February. The new context
obviously calls for the development of a partnership
between the United Nations and the Congolese
authorities, and it is in that spirit that the mission
visited Kinshasa.

The report (S/2007/42l) recounts the visit in
detail and then sets out the conclusions drawn by
Council members. I should like very briefly to touch
upon the five recommendations contained in the report.

The mission recommended that the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo seek a
solution to the crisis in the Kivus through political and
diplomatic means. The mission also stressed that the
mixage experiment in North Kivu should be terminated
and replaced with a real brassage, consistent with the
principles of the integration of the Congolese Armed
Forces (FARDC). In addition, the mission
recommended that the Governments of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Rwanda continue to strive
to improve their diplomatic relations. Those two
recommendations are at the top of the list, showing the
importance that the mission's members accord to
resolving the issue of the Kivus.

The third recommendation is that the Congolese
authorities carry out security sector reform as a matter
of priority, with a view to consolidating the
achievements of the reform of the police, completing
the integration of all army units, while completing also
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
process. The fourth recommendation concerns the
international partners of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. The mission recommends that they organize
and coordinate their support for security sector reform
so as to maximize its efficiency. Finally, the mission
recommends that the Congolese authorities and their
main international partners organize themselves so as
to make possible a continuing political dialogue. Those
are the recommendations that we are making.

Before concluding, let me say once again how
grateful we were for the welcome that we received in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo from President
Kabila, all the other authorities and the Congolese
people. They know that the United Nations will always
stand by them in facing the challenges that they must
still meet.

