Mr. Tshibanda N'tungamulongo (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): First of all, I
would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your accession
to the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of March. I am also particularly pleased to welcome,
through you, a kindred friendly country, Angola,
with which the Democratic Republic of the Congo has
long-standing, excellent relations marked by the seal
of reciprocal trust and respect. Next, I want to thank
you for having taking the initiative to organize this
important debate on the maintenance of international
peace and security and the prevention and resolution of
conflicts in the Great Lakes region, a theme that reflects
the interest that the Security Council has in our region.
This meeting allows us to assess the effectiveness of
our joint action for peace within our States and between
our States, and gives us an opportunity to reflect on
ways and means to accomplish that, not just so as to
resolve disputes but also, above all, in order to prevent
them, with the ultimate goal of bolstering cooperation
between the States of the region and thereby usher in
an era of lasting peace and stability. Finally, I want to
welcome the presence at this meeting of my friends
and brothers, Smail Chergui, Commissioner of the
African Union for Peace and Security; Maman Sidikou,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo; and Said Djinnit,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region, and to commend the way in which they
are carrying out their respective tasks.

Today's debate has, above all, the interest of
keeping us well aware of the crisis in the region,
which, through its unprecedented duration and cost in
human lives and the massive destruction of goods and
infrastructure and the violation of human rights, not to
speak of its humanitarian aspects, constitutes for the
leaders and peoples of the African Great Lakes region a
test of their sense ofresponsibility; and for the Security
Council and United Nations peacekeeping operations
a test of their relevance and effectiveness; and for the
world in which we live a measure of its humanity. The
participation of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in this debate, as in all previous meetings on the topic,
reflects a collective awareness of the challenges and
our ongoing willingness to work in concert with other
regional and international actors to meet the challenges
posed and affirm our determination to shoulder our part
of the responsibilty to ensure that peace and harmony
can return and be consolidated in the region, so that the
universality of the principles and values underpinned
by the Charter of the United Nations can be shown to
be effective and so that the Sustainable Development
Goals cease to be an illusion for the people of our
country and the peoples of the Great Lakes region.

The recurring conflicts in the Great Lakes region
are the result of the convergence of various factors, at
the heart of which are the moral and political failings of
the elite: the failings ofthe national elites when it comes
to governance, which for a long time has been, and in
certain cases remains, characterized by the denial of
the fundamental rights of citizens; the patrimonial
governance of States and the failure to respect
international law, thus opening the path to political
instability, social unrest, intercommunal conflicts
within States and open conflicts that have engulfed
the States of the region. We should also recognize the
failure of the elites within the community of nations,
which have not always lived up to their historic
responsibilities, owing to a lack of courage or to the
prevalence of diverging national interests, including at
the level of the Security Council. The result has been
subjective actions that have been at odds with the rules
of international law. Fortunately, despite those failings
and their tragic consequences, the spirit of the Charter
of the United Nations has always prevailed, and the
relevance of the universal Organization has always been
there to guide us. The same is true of the aspiration of
our populations to better living conditions, as well as
the determination of our peoples to control their own
destiny, and therefore to protect and preserve their
independence and sovereignty, while respecting, at the
national level, the rules of good political, economic
and social governance and, at the regional level,
respect for the international texts to which their States
have subscribed.
That is the context where many initiatives
undertaken by the States of the region and the
international community belong and should be
evaluated, including, in particular, the creation of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,
the signing of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework Agreement for the Democratic Republic of
Congo and the Great Lakes Region and the Security
Council's adoption of several relevant resolutions,
including resolution 2098 (2013).

The conduct of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in dealing with all these initiatives has been
entirely responsible. Out of respect for the regional
and international commitments it has undertaken,
it has applied itself to implementing them, as it has
done with the Framework Agreement and the Nairobi
Declarations, despite the fact that implementation of
the latter has been obstructed for some time now by
the leaders of the former Mouvement du 23 mars.
We therefore remain committed to eradicating all the
negative forces and armed groups still active on our
territory. This fight, which was initially begun by the
Forces armees de la Republique De'mocratique du Congo
on its own, and whose results are proof of a power and
professionalism that grows daily, has continued with
the support and cooperation of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and the military operations
have been restarted. I should say that this struggle will
not end until the negative forces and armed groups have
been completely neutralized.

As witnessed by the excellent results we have had
so far, my country has shown the same determination in
implementing its national commitments by continuing
the reforms under way aimed at consolidating
democracy and the rule of law and rebuilding the
country and its economic and social development. In
order to solidify the State's authority, especially in
formerly troubled areas, we have not only deployed the
National Police, the public administration and the courts
but also strengthened them, resulting in a significant
reduction in sexual violence. At the same time, the
decentralization provided for by the Constitution has
been consolidated through the enactment of a series of
laws needed to implement it, by the creation of 26 new
provinces and the election, to be held at the end of this
week, of new provincial governors and vice-governors.

Where the elections are concerned in particular, it is
important to emphasize that we are determined to hold
them on schedule, but above all in conditions that will
ensure their transparency, credibility and especially

peace. In that context, the Independent National
Election Commission has been completely reformed
and, led by a new team made up of representatives of
the majority party, the opposition and civil society, is
actively preparing for elections, with one of its priorities
being the revision of the electoral register. In order to
overcome any obstacles to the process and prevent
post-election crises, the Head of State has invited
the political classes and civil society to an inclusive
political dialogue aimed at achieving a consensus on all
the issues dividing them ahead of time. In our View, that
is the only smart way in the circumstances, far more
so than any unilateral Government decision or solution
imposed from outside. We welcome the support to the
dialogue provided by the international community.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo's strong
involvement in the implementation of regional and
international agreements is unfortunately not enough
on its own to end the damage done by the negative forces
and armed groups, still less to create the conditions
needed in the Great Lakes region for peace, stability
and prosperity. To do that, and to bring about positive,
real and lasting change there, it is essential that the
following five factors come together.

The first is that the other States signatories to
the various relevant regional and international legal
instruments must also be individually required to
implement them and to report periodically on that
implementation, particularly concerning respect for
each State's sovereignty, non-interference in the internal
affairs of other States, the promotion of democratic
practices, and non-assistance to negative forces and
armed groups.

The second is that all States must be sincerely and
actively involved in combating those forces and groups,
as well as the illegal exploitation of natural resources,
within a framework of genuine cooperation on the
diplomatic, security and judicial fronts.

The third is that legitimate and necessary promotion
of the rule of law and democracy in the States of the
region must not be conducted at the expense of the
demands of peace and stability, without which there
are no real prospects for lasting improvement in the
overall situation.

The fourth is that without prejudice to the
universality of the principle of good governance, each
State's individual circumstances, in terms of challenges
and also in efforts made and results obtained, should be
taken into account in evaluating its internal situation
and the importance of continuing support to it.

The fifth is that policies that incentivize private
investment and regional cooperation should be
implemented with the aim of achieving balanced and
integrated development in the region and thereby
providing better job prospects and decent incomes
for the countries' populations, particularly women
and young people. In that regard, the Government
of the Democratic Republic of Congo welcomed
the holding in Kinshasa on 24 and 25 February of a
conference on private-sector investment in the Great
Lakes region. Opened ceremonially by the President
of the Republic, the conference was honoured by the
personal presence of the Secretary-General and other
high-level representatives of the worlds of politics and
business from the Great Lakes region and elsewhere.
It set the stage we need for peaceful coexistence and
shared prosperity in the region by identifying a number
of integrational projects in areas such as tourism, with
the mountains, landscapes and beautiful locations that
abound in Africa's Great Lakes region making it a
naturally attractive tourist area. The same applies to the
energy sector, with the methane gas that countries in the
region have in common and the multiple watercourses
that represent possibilities for hydropower development
that are just as real. The prospects are similar for
development projects for the transport infrastructure
that is essential to the stimulation of cross-border trade,
intraregional commerce and the economic growth of
the countries of the region.

In conclusion, we should acknowledge that war
and armed conflict are at the root of the distressing
situation in the region, with its legacy of destruction of
the economic fabric, of loss of human lives, including
6 million Congolese and of the erosion of mutual trust
between the States of the region and their leaders.
Whatever the wounds and horrors that have resulted
from past suffering, of which we are all aware and
which we do not minimize, we cannot stay trapped in
dead-end positions indefinitely. That is why we must
promote reconciliation and cohesion within our States
and peaceful coexistence and cooperation between
them. Our history and geography require it, as do the
demands of survival and sustainable development.
Others before us, in other places, have endured tests
similar to ours. Without forgetting anything that had
happened, they were still able to renounce indefinite
reckless vengeance and a resort to force rather than
the force of law to resolve disputes. The prosperity and
peaceful understanding of those countries today should
be our inspiration.
