Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): Firstly, Mr. President, allow me to join in
congratulating you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council for the month of May and to express our
delegation's readiness to do its utmost to support you in
your work. We should also like to express our
appreciation to the Ambassador of the Czech Republic for
his excellent leadership last month.

I should also like to welcome to this meeting of the
Council the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic
of Georgia, Alexander Chikvaidze. We listened very
carefully to his statement, and we agree with his basic
assessment of the situation.

The Russian Federation has always assumed that a
comprehensive settlement of the Georgian-Abkhaz
conflict is possible only on the basis of respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Georgia and for the
rights of the multi-ethnic people of that country. The
resolution just adopted, in addition to the regular
extension of the mandate of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG), contains some weighty
political provisions. Its adoption is confirmation of the
international community's commitment to ensuring a
political settlement of the conflict in Abkhazia - with
the understanding, of course, that the main responsibility
for finding ways to resolve the crisis lies with the parties
to the conflict.

The Russian Federation is seriously concerned at the
minimal progress made in the negotiations, including
those on the political status of Abkhazia. We find very
timely the Security Council's reaffirmation of its call for
substantive progress in the Georgian-Abkhaz talks, under
United Nations auspices, which are being conducted with
the assistance of the Russian Federation as facilitator and

 

with the participation of representatives of the Organization
of Security and Cooperation in Europe. The Russian side is
actively working in this direction.

During the consultations in Moscow between 18 April
and 6 May with representatives of the Government of the
Republic of Georgia and the Abkhaz leaders, it proved
possible to come up with a number of agreements in
principle. The parties reaffirmed their commitments not to
allow the resumption of armed confrontations and agreed
that they must and will live in a single State. At the same
time, however, serious differences of views remained in
their approaches to how that State should be organized. On
11 May, the consultations resumed.

I think it important that the Security Council has
welcomed and supported the continuing consultations on the
question of a new constitution for Georgia, based on
federative principles, within the context of a comprehensive
political settlement. We also appreciate the support
expressed by the Council for the Russian Federation's
efforts as facilitator in intensifying the quest for a peaceful
settlement to the conflict. As facilitator, we attach the
greatest importance to coordinating our efforts in close
cooperation with the Secretary-General's Special Envoy for
Georgia, Ambassador Edward Brunner.

We are seriously disturbed at the unacceptably slow
rate of return of refugees, which is the fault of the Abkhaz
side. Ensuring a safe return en masse of the refugees is a
key issue whose solution will to a large extent determine
the progress made on the other problems involved in
settling the conflict. We hope that the strong position taken
by the Security Council will finally be heeded by the
Abkhaz side and have an impact on it.

We attach fundamental importance to the resolution's
renewed call on States to contribute to the voluntary fund
in support of the implementation of the Agreement on a
Cease-fire and Separation of Forces, including demining.
We note also that the resolution expresses great
appreciation for the contribution of UNOMIG and the
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) peace-keeping
force in stabilizing the situation in the zone of conflict and
satisfaction at the close cooperation between them. We
note also that it welcomed the additional measures both
have taken to improve conditions for a safe and orderly
return of refugees. We believe that those measures will help
to improve the effectiveness of both missions in Abkhazia.

We are grateful to the leadership and, indeed, to all
the personnel of UNOMIG for the extremely difficult work
they have been doing. We are pleased at the spirit of
mutual confidence and comradeship that has been
demonstrated in the day-to-day contacts between
UNOMIG and the CIS peace-keeping force.

As representative of the country presiding over the
CIS, I should like to reaffirm our readiness to develop
this cooperation further in the interests of ensuring the
optimal conditions for a political settlement. We expect
that the resolution we have just adopted will also help
achieve such a settlement.

