I would like to thank South Africa for organizing this open debate, and Mr. Abdulqawi Ahmed Yusuf, President of the International Court of Justice, for his excellent and enlightening briefing to the Security Council. Belgium particularly appreciates the convening of this open debate, which makes it possible to include all States Members of the United Nations in a comprehensive discussion on cooperation between two of the principal organs of the United Nations whose mandates focus on respect for international law. I will address three points in particular: first, the central role of the International Court of Justice in an international order based on the rule of law; secondly, our desire to see the Security Council cooperate more with the Court; and, lastly, the need to ensure the inclusiveness of the international legal order. First of all, it should be recalled that international law is the cornerstone of our multilateral system. Seventy-five years ago, at the end of the Second World War, 51 of us signed the Charter of the United Nations. We made the clear choice for an international order based on the rule of law as a key element of international stability, democracy and prosperity. The United Nations family has almost quadrupled since then. That illustrates the very essence of international cooperation, which, through the establishment of common rules and institutions, is an essential tool for the prevention and resolution of conflicts. In that regard, both the International Court of Justice and the Security Council play an important role by contributing to the development of international law and its implementation. That brings me to my second point. The number of new cases submitted to the International Court of Justice, the geographical diversity of the States concerned and the range of issues on which it is called on to rule attest to its universal character and the fundamental role that it plays in the application and interpretation of international law. While 74 States accepted its compulsory jurisdiction, nevertheless it is regrettable that only five current members of the Council, including only one of its permanent members, have made a declaration to that effect. Despite the increased trust among States in the International Court of Justice, the Security Council has nevertheless largely refrained from using it in discharging its mandate. The Charter unambiguously grants it three powers for cooperation with the Court. That can be done at the outset by recommending that disputes be submitted to the Court or by requesting an advisory opinion. It can also be done subsequently by making recommendations, or even taking measures to enforce a decision of the Court, without which the Court cannot be truly effective. In addition to those three specific functions, the Security Council could also innovate by, for example, as suggested in the concept note (S/2020/1194, annex) for this debate, inviting the President of the International Court of Justice to brief it when non-compliance with Court decisions could threaten international peace and security. A particular area in which the Security Council could also be more involved is on follow-up to provisional measures specified by the International Court of Justice to safeguard the respective rights of either party pending the final ruling. The Council could clearly benefit from confidential access to the information provided in the compliance reports that are increasingly requested by the Court. That could assist the Council in monitoring the implementation of the provisional measures notified to it by the Court and then, if it deems it necessary, make recommendations or decide on measures to be taken to enforce the Court's decision. In conclusion, I would like to highlight the specific role that the Court can play in capacity-building. Last Monday, the General Assembly unanimously adopted resolution 75/129, which establishes a trust fund to make the Judicial Fellowship Programme of the International Court of Justice more accessible to talented young lawyers from the South. That is the result of President Yusuf's efforts to encourage greater inclusiveness in the way in which the Court works and contributes to the development of international law. Belgium welcomes that initiative and will consider how it can contribute to that.
