Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): I thank you, Sir, for
promoting a useful debate on peacekeeping that
focuses on the actual effectiveness of peacekeeping
operations, based on the capacity to assist a country in
its transition from conflict to peace. I also thank you
for inviting Italy, the most important European troop-
contributor to United Nations peacekeeping missions,
to add its reflections to this debate. I also wish to fully
align myself with the statement delivered by the
representative of the European Union.
A debate on transition and exit strategies requires
a focus on at least three different levels. First is the
strategic level, here in New York, with the participation
from the start of the Peacebuilding Commission and
the troop-contributing countries in drafting mission
mandates and planning; second is the involvement,
whenever possible, of the regional organizations most
affected by the crisis; third are national contributions,
which should be focused, among other priorities, on
building the security conditions indispensable to any
transition.

On the first point, Italy considers it essential that
the main protagonists, present and future, be brought in
at the very first stages of forging a peace mission.
These are the countries that contribute military and
police forces, and the Peacebuilding Commission, a
body conceived specifically to coordinate efforts to
consolidate institutions in States emerging from
conflict. Only integrated participation, a strategic
vision and shared responsibility from the outset among
the various actors of a peacekeeping operation will
permit timely preparation for the changing of the guard
between military Blue Helmets and peacebuilders
deployed to help a country stabilize. Such joint efforts
will unfailingly promote clearer mandates and fill
present transition gaps.

Members know that this is not a totally new idea.
In its presidential statement adopted in August, the
Security Council underlined the following conclusion:

"The Security Council... re-emphasises the
need for coherence between, and integration of,
peacemaking, peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
development to achieve an effective response to
post-conflict situations from the outset"
(S/PRST/2009/24, p. 3).

In the same statement, the Council recognizes that a
peacekeeping mission should be a complement, not an
alternative, to a political strategy. Bearing in mind the
very wide deployment of United Nations troops around
the world, we believe that the moment has come to
shape concretely the coherence required by the
Security Council in that statement.

The five-year review of the Peacebuilding
Commission offers us the chance to move from words
to deeds. It is an opportunity to establish new working
methods, more cooperation and greater synergy
between the Security Council and its national and
institutional partners, which are called on to share the
burden of a responsible transition. In this context, we
cannot ignore the issue of strengthening the status of
the Peacebuilding Commission in the framework of the
United Nations institutional architecture.

On the second point, recent history illustrates the
growing role of regional organizations in the
international context. Sharing the burden of
peacekeeping with them maximizes the global
effectiveness of the United Nations, rationalizes the
resources available, and often increases the
possibilities of a successful transition. One example
should suffice; with the status of Kosovo clarified, the
United Nations is gradually passing the baton to the
European Union. Similar cooperation has proved useful
with the African Union, an organization that should be
encouraged and supported to share the burden of
peacekeeping.

With their shared geopolitical interests, economic
and trade relations, historical ties and cultural
affinities, the regional organizations are natural
partners, with the greatest interest in managing a crisis
afflicting one of their members or neighbouring States.
They are also increasingly institutionalized
international actors, as the recent Lisbon Treaty has
shown for the European Union. We thus need to
encourage a deeper and more structured partnership
between regional organizations and the United Nations,
foster adequate recognition of them, and structure
better cooperation and working methods with the
Security Council. The African Union-United Nations
Panel has made important efforts in this direction.

The Secretary-General has reminded us that
transition and exit strategies are dependent on
countries assuming responsibility for their own
security. Security and the rule of law are thus crucial to
assuring the handover from the Blue Helmets to
peacebuilding workers. The police component of
peacekeeping missions, which have dramatically
increased in the past few years, and the inclusion of a
civilian capacity, particularly in the area of the rule of
law, are indispensable to helping a country work
towards resuming full national ownership and
responsibility.

Italy provides a key contribution in this area. The
deployment model for Italian peacekeepers, especially
carabinieri, is to help re-establish State control and
security over the territory. But it is accompanied by an
ability to relate to the local population and an approach
that integrates the civilian components of a mission.
The perception of police forces in relation to training
projects, infrastructure protection, reconstruction and
liaison with local authorities naturally increases trust in
peacekeepers. If we add to this the training activities
done in Italy to assist foreign police units assigned to
United Nations peacekeeping missions, the
effectiveness of this approach increases even more.

Italy, together with the European Union, will
continue to make its contribution, in the conviction
that, under the leadership of the United Nations, a
comprehensive approach at the strategic level
combined with national ownership are the essential
ingredients to ensuring a successful transition strategy
for peacekeeping missions.

