Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I would
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Lowcock and
Special Representative Gamba for their detailed and
disturbing briefings and for their important work
on Syria.

The United States condemns the attack that took
place earlier this week in Syria's Al-Suwayda province,
for which the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham has
claimed responsibility. The barbaric attack killed
scores of civilians and we send our sympathies to the
families of the victims.

Civilians, in particular children, continue to bear
the brunt of ongoing violence in Syria. Each month,
Mr. Lowcock briefs us on desperate civilians caught
up in military offensives and the thousands who are
denied access to the most basic necessities, including
life-saving aid. The most recent military campaign in
the south-west is yet another dark chapter in Syria's
tragic story. This month, Special Representative Gamba
has provided us with an even closer look at the misery.
It is clear that Syria's children have experienced an
almost unimaginable level of suffering and trauma that
they will carry with them for the rest of their lives.

The statistics cited here and in the monthly reports
on Syria should not be misinterpreted. Yes, the number
of besieged areas has been reduced to zero, but not
because the regime lifted sieges. Instead, it is because
it mercilessly followed through with its surrender-or-
starve campaign. Similarly, the number of Syrians
living in hard-to-reach areas is down from just over
2 million last month to 1.5 million in July - not
because the regime is allowing more access, but because
it has taken more territory by force. Sadly, more than
13 million people in Syria still require humanitarian
assistance, and at least 6 million of those are children.

In south-west Syria, the regime's military offensives
since 17 June have displaced more than 325,000
civilians, approximately half of whom are children.
Yet, humanitarians are largely unable to reach those
vulnerable populations and supplies are dwindling.
Even more concerning is the fact that this loss of
humanitarian access in south-west Syria includes the
halting of United Nations cross-border aid deliveries
demanded by the Council, most recently in resolution
2393 (2017).Nothing about the regime's failure to
facilitate humanitarian access has changed since last
month's Council meeting (see S/PV.8296). Instead of
placing the needs of its own population first, the regime
continues to weaponize humanitarian assistance and
withhold access as a tool to force reconciliation in areas
formerly held by the armed opposition.

We call on the Syrian regime and its Russian allies
to allow the United Nations to resume cross-border
convoys from Jordan and to facilitate delivery of cross-
line assistance from Damascus to people in need, in line
with the Council's previous resolutions on the matter.
For the 800,000 people dependent on life-saving cross-
border assistance, United Nations operations need
to continue.

Turning to Idlib, the Syrian regime and its
supporters have continued their aggressive actions and
are building up their military forces for their next major
offensive. The United Nations dire warnings have been
clear and unmistakable - a Syrian regime military
campaign in Idlib, akin to what we saw in eastern Ghouta
and Aleppo, would result in a disastrous humanitarian
crisis. The Council urgently needs to put measures
in place to protect civilians and ensure humanitarian
access in Idlib, where hundreds of thousands of people
are at risk.

The United States will once again put on record
that United Nations humanitarian convoys are welcome
at any time in Rukban. We welcome this assistance and
are ready to do everything we can to facilitate it.

In Raqqa, removing unexploded ordinance is
one of our top priorities; it is a critical first step for
humanitarian and stabilization assistance. To date,
coalition-funded explosive hazards removal teams
have cleared more than 20,000 explosive hazards from
15.5 million square meters of territory in Manbij,
Tabqa and Raqqa cities and trained over 300 Syrian
nationals to conduct marking, survey and clearance up
to international humanitarian mine action standards.
The task is not easy, but it is vital to ensure that Syrians
can return home safely.

The United States continues to support refugee
returns when they are safe, voluntary and dignified.
The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
assesses that it is not yet safe for large-scale refugee
returns in Syria. We also remind the Council that the
cessation of violence is a critical element for planning
successful large-scale refugee returns. Russia is
still not upholding its commitment to maintaining a
de-escalation zone in south-western Syria. If Russia
is serious about its concern for refugees and other
displaced Syrians, it should work with the Syrian regime
to stop the violence and allow unhindered humanitarian
access to civilians in need.

In conclusion, the positive developments are few
and far between, but we must find light where we can.
We are glad that children and their families in two
previously besieged parts of Idlib were finally able to
depart for safer areas and no longer face being cut off
from the basic elements of survival. Now, we must find
a way to protect the other children in Idlib in the weeks
and months ahead.

