Mr. Ocaziones (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation wishes to extend very special
congratulations to you, Madam President, and the
members of the team of the Permanent Mission of
Jamaica on having led the Security Council admirably
during the month of November.

We value the convening of this public wrap-up
meeting. In connection with the limited presence of
non-members of the Council at this meeting, we would
like to suggest that in addition to regretting that fact,
we should also think about what we perhaps are not
doing right in these meetings and why they are not
being given more attention by non-members.

I would like to refer to the objectives of the
month. During the month of November we managed to
take an important step forward in defining the role that
the United Nations can play in Afghanistan and, above
all, in its reconstruction. Many questions remain about
the scope of that involvement, and we certainly will
have to consider this question again in the weeks to
come, when the process that has begun in Bonn yields
its first results. It is undeniable that the Security
Council ministerial meeting held this month holds great
political value. Security Council resolution 1378
(2001) sets forth some general principles that should
serve to synchronize and harmonize the response of the
various actors of the international community that
intend to meet the humanitarian, political, security,
reconstruction and development challenges in
Afghanistan.

Likewise, in November we took satisfactory steps
in dealing with various African conflicts on the
Council's agenda. The meetings with the ministers and
representatives of African countries that are involved
in the peace processes both in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and in Burundi made it possible for us to
encourage further commitment from the actors to the
attainment of peace in the Great Lakes region. In
addition, our meetings with the Ministers of Ethiopia
and Eritrea were also very useful in connection with
the presence of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia
and Eritrea (UNMEE) in that region. In connection
with West Africa, the consideration of the application
of the sanctions regime against Liberia enabled us to
familiarize ourselves with the Council's political
options at the present time, given the violations
reported, the humanitarian impact of the sanctions
regime and the possible economic repercussions of
additional sanctions.

At the ministerial level we also reaffirmed our
solid commitment to the strategy to combat and
eliminate international terrorism. Finally, we continued
to move towards the establishment of a better-targeted
sanctions regime in the case of Iraq.

We recognize your leadership, Madam President,
in all these achievements.

I would like to make a few suggestions in
connection with our work. The first of these results
from the meeting that we held with the Presidents of
the Tribunals for Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia.
We want to say that at that meeting it became clear that
there is a need to evaluate more carefully the work of
these Tribunals, the results they have attained and their
power of deterrence. The work of the Tribunals is a
concrete measurement of the performance of the
Security Council itself, and therefore we must not let
that item become marginal. The very fact of sending
strong messages to the masterminds of the massacres is
a valuable result that we must duly appreciate.

My second suggestion relates to the handling of
the results of the thematic debates. We agree with you,
Madam, that we must be innovative in taking
advantage of the contents of the relevant resolutions.
Perhaps the best path would be, in situations that are
under consideration in the Council, to apply them
through a consultation process with other agencies of
the United Nations and organizations of civil society.
For example, Security Council resolution 1325 (2000),
on women, peace and security, is a source of guidance
from the Security Council that has a life of its own
because various agencies of the United Nations system,
such as the United Nations Development Fund for
Women and the United Nations Children's Fund, and
several States and non-governmental organizations
have made it an important reference point in order to
make a difference on the ground. This experience
shows us that it is not necessary to routinely adopt
annual resolutions - as we did, for example, regarding
the situation of children in armed conflict - for
Security Council action to be strengthened and for its
agenda to retain its timeliness. In this respect, we agree
with Ambassador Greenstock's comment about the
need to avoid the inclusion of excessive thematic
debates on our agenda.

I wish to conclude by commenting on some of the
challenges for December. We are confident that in the
month to come we will manage to adopt a note by the
President that will contain the new guidelines for the
preparation of the annual report of the Security Council
to the General Assembly. It is also our hope that under
Mali's leadership we will be able to take a fresh
regional look at West Africa, particularly now that the
Secretary-General has notified us of his decision to
create a United Nations office in Dakar in order to take
a regional approach to the political instability and the
conflicts of that region.

It seems to us that we must also continue to
examine the situation in Afghanistan with the same
promptness and degree of interest with which we have
been responding thus far to that situation. Lastly, in
December we must prepare ourselves to begin the
process of reviewing the reports that the Member
States of the United Nations will send to the
Committee on Counter-Terrorism, in fulfilment of
Security Council resolution 1373 (2001).

