Mr. Danon (Israel): As we approach the end of
the month, I would like to commend Japan for its able
leadership of the Security Council.

The peoples and nations on the continent of Africa
are among the most resilient on the planet. States,
communities and families across Africa have known
decades of poverty, civil war and ethnic conflict, but
they are determined to overcome those challenges.
They are driven by the hope ofa continent at peace and
by the promise of a bright future. The State of Israel is
committed to partnering with our friends in Africa in
order to achieve not only stability and security, but also

prosperity.

In order to ensure sustainable growth that will
last for generations, the international community
must work together to build the kind of peace that will
last for generations. Resolution 2282 (2016) on the
peacebuilding architecture is an ambitious statement
that challenges us to rethink how we see peacebuilding.
A comprehensive approach must address all stages
of conflict - after, during and before. Therefore
peacebuilding must not wait until the fighting begins
to take action. Bringing an end to ongoing violence and
rebuilding communities post-conflict are important to
all of us. But we need to develop prevention capabilities
in order to avoid escalation and stop conflicts before
they even start. That will require acting on several
fronts.

First, now is the time to focus our resources to
build institutions on the ground that enable States to
sustain peace and resolve tensions before they lead
to conflict and violence. Secondly, we must promote
strong mechanisms for national reconciliation,
including justice and governance and focusing on
national ownership and inclusivity. Finally, we need
to understand that in our world today, the impact of
disease, terror and conflict is no longer limited to
any one region or any one people. They are collective
challenges that must be met by collective action.

Ensuring post-conflict stability requires the full and
active participation of all actors in society. We need to
empower local communities and encourage more women
to take part in peacebuilding and conflict resolution.
Israel believes that the inclusion of women is the key to
opening the door to a sustainable peace in Africa and
around the world. Every year, in cooperation with UN-
Women, Mashav - Israel's Agency for International
Development Cooperation - organizes a workshop for
African women on political empowerment of women.
The goal is to discuss the role of and opportunities
for women in peacebuilding, mediation and conflict
resolution. Participants from several of the countries on
the agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission have been
trained by Mashav, in Israel and abroad, in courses
on various topics including community development,
women's leadership and economic empowerment.

We are also proud to have played a role in fighting
the Ebola outbreak in West Africa. Israel was the
largest donor per capita in the international effort to
end the deadly disease. That is part of our ongoing
commitment to help bring about a safer, more secure
future for the people of Africa. A few weeks ago, our
Prime Minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, went on an
historic visit to Africa, the first visit by an Israeli Prime
Minister to the continent in three decades. At the start
of his visit, Prime Minister Netanyahu declared that
"Israel is coming back to Africa and Africa is coming
back to Israel".

Israel is committed to strengthening old ties in
Africa and building new partnerships for the twenty-
first century. I am proud to announce today that just
last week, the State of Israel established ties with the
Republic of Guinea, and our Governments have already
started to discuss the many ways our new partnership
can be beneficial for the people of Israel and the people
of Guinea. The State ofIsrael looks forward to working
together with Guinea and other African nations towards
pursuing a common agenda and building a common
future.

Africa is not only rich in natural resources, it is
also rich in human talent and energy and hope. By
mid-century, 37 per cent ofthe world's children will live
in Africa. The continent's future will be shaped by its
dynamic and vibrant youth, who are more empowered
and engaged than ever before. In order to unleash
that vast potential, we need a long-term, sustained
international effort to ensure that this generation of
young people enjoys a safe and secure tomorrow.

Israel is committed to our partnership with the
people and the nations of Africa to work together to
make that future a reality.

