Mr. Ward (Jamaica): We are grateful to Special
Representative Jacques Paul Klein for updating us on
the recent developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and for his very clear message on the way forward. We
are pleased with the progress being made in the
mandate implementation plan and wish to commend
him and his colleagues in the United Nations Mission
in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) for their
tireless efforts in making this possible. The time lines
that have been established and the key objectives stated
provide us with indicators by which we can measure
our progress and make adjustments where necessary.
We therefore support and look forward to the fruits of
this initiative.

We note from the extensive report before us that
UNMIBH continues to make rapid progress in some
areas and incremental progress in others. We are
confident that, with the continued support of the
international community, UNMIBH will be able to
complete its core tasks by its target date of December
2002.

As the Secretary-General most aptly concludes in
his report, the stabilization and recovery of the whole
region depend on how the challenges are resolved.
These challenges - ethnic reconciliation, democratic
institution-building, reconstruction, economic reform
and, most importantly, the full implementation of
human rights for all the citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina - are complex and require the continued
full cooperation of the international community. As the
Secretary-General also states, failure to see the tasks
through to the end would be disastrous to the whole
region.

As Mr. Klein indicated, regional cooperation, a
new emerging reality, augurs well for the future of the
Balkans. As the Governments of the region - in
particular the Governments of Croatia, the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina - are recognizing, the only way forward
to peace and stability in the region rests firmly on their
commitments to constructive bilateral and regional
relations based on mutual respect and the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of each State. There is no other
way, and those who would advocate another path
should be condemned by all.

As our delegation has stated in the past, law and
order are essential to the sustained stability of any
nation State. Police reform initiatives geared at
establishing effective law enforcement must therefore
continue to be of high priority. We note the incremental
progress being made in the area of police reform, the
continuation of which will contribute to ensuring that
law enforcement agents are credible and enjoy the
respect of the population. We attach importance to the
continued emphasis on the training of police officers,
as we are convinced that professionalism is the key to
self-sustaining police reform. The political neutrality
and professionalism of the local police and judiciary
must be promoted and upheld. We therefore support the
appeal of the Secretary-General to Member States for
generous contributions to the Trust Fund for the Police
Assistance Programme.

The Secretary-General's report clearly outlines
the detrimental effects of the continued presence of
indicted war criminals in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
repeat a call we have made in the past for full
cooperation with the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia and that indicted war criminals be
brought to justice. The international community must
be consistent in its pursuit of an end to impunity for
Violations of human rights and humanitarian law,
wherever in the world these criminal acts occur.

We remain hopeful that, despite the forces of
separation, UNMIBH will continue to focus on the
implementation of its mandate with the cooperation
and assistance of those political leaders who have
embraced the path to peace, reconciliation, democratic
principles, respect for human rights and justice for all.
We agree with the Secretary-General's statement that

"The path to a better future is through
cooperation and compromise, not through
sectarianism and separation". (S/2001/5 7], para. 45)

In conclusion, I wish to underline Jamaica's
support for the extension of UNMIBH's mandate, as
recommended by the Secretary-General, in order to
consolidate the gains already made and to address the
challenges that remain.

