Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation congratulates Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator in the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA),
and Ms. Nujeen Mustapha, a Syrian refugee, for their
enlightening and inspiring presentations.

Cote d'Ivoire is particularly concerned about the
precarious situation in the AI-Hol camp. The number
of internally displaced persons has sharply increased.
It went from more than 15,000 people in January to
around 73,000 in April, 92 per cent ofwhom are women
and children.

The recent floods in the country are also a source of
great concern to my delegation. According to OCHA's
assessment, the torrential rains caused the destruction
of 14 camps, hosting 40,000 internally displaced people,
and 40 villages in Al-Hasakah governorate, with a total
of 120,000 people.

In that context, my country welcomes the measures
under way in the Rukban camp, which seek to find
durable solutions to the situation of internally displaced
persons. Between 24 March and 16 April, 4,317 people
were able to leave the camp, including 2,842 who
returned to their original homes or any other destination
of their choice after a brief stay in a collective shelter.
That encouraging return must be voluntary and safe
and respect the dignity of the displaced.
In the same vein, Cote d'Ivoire notes with
satisfaction the efforts made by humanitarian agencies
to provide food aid to 3.32 million people and
medical care to 2.4 million people. In that respect, it
welcomes the provision of assistance through cross-
border humanitarian deliveries. The 906 trucks in
27 consignments from Turkey and Iraq provided relief
to an average of 150,000 people a month.

The unstable security situation in Idlib province
could compromise the delivery of humanitarian aid to
populations in need. Despite the ceasefire negotiated
by the Russian Federation and Turkey on 17 September
2018, the province is seeing ongoing fighting. Cote
d'Ivoire therefore calls on all stakeholders to uphold the
Russian-Turkish agreement on the demilitarized zone
and recalls their obligation to respect international
human rights law and international humanitarian law.
We also call on the international community to continue
its support for efforts to ensure the protection of people
in distress and to meet their basic needs.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire urges the parties to the
conflict to give priority to dialogue in the pursuit of
solutions to the Syrian crisis, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of resolution 2254 (2015) and the
complementary Astana and Sochi processes.

In that regard, my country welcomes the next round
of talks scheduled for 25 and 26 April in Nur-Sulatan,
the capital of Kazakhstan, and hopes that it will help to
relaunch the peace process in order to put an end to the
Syrian crisis, which has lasted too long.

