Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): First, I would like to thank Mr. Qazi, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for having
presented the report (S/2007/330) of the Secretary-
General on the situation in Iraq and the work of United
Nations agencies there. We take note of
Mr. Khalilzad's briefing on the Multinational Force,
the Development Fund for Iraq and the International
Advisory and Monitoring Board.

We are grateful for the statement made by
Mr. Zebari, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq, who
informed us about the Government's stepped up efforts
to stabilize the situation in the country. We agree with
the conclusions and assessments of the Secretary-
General's report; we would like to make a few
comments in that regard.

We believe that, as confirmed at the Sharm
el-Sheikh meeting in May, the international
community, through its collective efforts, is trying to
help to achieve the prompt and sustainable
normalization of the situation in Iraq. We are
convinced that, without effective international
assistance for the political process, the leaders of the
various groups in Iraq will not be able to overcome the
inertia resulting from mutual distrust. Given that
situation, if national agreement is to be achieved, we
need the mediation of the United Nations, the League
of Arab States, the Organization of the Islamic
Conference, the Non-Aligned Movement, Iraq's
neighbours and other countries that have an
opportunity to help Baghdad.

It is important that the final statement of the
Sharm el-Sheikh meeting accorded priority to goals

and tasks aimed at achieving a settlement and stressed
the need for inter-Iraqi conciliation and broad
exchanges of ideas among various communities and
groups.

We are very concerned about the information
concerning the renewed terrorist act in Samarra, which
caused further destruction of holy sites that had already
been damaged in the bombing of February 2006. We
express sympathy to the faithful who were outraged by
that heinous extremist act. At the same time, we call on
all Iraqis and Iraqi communities to remain calm and not
to succumb to the outrage of radicalism. We hope that
the provocative act in Samarra will not - as in
2006 - lead to a new round of cruel inter-ethnic
fighting. We support the efforts of the Al-Maliki
Government, which are aimed at preventing renewed
spiral of crisis in the country.

Here, I would like to stress that the key to success
for a genuine national dialogue in Iraq is that all
religious, ethnic and political groups should feel
included in the political process and that they have a
democratic opportunity to find their place within the
Iraqi power structure. That must be ensured if we want
Iraq to remain one undivided sovereign State. We also
need to provide deadlines by which the Multinational
Force - which, we must say, is a serious irritant for
many Iraqis - will leave the country. We are not
speaking of the immediate announcement of a date. But
it appears to be important for Iraqis to see the prospect
of a full end to the foreign military presence in their
country.

We note that one of the major results of the
Sharm el-Sheikh meeting was the adoption of a
Russian initiative to establish a standing body to
coordinate the efforts of interested parties on Iraq. We
are awaiting information on the start of the work of
that and other key working groups, and on their
decisions. Once again, we would like to say that, for
our part, we are ready to actively participate in
developing and implementing any initiatives that might
assist in overcoming the crisis in Iraq.

We express support for the draft statement drawn
up by the United States with respect to today's
meeting.

