Mr. Williamson (United States): We recognize
the excellent work that the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) has done in Angola,
coordinating humanitarian assistance and responding to
overwhelming needs. The United States has been
gratified to work alongside OCHA in an active
response to Angola's humanitarian crisis. The United
States has already delivered, or committed to
providing, 97,000 metric tonnes of food and $2 million
worth of non-food commodities, airlifted to family-
quartering areas. This brings United States
humanitarian assistance to Angola for the current fiscal
year to $100 million. We are committed to working
with the Government of Angola, United Nations
agencies and other donors to coordinate our priorities
and next steps, both for immediate humanitarian needs
and for broader issues such as the resettlement of
internally displaced persons, former combatants and
returning refugees.

We look for the Government of Angola to provide
leadership by committing to the welfare of its people.
Donors cannot provide enough for all of Angola's
needs. But Angola is different from most other
countries in Southern Africa facing severe
humanitarian crises because it is blessed with resources
to care for its own citizens. We urge Angola quickly to
direct significant resources to internal relief needs as
the international community continues to assist it.

Finally, let me briefly touch on the important
political dynamic because it has a huge impact on
humanitarian aid, as pointed out by the emergency
humanitarian coordinator, Mr. Oshima, and as issues
raised by earlier speakers make clear. There was a
dramatic shift in February, for which the Government
of Angola has adjusted. Yet we still await the
Secretary-General's report, recommending United
Nations strategy to be adopted. Whether it is mine-
clearing, dealing with UNITA ex-combatants and their
families, et cetera, the delay only hurts the people in
Angola. We look forward with great anticipation for
the Secretariat to share their vision with us so that the
suffering people deserving of assistance can be helped.

