Mr. Barkin (United States of America): We are
grateful to the United Kingdom and Germany for
their leadership in producing a mandate that supports
the civilian-led transitional Government of the Sudan
as it works to form inclusive peace agreements and
bolster democratic governance. As we look to the
successful conclusion of the peace process in the
Sudan, the United States fully expects this to be the
final extension of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), barring
extraordinary circumstances and subject to review by
the Security Council.

We have been working towards responsibly drawing
down the mission since 2017, and we believe it is still in
the interests of the Sudan to do so within the next year.
The United States supports a follow-on United Nations
mission with a countrywide mandate to continue
assistance to the new Sudanese Government following
UNAMID's conclusion. This final mandate reiterates
that UNAMID's core mission is to support the peace
process and peacebuilding and to protect civilians.
Furthermore, UNAMID's r01e remains central to the
facilitation ofpeaceful political solutions and to the full
inclusion of the views of women leaders and civilians.
This mandate affirms the continued importance of
this role.

The Sudan has a historic opportunity to foster
lasting peace, and we are ready to support the Sudanese
people and their Government. The United States calls on
all parties to fully and actively participate in the peace
process and honour the commitments that they make
in that process. To be clear, this is only the beginning
of the long road to stability, security and democratic
governance in the Sudan. There must also be follow-
through.

We value the role that the United Nations, the African
Union, Ethiopia and other international partners play
in supporting stability and a smooth political transition
in the Sudan. This mandate clearly represents the
international community's support for that transition.
It offers needed support to the new Government as it
focuses on addressing insecurity, enabling unfettered
humanitarian access and protecting civilians.

We look forward to the Secretary-General's
next report, which will outline steps to fully
draw down UNAMID and propose a follow-on
international presence.

