Mr. Fowler (Canada): I should like to begin by
thanking you, Mr. President, for convening an open debate
on the situation created by the nuclear tests conducted by
India and Pakistan. I must, however, express my country's
regret that the views of Member States not members of the
Security Council are being heard only after consideration
and after adoption of such a resolution, dealing as it does
with matters of such vital concern to all Member States.

(spoke in French)

We are meeting here today in order to avoid a new
nuclear realpolitik. The nuclear tests that India and Pakistan
have carried out are a clear and fundamental threat to
international security. Thirty years of success in the
management of the risk of nuclear proliferation have been
compromised, and the consensus of the 186 nations that
have signed the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) has been mocked.

India and Pakistan have returned the world to the dark
years of nuclear terror, with dangerous political and security
arguments put forward to justify the proliferation of, or to
retain, nuclear weapons. The chief result of such a nuclear
realpolitik would be the acceptance of India and Pakistan
into the circle of nuclear-weapon States. This would mark
one of the most serious steps backward in the process of
nuclear disarmament.

Canada believes very firmly that the Security
Council, and in particular its permanent members, should
take no measure that would enable India and Pakistan to
acquire, de facto or de jure, the status of nuclear-weapon
States. The NPT recognizes five - and only five -
nuclear-weapon States. If this number can be raised to
seven, then other countries might want to join the club.
The world cannot stand by idly in the face of such a
possibility.

(spoke in English)

Non-nuclear-weapon States parties to the NPT also
have a very particular responsibility. Over the past 30
years, they have acted responsibly, forgoing nuclear
weapons of their own while working multilaterally in
support of nuclear disarmament. The Security Council and
the international community need to invalidate the
concept of nuclear weapons as a currency of modern
geopolitical authority. According to the Charter of the
United Nations, Security Council membership is open to
those countries which contribute to the maintenance of
peace and security and to the other purposes of the
Organization. This obligation weighs particularly heavily
on the permanent members of the Council.

Countries which deliberately undermine peace and
security and flout the will of the international community
have voided their claim to Security Council membership,
let alone a permanent place in the management of the
post-cold-war world.

Canada welcomes the Security Council resolution on
this issue and the commitment of the Council to remain
actively engaged. Today's meeting, to which all interested
United Nations Members have been invited, recognizes
that all members of the international community have a
vital interest in resolving the current, dangerous situation.

Measures directed at India and Pakistan should be
aimed at convincing the two countries to renounce their
nuclear-weapon programmes. The people of India and
Pakistan - one-fifth of the world's population - and
their neighbours have never been in greater danger.

The Governments of India and Pakistan owe it to
their people to pull back from the course they have
chosen towards a nuclear dead-end. Sustained
international dissuasive pressure must be applied to
convince these two countries to sign the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and to look beyond it to the
NPT.

 

Canada has taken a number of unilateral measures to
signal to these two countries that we profoundly oppose
what they have done. These measures have included the
recall of the Canadian High Commissioners to India and
Pakistan; the ban of military exports to both countries; the
suspension of high-level contacts; and the suspension of
bilateral aid programmes to these two countries in all areas
except for humanitarian assistance. Canadian relations with
India and Pakistan are on hold; there is no business as
usual.

Action directed at India and Pakistan is obviously not
enough. The more of these weapons there are and the more
nations that have them, the more likely it is that they will
be used. These mathematics are inexorable and ought to be
of concern to all of us.
Within the community of nations, we must recornmit
ourselves to putting nuclear disarmament back on track, and
urgently. The future credibility of the non-proliferation
process depends not only on a renunciation by these two
countries of their weapons programmes, but also on the
good faith performance of the nuclear-weapon States. They
must keep their end of the NPT bargain - a promise that
not all have treated with the same urgency. There must be
visible and consistent progress on both sides of the NPT
equation.

It is time to take pragmatic steps in nuclear weapons
reductions and to ensure transparency in the disarmament
process. In supporting the nuclear non-proliferation regime,
the enhanced NPT review process provides the means to
achieve this and needs to be used to better advantage. It is
time for the Conference on Disarmament, the General
Assembly's First Committee and the NPT review process
to move quickly beyond their current sterile debates. The
people of the world need progress on nuclear weapons
reduction, and on disarmament more generally.

The international community cannot afford to succumb
to nuclear fatalism. We have re-entered a dangerous time,
one which challenges each United Nations Member to play
its own positive and constructive role.

In addressing this crisis, we need to send three
unequivocal messages. First, to India and Pakistan: we
condemn your tests and urge you to renounce your nuclear
weapons programmes. You deserve no reward for these
irresponsible acts.

Secondly, to the nuclear-weapon States: fulfil your
commitments to reduce your nuclear weapons stocks.

Finally, to all here present in the body charged with
maintaining international peace and security: carry out
your responsibility by implementing the resolution you
have adopted.

