Mr. AI-Ashtal (Yemen) (interpretation from Arabic):
At the outset, I would like to extend to you, Sir, our sincere
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I am confident that you
will ably conduct the work of the Council. I would also like
to thank your predecessor, the Ambassador of Kenya, for
his excellent guidance of the work of the Council in
February. . -

The Security Council meets today in the face» of
serious developments which imperil peace and security and
threaten to return the Middle East to the vicious circle of
conflict, tension and instability. The Israeli Govemment's
decision on 26 February to built a new Jewish settlement at
Jabal Abu Ghneim, south of the Arab city of Jerusalem, is
a new and acute crisis that threatens the peace process,
which has already been shaken several times since the
Likud party came to power.

The decision of the Israeli Government is a clear
violation of the principles upon which the peace process
was based and of all international laws and resolutions,
and in particular Security Council resolutions 242 ( 1967),
252 (1968) and 338 (1973), which reaffirm the illegality
and illegitimacy of confiscating land by force and which
decide all actions and measures taken by Israel, including
the confiscation of land and property, to be null and void.
Such actions cannot change the status of the city of
Jerusalem. .

Furthermore, the Israeli actions run counter to the
letter and spirit of the peace agreements signed between
Israel and the Palestinian party.

They also pre-empt the final-status negotiations and
constitute an attempt to impose a fait accompli on Al-
Quds Al-Sharif, one of the most important issues of the
peace process.

When the Arab Group addressed its letter to the
President of the Security Council before Israel took the
decision to build a new settlement, it did. so in the hope
that the Security Council would take pre-emptive action
to compel Israel to put a halt to the Jabal Abu Ghneim
project. The Council did not act expeditiously, hOWever.
Now that the Israeli Government has taken that decision
and is prepared to use force in order to implement it, the
Security Council is required once again to make a clear
pronouncement reaffirming the illegality of the
confiscation of land by force and calling upon Israel to
reverse its decision and to cease all provocative action
that could threaten the peace process and the security of
the region. - -

The position of the Republic of Yemen with regard
to Israel's decision to build a new settlement is
summarized in the following statement issued by the
Ministry for Foreign Affairs in Sanaa:

"The Republic of Yemen follows with grave
concern the Israeli decision to build a new Jewish

, settlement in occupied East Jerusalem. This
represents a further escalation by Israel that will
create tension in the region and is an expression of
Israel's ill-intentioned design to destroy and hinder
the peace process. It also represents. Israel's
complete disregard of all the agreements it has
concluded with the Arabs to promote the peace

process.
Security Council 3745th meeting
Fifty-second year 5 March 1997

 

"This new Israeli provocation and escalation does
not contribute to establishing an environment of
confidence. Rather, it pushes the region once again
into an atmosphere of confrontation and instability.

"While strongly denouncing and condemning this
Israeli action, the Republic of Yemen calls upon the
Security Council and all States concerned with the
peace process in the region -- foremost among which
are the United States of America and the European
countries -- to bring pressure to bear on Israel to
reverse this serious and provocative decision.

"The Republic of Yemen once again reiterates its
firm position on the peace process and the importance
of establishing a just and comprehensive peace based
on the restoration of all legitimate Arab rights and the
end of the Israeli occupation of all occupied Arab
territories in Palestine, the Golan and southem
Lebanon.

"The eyes of the world, in particular in the
Middle East, are focused on the Security Council in
the hope that it will shoulder its responsibility and
advance the peace process on the basis of its own
resolutions, which form the framework of all
agreements, including those signed between Israel and
the Palestinians. We call on the Security Council to
move Speedily to avert all the dangers and impel the
peace process forward."

