Mr. La Yifan (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the

outset, I would like to thank Mr. Ian Martin, the

Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for

his briefing. I thank him and the United Nations

Mission in Nepal (UNMIN) for their hard work over
the past year and a half.

As a neighbouring country of Nepal, China takes
great pleasure in seeing the continuous positive
progress in the peace process in Nepal. On 10 April,
Nepal successfully conducted the election of its
Constituent Assembly. On 28 May, the Constituent
Assembly held its first meeting and declared the
establishment of a federal democratic republic and the
posts of President and Vice-President, and decided that
it would draft a new constitution within two years. At
present, various parties are engaged in positive and
active consultation on the formation of the new
government. Tomorrow, moreover, Nepal will hold its
presidential election.

China has a positive View of those important
developments and appreciates the tireless efforts of the
parties and the people of Nepal. We expect and believe
that the people and the Government of Nepal have the
ability and the wisdom to continue to settle outstanding
issues in the peace process through dialogue and
consultation and to achieve long-term peace, stability
and development in accordance with the established
plan.

China appreciates the strong support provided by
UNMIN in the election of the Constituent Assembly of
Nepal. At present, Nepal is at a critical transitional
period. Recently, Nepal made a request to the
Secretary-General in the hope that UNMIN would be
reduced in size, that its mandate would be extended for
six months and that it would continue to facilitate the
monitoring of the management of arms and armed
personnel.

China supports the extension of UNMIN's
mandate at the request of Nepal, with the prerequisite
of a clear mandate. We encourage UNMIN to continue
the work of monitoring arms and armed personnel so as
to create a good security environment for a smooth
post-election transition in Nepal.

It is necessary to point out that in the end that the
peace process in Nepal should be led by the Nepalese
people and that issues related to peaceful
reconstruction should likewise be settled by relying on
the wisdom of the people themselves.

We believe that, with the support of the
international community, a new Nepal will be able to
return once again to the path of peace and
development.

