Mr. Olguin Cigarroa (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We note with great interest the briefing by the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sahel,
Ms. Guebre Sellassie, and reiterate our full support to
her, as we did at the Council meeting on 19 June (see S/PV.7203).

We consider the implementation of the United
Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel very
important, since it should focus not only on security but
also on such vital elements as development and social
inclusion. In our view it is fundamental to implement
policies that can help the population of the Sahel
emerge out of extreme poverty by creating sustainable
employment and fair income distribution within the
countries involved. We believe it is right to focus
that African problems must be dealt with essentially
by the countries of Africa. In that regard, we support
and welcome the work of the Group of Five Sahel in
strengthening cooperation on the integrated strategy, as
well as the Ministerial Coordination Platform for the
integrated strategy in the Sahel, chaired by Mali for the
next two years, and the efforts, supported by Chile, to
bring peace to northern Mali.

My delegation believes that particular attention
should be paid to strengthening the rule of law and its
institutions in the countries of the Sahel. A democratic
system is the best way to achieve equitable economic
development and ultimately peaceful co-existence.
We would urge that over the next few months free and
transparent elections be held in Burkina Faso leading
to a transition to a civilian Government in November.

Chile has always considered the protection of
civilians and the issue of internally displaced persons
to be important aspects of the work of the Security
Council. We are therefore concerned about the fact
that, according to the most recent data in the Secretary-
General's June report (S/2014/397), the number of
internally displaced persons exceeds 3.3 million. In that
regard, we would like to ask Ms. Sellassie, working with
the relevant international organizations, to continue to
focus on finding a solution to the problem.

The Sahel region is currently facing not only
enormous social challenges but also those related to
terrorism, criminal activity and now Ebola. We firmly
believe that the way for the region to make progress is by
effectively implementing the United Nations integrated
strategy under the leadership of the Special Envoy and
other international institutions. For those efforts to
succeed, they require cooperation and responsibility on
the part of the national authorities in order to ensure
sustainability, strengthened institutions and respect
for human rights, and the definitive establishment of
democracy.
