Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation wishes to
commend you, Sir, on your initiative in convening this
formal meeting of the Council to discuss the important
issue of protection for humanitarian assistance to refugees
and others in conflict situations. My delegation considers
the convening of this debate as timely in the light of
developments of recent years, in which the distinctions
between traditional peacekeeping and international
humanitarian actions have become increasingly blurred.
The discussion in the Council on this issue affords us the
opportunity to consider the matter in a more focused
fashion, with a View to identifying problem areas and
determining the appropriate measures, approaches and
strategies that could be taken by the international
community, and in particular by the Council, in
addressing this increasingly complex issue.

Following the end of the cold war and in the wake
of the profound political changes that have occurred in
various regions of the world, United Nations
peacekeeping operations have undergone dramatic
changes. In recent years they have become more
numerous and complex, given the increasingly complex
and multidimensional nature of conflicts, many of which
are cross-boundary in character, and have increasingly
moved away from the traditional peacekeeping model.
This changed situation has created an enormous challenge
for the international community, specifically the Council,
which is responsible for United Nations peacekeeping, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) and other international humanitarian
organizations. Classic cases in point include the situations
in the former Yugoslavia, and in particular in Bosnia and
Herzegovina; in Liberia; in Somalia; and in Rwanda and
the Great Lakes region, which have raised questions as to
the efficacy and competence of these bodies.

With regard to the Security Council, questions have
been raised, inter alia, about the decision-making process,
mandated objectives, and the approaches and strategies
adopted by the Security Council with regard to the
peacekeeping operations in these war-tom countries.
Questions have also been raised about the relationship and
coordination, or the lack of it, between peacekeeping
operations mounted by the Council and humanitarian
efforts undertaken by the UNHCR and other humanitarian
agencies, such as the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC), and other non-govemmental humanitarian
organizations.

These questions have been raised by many Member
States and individual experts, as well as by humanitarian

 

agencies, including the UNHCR, whose High
Commissioner, Mrs. Sadako Ogata, to her credit, made
some very pertinent comments and observations during her
address to the Council on 28 April this year - for which
we should be most grateful. Mrs. Ogata, inter alia,
highlighted the enormous problems faced by her agency,
not only in the Great Lakes region and other parts of
Africa, but also in the other areas of UNHCR operation,
such as Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia. She
highlighted the daunting tasks of her agency and the
enormous obstacles that it has faced, and continues to face,
which require more concerted international response and
assistance. She also pointed out the useful lessons learned
by the UNHCR, which this Council should particularly
note, as well as the close linkage between humanitarian,
political and security problems, which require a more
integrated approach to international crisis management,
involving closer coordination between humanitarian,
political and military efforts. Hence her call for the
establishment of a rapid-deployment capability. Equally
important was Mrs. Ogata's redefinition of the concept of
security, which, in the context of our times, puts human
beings at the centre of these international efforts. Mrs.
Ogata's views and suggestions should be examined with the
seriousness they deserve.

My delegation would strongly urge the Council to
seriously consider the many questions raised and
observations and proposals made during this debate, as well
as outside of this Council, given the intertwining nature of
peacekeeping and humanitarian issues. In this regard, my
delegation notes with particular interest the report of the
third Singapore Conference on Humanitarian Action and
Peacekeeping Operations, organized by the United Nations
Institute for Training and Research (UNITAR), in
collaboration with the Institute for Policy Studies, in
February this year. This extremely useful report looked at
the issue in a holistic manner, covering such aspects as the
political framework for humanitarian actions, the
relationship between humanitarian and military actions and
related problems, cooperation with regional organizations
and multinational forces, funding, peacekeeping and human
rights, information and education, and the role of the media.
The 17-point recommendations contained in the report
should provide a useful basis for more detailed examination
of the issue by the Council.

These recommendations deserve careful consideration
by the Council. While not exhaustive, they provide an
extremely useful framework for a fuller examination of the
twin issues of peacekeeping and humanitarian actions in the
increasingly complex political situation in the post-cold-war
era in which we live, which is characterized by an
essentially dynamic situation in many parts of the world.
In this changed global dynamic situation, in which
millions of ordinary citizens are caught in conflict zones
and in the process are subjected to human-rights
Violations and denied essential humanitarian assistance, it
is imperative that the international community make every
effort to provide and ensure these citizens' protection. As
implied by Mrs. Ogata, the security and well-being of
people - that is, citizens of States - are not of lesser
importance than the security of States themselves.

Thus, the Council is called upon increasingly to
address problems which threaten to escalate and to
endanger civilians caught in crisis situations. In such
situations, the Council's response is expected to be
immediate, bold and determined, so as to create
conditions which will, first, ensure the immediate
protection of these hapless civilians and, secondly,
provide a framework for a durable solution to the
conflicts themselves. This, in the View of my delegation,
is the most important role of the Council in this post-
cold-war period, and it represents the best support it can
provide to organizations concerned with the humanitarian
dimensions of crises, whose personnel in the field should
enjoy the protection of the United Nations. My delegation
supports any move to strengthen existing mechanisms for
ensuring the safety of these personnel, if necessary
through appropriate legal instruments.

The conditions and prerequisites for the effectiveness
of any peacekeeping-cum-humanitarian operations are
many and have been touched on by previous speakers.
Clearly, it is of fundamental importance that mandates
should be clear and precise and appropriate to the task,
and that the necessary authority and resources are made
available to any mission tasked with addressing protection
needs. Half-measures are likely to do more harm than
good, as the experience of Bosnia, Rwanda and Somalia
have borne out. In those cases, protection could not be
divorced or disentangled from the dynamics of the crisis,
and the war strategies of the protagonists to the conflicts
were designed to target and harm civilians. In such
situations, where the logic of violence held sway, it was,
with hindsight, neither smart nor sane to send the Blue
Helmets to provide "protection" on the assumption that
they could be insulated from the fighting, which had to
cease if they were to carry out their protection missions
effectively. The hapless situation in which United Nations
peacekeepers, along with Bosnian civilians, found
themselves in the so-called safe havens in Bosnia and
Herzegovina was most illustrative indeed.

 

Another important prerequisite for effective
humanitarianism is respect for strict neutrality and
impartiality, and the overriding imperative to go to the aid
of victims who are in need of protection and humanitarian
assistance, pursuant to universal humanistic principles. Not
to respect such basic, fundamental norms, including the
right of people to receive assistance and the right of
concerned groups to provide it, or to use humanitarian
assistance as a bargaining chip for specific political
objectives, however worthy, would be to jeopardize the
lives of these civilians in need as well as those of
humanitarian workers.

Without doubt, an equally important condition is, of
course, the availability of adequate funding, which should
be seriously addressed, given the continuing financial crisis
of the United Nations, as without resources the best plans
will go awry. This, obviously, is the responsibility and
obligation of all of us States Members of this Organization.

Aside from these conditions, and as an accompanying
post-conflict measure, it is important to ensure that the
perpetrators of genocide or crimes against humanity will
not go unpunished, hence the importance of continuing
strong international support for the work of the international
tribunals set up for this purpose.

My delegation believes that the convening of this
formal meeting of the Council today is an important step in
addressing the issue. It demonstrates the seriousness with
which the Council is coming to grips with the problem,
with a view to finding appropriate solutions. It is our hope
that the airing of these issues of critical importance, both
here in the Council and in the General Assembly, will lead
to some concrete actions to ameliorate the present situation.

