Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Gonzalo Koncke, Chief
of Staff to the Secretary-General of the Organization
of American States, and Mr. Felix Maradiaga for
their valuable briefings. I would also like to welcome
Mr. Denis Moncada Colindres, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Nicaragua, to our meeting.

We are here today in the absence of a consensus
among the members of the Security Council on holding
this meeting. In that regard, we note Article 34 of
Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations, which
states that

"The Security Council may investigate any
dispute or any situation which might lead to
international friction or give rise to a dispute, in
order to determine whether the continuance of
the dispute or situation is likely to endanger the
maintenance of international peace and security."

That underscores the role of the Security Council to
apply preventive diplomacy in order to prevent conflicts
and address situations and crises as early as possible
if there are any early-warning signs of such conflicts
that could endanger international peace and security, in
accordance with the Council's mandate as outlined in
Article 24 of the Charter.

Regional and subregional organizations also
play an essential role in dealing with regional issues
before they escalate, as expressed in Article 52 of the
Charter, which calls for enabling them to deal with
matters relating to the maintenance of international
peace and security provided that such activities are
consistent with the purposes and principles of the
United Nations. All such preventive measures in the
Charter are available to the Security Council so that it
can address crises at an early stage and often prevent
conflicts and destabilization. Preventive diplomacy
has been one of the priorities of the State of Kuwait
during its membership of the Council, as we believe
that addressing unrest and crises at an early stage can
spare enormous losses on the financial, economic, and
political fronts, and especially losses of human life.

We are concerned about the recent events in
Nicaragua and regret the violence and the many
dead and wounded. We underscore the importance
of holding the perpetrators accountable and averting
similar incidents in the future. We call on the parties
concerned to abide by international humanitarian law
and international human rights law. We also urge that
a national dialogue be launched in good faith, aimed at
reaching a peaceful solution to the crisis and avoiding
repercussions that could affect security and destabilize
Nicaragua and the region. This should be done while
taking into consideration the interest of the country
and the the people's right to a free and dignified life.
We therefore urge the Government of Nicaragua to
continue taking the steps necessary to de-escalate
tensions and cooperating with all the relevant parties,
including the Organization ofAmerican States, in order
to get through this difficult period.

The State of Kuwait emphasizes the importance
of acting based on the principles established in
international law for addressing such situations. We
also emphasize our full commitment to the principles
stipulated in Article 2 of the Charter, which call for
respecting States' sovereignty and refraining from
interfering in their internal affairs.

