Ms. Yparraguirre (Philippines): A year ago, the
Philippines joined many other delegations in issuing
a strong call in the Chamber for a full, thorough and
independent investigation of the downing of Malaysia
Airlines Flight MH-17, which took the lives of 298
people, including three Filipinos, a mother and her
two children. In July 2014, united with us in our grief,
the Council adopted resolution 2166 (2014), aimed at
securing justice for those innocent and irreplaceable
lives and honouring their memory.

Twelve months after the incident and the adoption
of that resolution, the world is still groping for answers.
The perpetrators remain free of all accountability.
The families of the victims continue to seek answers,
justice and closure. If adopted, today's draft resolution
(S/2015/562) would have been a crucial step in
fulfilling the commitment we made - both to the
families of the victims and to the larger international
community - to holding the perpetrators of this tragic
incident and heinous crime fully accountable.
As one of the grieving nations, the Philippines
sponsored today's draft resolution in order to lend
our strong support to the initiative taken by the
Governments of Australia, Belgium, Malaysia, the
Netherlands and Ukraine in seeking an international
investigation of the incident and the establishment of an
international tribunal for prosecuting those responsible
for the downing of Flight MH-17. The Philippines and
the Filipino people are indeed indebted to those nations
for their sustained efforts and to those who believed in
the merits of the draft resolution and gave it their full
support.

We deeply regret, however, that the Council was
unable to adopt the draft resolution today, representing
a huge disservice to those who perished and to their
families, their nations and the world. But the search
for answers and justice will continue. The Philippines
stands ready to support and collaborate with other
countries to ensure that those responsible are finally
brought to justice and that such tragic incidents will
never happen again.

