Mr. Eler (Turkey): At the outset, I would like to
thank the Russian Federation presidency for organizing
today's open debate. I would also like to express my
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his briefing
and for the work he is carrying out through the
Secretariat to strengthen the peacekeeping capabilities
of the United Nations.

Peacekeeping operations play a critical role in
supporting a country's efforts to provide a better
future for its inhabitants. Peacekeeping is the flagship
activity of the United Nations. For populations in need,
peacekeepers are the face of the United Nations. The
conditions under which today's peacekeepers operate
have changed dramatically. The number of conflicts
is, unfortunately, on the rise, and they are increasingly
of an intra-State nature. Asymmetric threats involving
armed non-State actors or terrorists with links to global
organized crime are emerging.

Those changing conditions undoubtedly require
that the concept of United Nations peacekeeping evolve.
First, it is clear that the challenging circumstances and
expectations with regard to protecting civilians require
a change in the posture of peacekeeping operations,
including through robust mandates. However, when
robust peacekeeping is in question, we must do our
utmost not to compromise a key asset of the United
Nations, namely, impartiality. All efforts must be
made to prevent any collateral damage and to win the
hearts and minds of the people in order to mitigate the
risks of local resentment, reaction and opposition to
peacekeeping missions, all of whichjeopardize success
in the fulfilment of mandates.

Secondly, the safety and security of personnel
must be given priority, given the increasing number
of attacks on United Nations personnel. We would like
take this opportunity to pay homage to the women
and men serving as Blue Helmets and express our
condolences to the survivors of the peacekeepers who
have sacrificed their lives in the line of duty. In that
context, the assets that modern technology offers, such
as unarmed unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), must be
utilized, as appropriate, to provide safety and security
to mission personnel, so that they can fulfil their
mission mandates. The use of UAVs for reconnaissance
and surveillance increases situational awareness and
thus saves lives. However, they must be used in strict
conformity with international law, the Charter of the
United Nations and the principle of transparency.

On the other hand, proper personnel training and
equipment must also be provided, keeping in mind
the increasing professionalization of peacekeeping.
However, such military measures alone are not
the answer for better protecting our peacekeepers.
Addressing the security and political situation in the
country and winning the hearts and minds of the people
will also be vital.

Thirdly, sharing assets between missions can
provide increased efficiency and cost effectiveness.
However, the most recent discussions on the issue
demonstrate that there are a number of challenges that
need to be addressed in order to make better use of that
practice.

Fourthly, today's peacekeeping missions have
increasingly comprehensive mandates. Security is
a precondition for development, and development
generates more security. Therefore, supporting national
peacebuilding and peacemaking efforts should lie at
the heart of peacekeeping operations. We thus welcome
the development of the concept of multidimensional
peacekeeping and the growing number of discussions
on that subject, as highlighted in resolution 2086 (2013),
which was adopted during Pakistan's presidency. For
such multidimensional mandates to be successful, they
must be realistic and flexible, and the missions must
be provided with the necessary skills and capabilities
from within the United Nations system or outside when
necessary.

The changing nature of threats and actors has led
to the need to intensify efforts against terrorism and
organized crime at the United Nations, at both the
mission and the Headquarters levels. Additionally,
there is a clear need to strengthen cooperation
and partnership with international, regional and
subregional organizations. On the other hand, we have
to redouble our efforts towards the peaceful resolution
and prevention of conflicts, which saves lives, costs
a fraction of peacekeeping efforts and eliminates the
need to deploy new operations. In that context, we
see mediation as an important tool, as it is consent-
based and pertains to all stages of the conflict cycle,
from prevention to resolution and implementation. We
believe that reinforcing the capacities of the United
Nations, regional and subregional organizations
and their member States in conflict resolution and
prevention will help us to better manage the conflicts
at hand and focus our efforts for a better world.

