Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): In seeking a solution to the question of Croatia,
we have always emphasized respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the Republic of Croatia and
have reiterated that the territories of Eastern Slavonia and
other areas are integral parts of the Republic of Croatia.
Ultimately, an appropriate and lasting solution to the
conflict in Croatia can be found only through peaceful
negotiations.

Towards the end of last year, the two parties
concerned in Croatia signed the Basic Agreement, which
opened up new prospects for the peaceful settlement of
conflicts and for the gradual reintegration of the territories
of Eastern Slavonia and other areas into the Republic of
Croatia, within its constitutional jurisdiction. We welcome
this development.

Well begun is half done. We hope that the two
parties concerned will put the interests of Croatian people
of all ethnic origins above their differences, adopt a
constructive approach, build mutual trust and implement
the Basic Agreement in earnest so as to create conditions
favourable for advancing the process of achieving a
political settlement of the question of Croatia.

We have noted that the Basic Agreement called for
the establishment of a transitional administration and a
peace-keeping force in Eastern Slavonia. Considering the
urgent needs of the parties concerned in Croatia and
considering that the United Nations should do all it can to

 

support the process of a political settlement in Croatia, we
will give positive consideration to the requests made in the
Basic Agreement and will vote in favour of the two draft
resolutions before us. However, we also believe that
political will and cooperation on the part of the parties
concerned is a prerequisite for any United Nations peace-
keeping operation and the basis for its success. We
therefore urge the two parties concerned to cooperate
closely with the international community in implementing
the Basic Agreement so as to ensure the success of the
United Nations peace-keeping operation to be deployed. I
also wish to point out that the main task of the Transitional
Administration will be to assist the parties concerned in
implementing the Basic Agreement, and its activities should
therefore be strictly restricted to what is requested in the
Basic Agreement.

When it comes to the deployment of United Nations
peace-keeping operations, we are never in favour of
enforcement action under Chapter VII of the Charter. As
the two Croatian parties have explicitly pledged their
cooperation, the military component of the Transitional
Administration will be engaged mainly in monitoring and
assisting demilitarization. Under these circumstances, it is
not necessary to invoke Chapter VII in the authorization.

Moreover, the use of close air support, as appropriate,
in the case of insufficient manpower in peace-keeping
operations should be limited to self-defence. Peace-keeping
forces should not use force indiscriminately, still less
employ it as a means of retaliation. The Transitional
Administrator should exercise caution when making such
requests.

Therefore, the Chinese delegation wishes to reiterate
its reservations about those elements of draft resolution
S/ 1996/23.

