Mr. Kolga (Estonia): I should like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting. I would also
like to thank Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson for
the statement he made today.

Estonia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union and would like
to make the following additional remarks.

Piracy is a major threat to commercial shipping,
with an immense cost to the global economy. Besides the
economic loss and implications for regional and global
security, it also entails huge human costs for seafarers
and their families. Drawing from our own experience,
seafarers of any nationality are at risk of being taken
hostage. Piracy affects us all and it should be tackled in
ajoint international effort. In that regard, we commend
the Security Council's work on piracy-related issues, in
particular concerning piracy off the coast of Somalia.
It is important to bear in mind that acts of piracy and
armed robbery are increasingly prevalent elsewhere, in
particular in the Gulf of Guinea. We therefore welcome
the attempt to take up the situation in an integrated
manner.

Estonia is actively contributing to the fight against
piracy off the coast of Somalia by participating in
the European Union (EU) anti-piracy operation EU
NAVFOR-OperationAtalanta, which was launched in
2008. In cooperation with France and Germany, our
vessel-protection detachment team has embarked and
escorted several World Food Programme (WFP) vessels
delivering humanitarian aid to Somalia, as well as
vessels providing equipment and supplies to the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). Together
with French troops, the Estonian vessel protection
detachment team has also been involved in the training
of AMISOM. forces, with the aim of helping them to
develop their own vessel-protection capabilities. We
have already decided to continue our contribution at
least until the end of the current mandate.

Our active participation in the fight against piracy
off the coast of Somalia has given us an understanding
of the complexity of the challenges and problems
related to piracy. One such challenge is the legal basis
for allowing the deployment of vessel-protection
detachment teams on board vulnerable ships. We urge
all nations whose ships sail in waters affected by piracy
to bear their responsibility for ships and crews under
their flags by signing flag-State declarations in order to
enable the teams to board vessels and provide effective
protection and deterrence against pirate attacks.

The role of the shipping industry in protecting ships
and seafarers cannot be underestimated. Compliance
with the Best Management Practices adopted by
the International Maritime Organization should be
promoted whenever possible. Arrangements for the use
of privately contracted armed security personnel on
ships also deserve further attention.

The military presence in the Horn of Africa
region, through Operation Atalanta and other
coalitions and nations involved, has contributed
to a significant reduction in the number of piracy
attacks in 2012 - to the lowest level since 2008. That
demonstrates the effectiveness of joint international
efforts and cooperation.

In spite of that relative success, it is clear that a
military response alone is not enough and more must
be done on land. In order to address the root causes of
piracy, a comprehensive, integrated approach is needed.
Somalia is a good example of different aspects that
need to be addressed. Among other things, the political
process, the security situation, the rule of law, good
governance, human rights and the economic, social and
humanitarian situations should be tackled.

One ofthe key elements in the fight against piracy is
the establishment of the rule of law and ending impunity.
Estonia would like to highlight three aspects. First,
States should review their relevant legislation in order
to be able to prosecute international crimes like piracy.
Secondly, in order to ensure that criminal proceedings
take place in full conformity with international human
rights standards, it is vital to make sure that there is
sufficient evidence gathering. States should tackle
effectively any legal, technical or training-related
issues that have arisen. Thirdly, a great deal ofwork has
been done by the relevant participants, including the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the United
Nations Development Programme and regional actors,
in order to increase regional capacity to prosecute
possible criminals. Efforts made in all three aspects by
all States and organizations should be recognized and
appreciated.

