Mr. Briz Gutierrez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation appreciates the convening of
this open meeting and the presence of the Foreign
Ministers of Jamaica and the Bahamas today.

Guatemala is exercising the pro tempore
presidency of the Central American Integration System
this semester. It is therefore in that capacity that I have
the honour to intervene on behalf, not only of my own
country, but also of Belize, Costa Rica, El Salvador,
Honduras, Nicaragua and Panama, as well as the
Dominican Republic, an associate member of the
System. We all view with the greatest concern and
distress the deterioration of the situation in our sister
country of Haiti. This deterioration is evolving on three
planes, namely, economic, political and humanitarian.

These three facets are, needless to say,
interrelated, and therefore necessitate an integrated
approach. We believe that the initiative launched by the
Caribbean Community (CARICOM) and the
Organization of American States (OAS), with the
support of the Governments of Canada, France and the
United States of America, points in that direction, and
we appeal to the parties - the Government and the
democratic opposition - to reach an agreement on the
basis of the content of this initiative in a peaceful and
constitutional manner. We accordingly urge all parties
to refrain from the use of violence.
Despite the democratic opposition's negative
response to the Plan proposed by CARICOM. and the
OAS, we urge them to reconsider their position, since
we feel that this Plan is the best option for preventing
further bloodshed and finding solutions consistent with
the internal legal order and the rules of the inter-
American system, to which we all belong. For Haitians
to be able to resolve their differences in a peaceful and
democratic manner that is respectful of human rights is
important, not only for Haiti, but also for all Latin
American and Caribbean countries.

We also appeal to the international community
and to the United Nations system to contribute to
easing the grave humanitarian situation afflicting the
population of Haiti, particularly as regards access to
food, health care, personal security and shelter. On the
other hand, if the Plan proposed by CARICOM. and the
OAS coalesces, we hope the international community
will participate in efforts and projects that will enable
the country to reinvigorate its economy with a view to
its long-term development.

