Mr. Moretti (Brazil): I wish to thank the
Honourable Judges Robinson and Byron and
Prosecutors Brammertz and Jallow for their
comprehensive reports before the Council (see S/2010/270 and S/2010/259) and their remarks today.
More importantly, we commend them on their efforts
to conclude the work of both Tribunals in a timely
manner. I also take this opportunity to thank
Ambassador Thomas Mayr-Harting of Austria and his
team for their remarkable work in the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals.

Today, my delegation would like to address five
specific issues related to the Tribunals: the progress
already achieved, staff retention, international
cooperation, outreach activities, and other residual
issues. Despite all the challenges and obstacles that the
Tribunals have faced in their ordinary activities, we
should not lose sight of the fact that both the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
have made significant progress in discharging their
responsibilities and fulfilling the completion strategy.
Their efforts are commendable and should be further
supported in order to allow for a prompt conclusion of
outstanding judicial activities.

With regard to staff retention, my delegation
agrees with the assessment of the Presidents and
Prosecutors that measures should be put in place as
soon as possible to ensure that the most highly
qualified staff continue to work for the Tribunals. It is
clear that the early retirement or resignation of
experienced employees may jeopardize the work of the
Tribunals and result in further delays in the conclusion
of their functions. That is why the Organization should
urgently consider giving further incentives and
assurances of future professional opportunities to staff
who wish to stay until the conclusion of the activities
of the Tribunals. Additionally, a swifter but thorough
recruitment process should ensure that proceedings are
not negatively affected in cases where staff decide to
leave.

A third important element is the cooperation
between Member States and the Tribunals. It remains a
key element not only for the success of the completion
strategy, but also for the proper delivery of justice. We
acknowledge the steps already taken by concerned
States to respond to requests issued by the Tribunals.
We encourage them to continue doing their utmost to
cooperate effectively and promptly with the Tribunals,
including with regard to the arrests of fugitives and the
possible referral of cases to national jurisdictions.

F ourthly, as the implementation of the completion
strategy moves forward, outreach and capacity-
building activities will become even more important.
The affected communities should be informed of the
evolving process and how it will impact the
administration of justice. They should also be made
aware of the new mechanism that will replace the
Tribunals when final decisions are made in this regard.
Furthermore, in view of the efforts to refer cases to
national jurisdictions, in particular in respect of the
ICTR, Member States interested in receiving those
cases should be offered international cooperation to
enhance their national capacities if they so wish. The
Tribunals could play a central role in this regard.
Finally, concerning other residual issues, my
delegation stresses the need for the continued
commitment of the Tribunals to the recommendations
made by the Secretary-General in his reports on
administrative and budgetary aspects and the residual
mechanism. This is of particular importance in the
consideration of possible ways to review witness
protection orders, the preparation of digital records,
and the development and adoption of strategies for
appropriate declassification of records and archives.

One of the main challenges in relying on an ad
hoc Tribunal is knowing exactly what to do when it has
performed most of its core functions but still needs to
undertake certain activities, such as trials for remaining
fugitives, witness protection and the preservation of
documentation. In addressing a completion strategy,
one should not pursue the goal of a speedy conclusion
of activities to the detriment of the principle of due
process; otherwise, the Tribunal's legacy may be at
risk, with a consequent impact on the delivery of
justice. At the same time, no effort should be spared to
make steady progress and comply with deadlines.

The early establishment of a residual mechanism
will add an element of certainty to the delivery of
justice. My delegation hopes that the efforts to create
such mechanism for the international Tribunals may
soon bear fruit. We must all work intensively towards
the day when all remaining functions of the Tribunals
can be transferred to the new structure. The Security
Council can count on the readiness of my delegation to
continue cooperating with other Council members in
this regard.

