Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
the Deputy Secretary-General for his briefing. We
welcome the Secretary-General's intent to travel to
Moscow and Kyiv this week. We hope that his visit
will help to persuade President Putin to step back, to
de-escalate the siutation, to fulfil Russia's obligations
under the Charter of the United Nations, to allow the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and United Nations monitors full access to
Crimea, and to engage in dialogue with Ukraine.

We also thank Mr. Simonovie for his briefing. It
is inexcusable that he was denied access to Crimea,
but we applaud his efforts to gather information
from the peninsula via other means. His report on
the extent of human rights violations in Crimea is of
serious concern. Cases of arbitrary arrest, detention,
torture, ill-treatment, disappearances and population
displacements directly contradict Russia's claims to the
contrary.

We share Mr. Simonovie's concerns about the
gross human rights violations that took place under the
previous Ukrainian Government. In that context, we
welcome the new Ukrainian Government's request for
United Nations monitors to investigate those concerns
and its commitment to reflect Ukraine's rich linguistic,
ethnic and cultural diversity. We urge the rapid
deployment of the United Nations monitors across the
country.

Last Saturday, 14 Council members underlined
their commitment to Ukraine's unity and territorial
integrity (see S/PV.7138). Russia was urged to distance
itself from the referendum set to take place the next
day in Crimea. Our aim was to avoid further escalation
and to ask Russia to heed the views of the international
community.

Russia has rejected that message. It rejected it on
Saturday by vetoing a draft resolution that carried
the overwhelming support of the Council. Yesterday,
following the referendum, it underlined its disregard
for our appeals for calm and for de-escalation by
announcing new laws to incorporate Crimea into the
Russian Federation. The Permanent Representative of
Russia spoke about that process being in compliance
with international law, without outside interference and
through a democratic process. It is hard to know which
of those three assertions is the biggest lie.
Sunday's referendum was a mockery of democratic
practice. It was illegal under the Ukrainian Constitution,
arranged at 10 days' notice, met none of the OSCE
standards for democratic elections, was held under
Russian military occupation and gave the people of
Crimea no option to vote for the status quo. Neither the
referendum nor the succession of increasingly desperate,
contradictory and inconsistent legal arguments put
forward by Russia can conceal the stark reality of
that country's actions. Russia has annexed part of the
sovereign territory of an independent State Member of
the United Nations through the use of military force.

Russia claims not to be bound by any ofits previous
obligations and commitments in respect of Ukraine,
including the 1994 Budapest Memorandum, on the
grounds that it does not regard the new Government
in Ukraine as legitimate. However, treaties and
international agreements are between States, not
Governments. A change in Government in Kyiv does
not absolve Russia from its international obligations
and commitments. We are witnessing the illegal
behaviour of a large country bullying its neighbours,
disregarding international norms and unilaterally
adjusting internationally recognized borders to its own
advantage.

Yesterday, in his speech to the Federation Council,
President Putin said: "In the hearts and conscience of
the people, Crimea has always been, and remains, an
inalienable part of Russia". He went on to add that,
because Crimea was a strategic territory, it needed to be
under the strong and stable sovereignty of Russia. Now,
at last, after weeks of denial, Russia's real motives for
its military adventurism have been admitted. There are
plenty of lessons from history about where that kind of
extraordinary logic leads. One only has to think back
to the 1930s to recognize the dangers of a complacent
international response when such behaviour occurs.

The United Nations system and the framework of
international norms that it embodies were the response
of our forefathers to a global conflict that resulted from
lawless aggression. The United Nations was designed to
provide security to us all by preventing the subjugation
of any State. We all therefore have an interest in
upholding the international framework and norms that
the United Nations represents. Russian actions throw
into doubt the credibility of that international order.
That is why they should be clearly condemned and
why Russia must now face further consequences for its
actions.

Russia cannot be granted the impunity to disregard
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.
Even at this late stage, Russia has the option to change
course, to heed the message of the international
community and to engage in dialogue with Ukraine.
Last week, in the Council, we all heard the Ukrainian
Prime Minister offer to open up such a dialogue with
Russia (see S/PV.7134). Yet, so far, even that basic step
has been rejected.

The situation in Ukraine and the region is serious.
Yesterday, another threshold was passed when a
Ukrainian serviceman was killed during the storming
of a Ukrainian military compound in Crimea by
forces aligned with Russia. There are credible reports
of Russian-inspired provocations across eastern
and southern Ukraine. We praise the continuing
and remarkable restraint of the Ukrainian military.
However, such actions only underline how close we are
to a further dramatic escalation.

The issue extends far beyond Ukraine's imperilled
borders. The issue before us is about respect for
bilateral and international treaties. It is about upholding
the Charter of the United Nations and international
law. Those are the frameworks on which we all rely
and that Russia is challenging. We have a collective
responsibility to defend everything that we have worked
so hard to build over the past 70 years.

