Mr. Valle (Brazil): First of all, I am very pleased
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this
month. I wish you a fruitful and productive term and I
pledge to you the full cooperation of the delegation of
Brazil. I would also like to extend my deep
appreciation to Ambassador Mihnea Motoc of Romania
for the excellent guidance he provided during July.

We welcome the presence here today of Mr.
Zoran Loncar, Minister for Public Administration and
Local Self-Government of Serbia.

I would also like to thank Assistant Secretary-
General Hedi Annabi for his thorough presentation of
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2004/613).

Brazil reiterates its support for the work carried
out by the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) in the very volatile
circumstances that prevail in Kosovo. The Mission has
been able to deal with the extremely difficult situation
on the ground and to respond promptly to challenges to
its authority. We are also appreciative of the efforts of
the "Contact Group Plus" in promoting the
implementation of standards. In that regard, I would
like to express our appreciation for the work performed
by former Special Representative Harri Holkeri. I
would also like to welcome the appointment of Soren
Jessen-Petersen as the new Special Representative for
Kosovo, whose credentials certainly qualify him for
that difficult and sensitive task.

We note with appreciation that the task of
identifying and prosecuting those responsible for the
violent outbursts of last March has not been neglected.
We appreciate the fact that police in Kosovo have
arrested suspects in connection with the riots and that
many cases are in the initial stages of prosecution.
Although it is encouraging that effective steps are
being taken to avoid impunity, it is important to
guarantee that this effort does not lose momentum and
that cases of involvement by Kosovo police officers be
pursued.

We also appreciate the progress made in the
implementation of the reconstruction programme
following the violence in March.

Unfortunately, the overall minority rights
situation has deteriorated. Kosovo Serbs and other
groups are still facing severe restrictions to their
freedom to work and travel. In practice, they are being
denied the right to a normal life. The international
community must take a firm stance in protecting them
against the continued violation of their fundamental
rights and in encouraging the Provisional Institutions
to honour the commitments set out by the Kosovo
Standards Implementation Plan in that regard.

In recent months, many different plans for the
future of the province have seen the light of day. We
must remain aware of the dangers of solutions based on
changing borders or allowing internal cantonization.
They are artificial and in the past have proven to
increase volatility in the Balkans. We favour solutions
that rest on integration and that are capable of
preventing further division. Although Brazil does not
oppose decentralization and a degree of autonomy for
minorities, we remain faithful to the principal that
peace and reconciliation in the region must be based on
compliance with resolution 1244 (1999) and the
"standards before status" policy.

In that connection, we call upon the Provisional
Institutions to enhance their commitment to the
fulfilment of the Kosovo Standards Implementation
Plan, which is the only viable path towards meeting the
standards that will allow a future decision on the status
of the province. Progress towards peace will not be
fostered by unilateral acts, such as the recent
movement by the Kosovo Assembly to make
amendments to the Constitutional Framework on issues
that actually fall within UNMIK's sphere of
competence. The Kosovo Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government would make a valuable contribution
to peace if they concentrated on helping to implement
the standards for Kosovo, a prerequisite for the future
discussion on the status of the province.

Firmer engagement is needed for achieving
adequate standards for minority rights. Minorities must
also accept the responsibility of engaging
constructively in the building of peace. Effective
participation in the political process, and particularly in
the upcoming elections, is one of the ways to
strengthen such engagement. All minorities, and
especially Kosovo Serbs, must be aware that refusal to
participate in shaping a new political scenario will only
aggravate exclusion and helplessness. The lack of
tangible progress towards a political solution for
Kosovo magnifies the human dimension of the tragedy.
As long as the political situation remains uncertain,
prospects are bleak for economic recovery. In spite of
laudable efforts in this area by UNMIK and the
Provisional Institutions, unemployment, rural
backwardness, gender disparities and deficient
educational, health and social welfare systems continue
to prevail.
The March riots in Kosovo and their
repercussions in Serbia and Montenegro have reminded
us that the persistence of an environment of underlying
violence and resentment in the province can threaten
the stability of the whole region and potentially
generate more ethnic clashes. Finally, we must call
upon the authorities in Pristina and Belgrade to ensure
the resumption of the work of the dialogue working
groups. Only by benefiting from the value of dialogue,
tolerance and diversity will Kosovo be able to leave
behind decades of conflict and destruction and pave the
way for a better future for all.

