Ms. Rice (United States of America): I thank
Ambassador Takasu for his report as Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006). We are grateful for the
09-26005
leadership that he has shown in the opening months of
his term as Chairman.

Today marks the Security Council's first meeting
on Iran since the release of the most recent report of
the Director General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) - a report that makes it clear
that Iran is still not complying with its international
nuclear obligations, including those set out in
resolutions of the Council. Today's meeting is also the
first time that the Council has discussed Iran since the
sanctions Committee examined the case of a merchant
vessel found to be shipping arms-related materiel from
Iran to Syria. Let me focus on three key issues.

First, the latest IAEA report contains troubling
findings that deserve the Council's sustained attention.
As the United States and other members of a united
P5+1 noted recently in Vienna, we echo the concerns
expressed in the IAEA Director General's report,
including with regard to the remaining issues that give
rise to continuing concern that Iran's nuclear
programme has military dimensions. Once again, the
IAEA has documented Iran's ongoing refusal to
comply with the Security Council's demands, including
the clear requirement that Iran suspend its
proliferation-sensitive nuclear activities. Iran also still
refuses to respond constructively to IAEA questions
about its past work to develop a nuclear-weapons
capability. The United States urges its fellow Security
Council members not only to take note of the IAEA's
serious findings, but also to vigorously support the
IAEA in its continuing investigations of these critical
matters.

Secondly, there is the question of a new violation
of Security Council resolutions on Iran that was
brought to the Committee's attention last month. We
have carefully studied the report regarding the
inspection of the M/V Manchegorsk, which was
transporting arms-related materiel from Iran to Syria.
The Iran sanctions Committee concluded that that
transfer violated Security Council resolution 1747
(2007). The United States supports the steps that the
Committee has already taken to address that violation,
and we hope that the Committee will take appropriate
action under its mandate.

Finally, the United States believes that the Iran
sanctions Committee has an essential role to play, even
as we offer Iran a new opportunity to increase
international confidence in its words and actions. But,
09-26005
in the light of Iran's continued failure to comply with
its obligations, the Iran sanctions Committee should
redouble its efforts to ensure the full and robust
implementation of Security Council resolutions 1737
(2006), 1747 (2007) and 1803 (2008).

As the Council knows, the United States is
currently engaged in a review of its policies towards
Iran. As President Obama, Secretary of State Clinton, I
and other leaders of my Government have noted, the
United States will not waver in its determination to
ensure that Iran does not obtain nuclear weapons. But
the United States also sees an opportunity - a chance
for the Iranian Government to demonstrate that it is
willing to unclench its fist and begin a serious,
responsible discussion about a range of issues.
President Obama has already said that we are prepared
for principled engagement with Iran, and we will
ensure that such engagement is consistent with the
decisions of this body.

Iran has very real responsibilities to fulfil. The
international community must stand together, firm in
ensuring that they are met.

