Mr. Patriota (Brazil): Let me thank you,
Madam President, for having convened this open
debate on the working methods of the Security Council.
I wish to congratulate Argentina on its leadership in
the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions. I also wish to thank
Ms. Kimberley Prost for her briefing and Ms. Fatou
Bensouda for her briefing and her presence.

The concept paper (S/20l4/725, annex) that guides
our discussion today highlights some important issues
related to the Council's work, in particular due process,
targeted sanctions and the referral of cases to the
International Criminal Court (ICC). The Brazilian
Government is of the view that sanctions regimes must
always comply with the highest standards of human
rights and international law.

In that sense, we note with appreciation the work
carried out by the Ombudsperson of the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011)
concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals and
entities, which has proved to be a valuable asset to
increase fairness and transparency in the consideration
of delisting requests. We encourage the Security
Council to continue studying ways to strengthen due
process within sanctions regimes, including through
the extension of the Ombudsperson mechanism to other
sanctions committees.

The appointment of the Ombudsperson is certainly
a step in the right direction, but much more remains
to be done with regard to the promotion of human
rights, due process and international law in the context
of the sanctions regimes. In improving the work of
those committees, one must, however, bear in mind
that sanctions are simply a tool at the disposal of the
Security Council to give effect to its decisions.

This month marks the tenth anniversary of the
Relationship Agreement between the United Nations
and the International Criminal Court. The pursuit of
international justice and the achievement of lasting
peace and security are common objectives that mutually
reinforce each other. Both the Court and the Security
Council have pivotal, albeit different, roles in pursuing
those objectives and striking the right balance between
peace and justice, accountability and reconciliation.
That is valid both for referrals and non-referrals of
situations, where the same rules and principles should
apply equally to all, thus avoiding double standards and
selectivity.

Another issue of concern relates to the costs involved
in referrals. We reiterate our call for the implementation
of article 115 (b) of the Rome Statute in relation to the
financial burden of referrals. The expenses of the Court
relating to referrals by the Security Council must be
met by funds of the United Nations, not fall just upon
the parties to the Rome Statute. The Court will only
be strong based on the support it receives, not only
from States parties, but also from the United Nations.
We ensure that the cooperation between the Court and
the United Nations goes beyond rhetoric and finds its
concrete implementation in the funding of referrals.

The Security Council acts on behalf of the 193
States Members of the United Nations, and it is
therefore of utmost importance to ensure that that
body be more transparent and more accountable to
the broader membership. In a sense, Brazil has long
advocated that the Council should carry out its work,
as often as possible, in an open and public manner.
Brazil believes that this organ should also consider new
ways to improve the participation of troop-contributing
countries, regional and subregional organizations,
countries hosting peacekeeping operations and other
relevant actors in its decision-making process.

It is almost imperative to improve communication
and dialogue between the Security Council and other
United Nations bodies. Closer cooperation is needed,
not only with the General Assembly regarding, for
instance, the issue of Security Council's encroachment
on the General Assembly's prerogatives, but also with
the Economic and Social Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC). We must ensure that the process of
reviewing the peacebuilding architecture in 2015 will
allow the Council to have a better understanding of the
advisory, early warning and preventive roles that the
PBC can play, and is playing.

The President returned to the Chair.

We encourage the Council to dedicate more of
its time and efforts to preventive diplomacy and the
peaceful settlement of disputes, in accordance with
Chapter VI of the Charter. I would like to commend
Argentina for its work as Chair of the Informal Working
Group on the Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions. The adoption over the past 14 months of
six notes concerning the Security Council's working
methods is evidence of that country's engagement in
promoting a more effective, accessible Council. Brazil
fully shares that commitment.

It is necessary to recognize that there is a limit to
what working methods can do for the Council. Changes
in working methods alone will not provide the Security
Council with the tools needed to adequately address
contemporary challenges. Some of the shortcomings
in the working methods of the Security Council can
only be corrected in the framework of a comprehensive
reform of that body. Initiatives aimed at achieving a
more accountable and transparent Council are more
likely to prosper in an expanded and more inclusive
Council with new permanent and non-permanent
members, a Council reflective of the realities of the
twenty-first century and committed to fresh and more
participatory working methods.

In concluding, I invite us all to take the
opportunity provided by the seventieth anniversary
of the Organization next year to finally achieve a
concrete outcome to the long overdue reform process
of the Council. By September next year, let us fulfil the
mandate extended by our heads of State and Government
at the 2005 Summit, when they unanimously called for
an early reform of the Security Council.

