Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I wish to thank
our three briefers today. This is an important issue,
so I thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
this debate.

For the United Kingdom's part, we welcome the
thorough and well-evidenced report on the ongoing
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2018/602).
We are aware of the criticism that has been made of the
report in some quarters, but we consider the scope and
the methodology of the report to be both appropriate
and robust. We offer our thanks to the Secretariat for
its continued work to ensure the proper implementation
of this resolution of such importance for regional and
international peace and security.

My intervention, like the issue itself, comes in two
halves: what happens with the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA) and what happens in respect of
the region and regional stability.

With respect to the JCPOA, we join the Secretary-
General and my French colleague in regretting the
United States decision to leave the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action and to reimpose United States sanctions
on Iran. For the United Kingdom's part, we remain
committed to the nuclear deal. It is an essential part
of the global non-proliferation architecture, and,
furthermore, the deal is working. As we have just
heard, the latest report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) confirms that Iran continues
to comply with its nuclear obligations under the deal,
as indeed it has since implementation day. This is
consistent with the previous 10 IAEA reports, and we
believe that it demonstrates the Iranian commitment to
the nuclear deal.

We expect this commitment to continue. We expect
Iran to continue to abide by its obligations under the
deal. In return, the United Kingdom, together with the
remaining participants in the deal, will take the steps
necessary to ensure that Iran continues to receive
economic benefits from sanctions relief. We welcome
the update on the activities of the procurement channel.
The United Kingdom fully supports and remains
committed to the procurement channel process.

While the JCPOA remains vital for our national
security, and indeed for the stability of the Middle
East, it is only one part of the efforts towards long-term
stability and peace in the region. The United Kingdom
shares the Secretary-General's view that issues not
directly related to the nuclear deal should be addressed
without prejudice to preserving the agreement. We
believe that these issues can most effectively be
addressed while the nuclear deal remains in place.

I will now turn to the second half of today's
debate: the regional picture. I listened very carefully
to the briefing given by the Under-Secretary-General
in particular, but also by the two other speakers. It is
true that the Secretary-General's latest report contains
concerning reports of attempted shipments to Iran of
certain dual-use items without the necessary prior
approval from the Security Council. We call on the
United Nations to investigate these alleged transfers
further and to report its findings to the Council.

We also note the Secretary-General's assessment
that ballistic-missile technology used by the Houthi
in Yemen was transferred from Iran, as previously
set out in the Yemen Panel of Experts report (see S/2018/68). This chimes with our own assessment.
The United Kingdom considers these transfers to be
in contravention of resolutions 2231 (2015) and 2216
(2015). The proliferation of missile technology is
destabilizing for the region and needs to cease, in the
interest of Iran, in the interest of regional stability, and
in the interest of international peace and security.

In addition, we remain concerned by Iran's testing
of missiles that are designed to be capable of delivering
a nuclear warhead.

It was not my intention today to talk about the
wider Iranian role in the region, but I would just like to
echo what my United States colleagues said about some
of the activities undertaken by Iran in places such as
Lebanon and Syria.

I should like to be very clear about the United
Kingdom's position. Iran is an ancient, respected and
mature civilization. It has legitimate security interests
in the region and deserves a proper place in the global
multilateral system. However, the way it pursues and
prosecutes these interests is too often destabilizing and
too often threatening to its neighbours and threatening
to others, including those of us in Europe. Supplying
missiles for attacks on regional neighbours has no
legitimacy. Transferring threatening technology has
no legitimacy, nor does importing dual-use equipment
without the Security Council's prior approval. And
while we recognize Iran's national security interests,
there is no legitimacy or justification for Iran testing
missiles that are designed to be capable of delivering a
nuclear warhead. Furthermore, diverting Iran's public
finances into such adventures retards its own ability
to modernize its economy and deliver services to
its people.

After 9/11, which struck this city, I worked very
closely with the Iranian Government. We were on the
same side in combating terrorism. It is a matter of
lasting regret that Iran has chosen a different course of
action in the intervening years. What I would like to do
is to join others in taking the opportunity today to urge
Iran to refrain from the destabilizing behaviour that
the report outlines and that we have talked about today,
and in particular to make a material contribution to the
political process in Yemen that the United Nations is so
bravely undertaking.

To conclude, the United Kingdom's position on
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action is clear. It is a
critical agreement that makes the world a safer place.
It is vital for our security, and we remain committed to
it. To that end, the United Kingdom, and, we believe,
our European partners, will continue to work with the
remaining parties to the deal to maintain it.

