Mr. Okafor (Nigeria): I thank you, Mr. President,
for your initiative in organizing this important debate,
and for providing a valuable concept note (8/2013/446, annex) to facilitate the discussions.

Nigeria is particularly pleased with the depth of
cooperation that exists between the United Nations and
the African Union (AU), and welcomes the strategic plan
to consider further steps to promote closer cooperation
between the two organizations in consonance with
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. We
are satisfied that, since its inception, significant strides
have been made in conflict resolution, peacekeeping,
post-conflict peacebuilding and economic
reconstruction in numerous African countries. That
has created momentum for the emergence of a more
enabling social, economic and political environment in
Africa.

We have witnessed United Nations and AU
peacekeepers patrol side by side in Darfur, as the two
organizations work concertedly to mediate a political
solution to that conflict. That enduring collaboration
has also proved fruitful in resolving the crisis in
the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and has provided support to recent African-led
mediation efforts in response to political crises in other
parts of the continent.

Nigeria ardently believes that cooperation between
the United Nations and subregional organizations
should be an ongoing and dynamic process so that the
benefits of such cooperation can be reaped in preventive
diplomacy, conflict prevention, peacekeeping, peace
support and, indeed, in post-conflict reconstruction and
peacebuilding. We believe that regional bodies should
assume leadership of efforts to maintain regional peace
and security, with the international community lending
the requisite support. Those organizations, after all,
are better placed in terms of geographical proximity,
political and cultural familiarity with local conditions,
and shared experiences with regard to regional peace
and security initiatives.

The response of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) to regional crisis situations
is illustrative of that potential. Therefore, we would
like to emphasize the need for the United Nations to
intensify such regional initiatives and to give impetus
to the implementation of the United Nations-African
Union 10-year capacity-building programme for the
African Union. More strident efforts are also required
to operationalize the African Union Standby Force and
the continental early-warning mechanisms.

The situation in Mali underscores the imperative
for early warning. It should be recalled that ECOWAS
made several attempts to draw international attention
to the imminent danger occasioned by the potent mix of
religious extremism, the lack of legitimate governance
and the failure to address the yearning of a section of
the population of Mali. Expedited action in response to
warnings of the looming crisis would have alleviated
the agony that we face today.

Nigeria recognizes that there are competing
demands for United Nations resources on myriad
issues, including peace and security, not only in Africa
but also in other regions. We therefore believe that it is
important to consider not only prioritizing our actions,
but also adopting innovative approaches. It is equally
important to assess the impact and sustainability of
our actions, as well as promote the complementarity of
roles in the promotion of peace and security. That will
require more intensive partnerships, inclusiveness and
purposeful leadership. We believe that there is room
in the cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union to incorporate those Vital elements.
However, our best intentions will amount to nothing if
we fail to provide adequate, flexible and predictable
funding for peacekeeping operations in Africa.

It is also necessary to coordinate efforts between
the United Nations and regional organizations. That is
one of the objectives of the annual consultation between
the Security Council and the AU Peace and Security
Council. We believe that for that interaction to bear fruit,
there must be a strengthening of the political will and a
firm resolve to implement strategic decisions. In spite
of the capacity gaps in the continent's quest to achieve
sustainable development, Nigeria will relentlessly
support closer collaboration between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations to
ensure that those gaps are appropriately bridged.

We would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
the adoption of presidential statement S/PRST/2013/12.

