Mr. Doutriaux (France) (spoke in French): I wish at
the outset to thank Under-Secretary-General Miyet for his
oral briefing and the Secretary-General for his report.

Our country fully supports the implementation of the
Lome Peace Agreement and calls on all parties,
particularly the rebels, scrupulously to respect its
provisions, including the establishment of the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission. In this respect, France
welcomes the establishment by President Kabbah of the
new Government of National Unity in October.

However, like most delegations that have spoken
before us, France deplores and condemns the ceasefire
violations that have occurred since July and the numerous
ongoing human rights violations. I would cite the hostage-
taking recently committed by certain rebel leaders and
members of the former junta, in particular the abduction
of humanitarian personnel working for Medecins sans
Frontieres. France calls on the rebel movements to
facilitate the unhindered delivery of humanitarian
assistance to all regions of the country and to ensure the
security of the personnel of humanitarian agencies.

We welcome the launching of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme and call on
all parties to hasten its implementation. We stress the
importance of financial support for this programme.

France welcomes the deployment of the first units of
the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL)
and again thanks the Economic Community of West
African States Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) for its
critical role in providing security nationwide and in
facilitating the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme.

We would emphasize the importance and urgency of
providing humanitarian assistance to Sierra Leone. I call
Council members' attention to the fact that France
recently contributed 1 million francs to the World Food
Programme to benefit Sierra Leone.

I wish to address a few questions to the
representative of the Secretariat. The first concerns the
deployment of UNAMSIL, as reflected in the map
annexed to the Secretary-General's report. We note that
the Mission has been largely deployed in the southern
part of the country along a line between Lungi and Daru,
which quite naturally covers the positions held by
ECOMOG. What are the Secretariat's intentions as to
deployment in the northern part of the country? Have
security guarantees for UNAMSIL troops to be deployed
there already been negotiated with the rebel movements
active in those regions?

 

Secondly, with respect to the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme, the report
emphasizes that doubts remain with regard to the
Revolutionary United Front (RUF) commitment to the
programme. How does the Secretariat assess the nature of
these doubts? Is it simply concerned that the RUF will raise
the stakes? Is there a problem of command within the
divided rebel movement or, more seriously, a fundamental
refusal to implement the Lome Agreement and, in the final
analysis, to relinquish control of the diamond-producing
regions?

Finally, in paragraph 5 of his report, the Secretary-
General notes that Mr. Koroma, the Chairman of the
Commission for the Consolidation of Peace, has already
presented his views concerning the organization of work of
his Commission. Do these plans truly reflect the wishes of
all the parties in Sierra Leone and have they been discussed
with the United Nations?

