The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Albania, Luxembourg, Serbia and
Montenegro, Switzerland and Ukraine, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to His Excellency Mr. Nebojsa Covic,
President of the Coordination Centre of Serbia and
Montenegro and of the Republic of Serbia for Kosovo
and Metohija, and invite him to take a seat at the
Council table.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Covic
(President of the Coordination Centre of Serbia and Montenegro and of the Republic of Serbia for
Kosovo and Metohija) took a seat at the Council
table; the representatives of the other
aforementioned countries took the seats reserved
for them at the side ofthe Council Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Soren Jessen-
Petersen, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo.

It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Jessen-Petersen to take a seat at the
Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
documents S/2005/335 and Corrigendum 1, which
contain the report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo. I should also like to call the attention of the
members of the Council to document S/2005/329,
which contains a letter dated 18 May 2005 from the
representative of Serbia and Montenegro addressed to
the President of the Security Council.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Soren Jessen-Petersen, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo.

I now give him the floor.


