Mr. Onowu (Nigeria): Let me join others in
thanking the Presidents and Prosecutors of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for their instructive
briefings on the work of both Tribunals.

Nigeria welcomes the substantial progress made
by those important bodies during the reporting period
towards meeting the objectives in their completion
strategies reports. Regrettably, staffing shortages
continue to hinder the pace of their work, despite
persistent requests, including by members of the
Security Council, for measures to enable them to retain
and replace staff. We must therefore urgently find a
solution to the staffing challenges, one that gives the
Tribunals the capacity to expedite their proceedings. In
so doing, we are not only giving expression to the
provisions of resolutions 1954 (2010), 1955 (2010) and
1993 (2011) but we are also ensuring the timely
implementation of the completion strategies. Our point
of departure should be the staff retention and
recruitment measures suggested by the Tribunals.

Effective and sustained cooperation with the
Tribunals by Member States remains the crucial
vehicle for attaining their core priority goals. The
arrest and prompt transfer of Ratko Mladic' and Goran
HadZie to The Hague exemplify the cooperation that
should exist between Member States and the Tribunals.
That cooperation is also essential to address all
outstanding issues. Of equal significance is the arrest
of Bernard Munyagishari by the authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in cooperation with
the ICTR. Such cooperation is required to underpin the
Tribunal's efforts to track the remaining nine fugitives
and in relocating acquitted or convicted persons. We
share the Secretary-General's assessment that those
arrests will not only reduce the Residual Mechanism's
responsibilities and the costs of tracking fugitives but it
will also enable the Tribunals to meet their completion
strategy targets.
Given that capacity-building and outreach
activities constitute important aspects of the mandate
and legacy of both the ICTR and the ICTY, we
commend both Tribunals for increasing their activities
in both respects, especially in helping States to
strengthen their capacity to prosecute alleged
violations of international humanitarian law in their
own courts. We also commend those Governments and
organizations that have supported those efforts. Indeed,
the international community should remain unrelenting
in its support for those activities.

In our View, the preparation of a draft proposal on
rules of procedure and evidence of the Mechanism is
an invaluable step in the effort to implement resolution
1966 (2010) and ensure a smooth transition to the
Residual Mechanism. We support the plans for the
transition to the Mechanism of the Tribunals' archives
management functions and information and
telecommunications technologies systems and
infrastructure. Needless to say, sustained coordination
within and between the Tribunals and the Offices of the
Prosecutors remains crucial to ensuring a smooth
transition to an efficient and effective Residual
Mechanism.

Nigeria will continue to support the efforts of the
Tribunals in establishing accountability for genocide,
war crimes and crimes against humanity. We commend
the Presidents and the Prosecutors of the ICTY and
ICTR for their dedicated leadership and unwavering
commitment to justice and the rule of law. We also
appreciate the contributions of the Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals, under the able
leadership of Ambassador Moraes Cabral, to this noble
endeavour.

