Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to start by conveying my gratitude to the Security
Council for affording me the opportunity to speak in
this very important meeting. I would like, of course,
to thank the delegation of the United Kingdom for its
efforts in authoring resolution 2259 (2015), which the
Council adopted moments ago. I also welcome the
presence of Mr. Martin Kobler, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, in the Chamber. I thank him
and his team for the efforts they have always made to
help Libyans achieve consensus and to put an end to the
crisis in our country.

As today is the birthday of the Prophet Mohammed,
may the peace of God be upon him, I congratulate all
Muslims throughout the world and express the hope that
his birthday will remind us of his goodness, his respect
for all faiths and his rejection of violence and injustice.
I also congratulate all Christians upon the birth of Jesus
Christ, Son of Mary, may peace be upon him. I hope the
convergence of these two birthdays will lead to peace
and security for all peoples throughout the world.

There is no doubt that the Political Agreement
reached in Skhirat in brotherly Morocco on 17 December
represents a significant step forward in Libya's history.
The Agreement is the result of the intra-Libyan dialogue
that has lasted for more than a year now. The dialogue
has been sponsored by the United Nations and advanced
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
Although the Agreement is a compromise, given that it
was reached through negotiation and therefore cannot
meet the aspirations of all parties, it represents the
best of what we can achieve and the highest common

denominator on which the parties could agree for the
sake of Libya and all Libyans.

The significance of the resolution adopted by the
Council today derives from its support for the Libyan
Political Agreement and the institutions to be created
pursuant to it. Since those institutions will serve as
the sole legal authority in Libya, the resolution urges
all parties to join and implement the Agreement.
Needless to say, the Security Council is not imposing
anything on Libya or Libyans. It will not create its
Government or its Presidency Council. That is the fruit
of the agreement of the House of Representatives. The
Government of Abdallah Al-Thinni will continue to
exercise authority until the creation of a Government of
National Accord, in keeping with the provisions of the
Political Agreement.

Most and possibly all Libyans understand that the
Agreement is the fruit of 14 months of very difficult
negotiations and represents the only hope for restoring
State sovereignty and ensuring the survival of Libya
as a sovereign, unified State. The Agreement is the
only hope for ending the chaos and bloodshed and for
ensuring that reconciliation, understanding, justice and
the rule of law prevail following years of atrocities,
fear and insecurity, both inside the country and outside,
scattering Libyans as refugees and displaced persons. It
is high time that Libyans of all stripes understand that
their interest lies in backing the Government of National
Accord and the implementation of the provisions of the
Political Agreement.

The success of the Agreement will depend first
and foremost on the armed groups. They bear a heavy
responsibility to banish the spectre of war, especially
from the capital, Tripoli. Moreover, we urge all these
armed groups to agree to the security arrangements.
We wish to see the national police force resume its
functions now that it has the necessary weapons and
equipment, and the Government of National Accord
exercise its functions from its headquarters in Tripoli.
The Government of National Accord will undoubtedly
prioritize the integration of armed groups into the
security, military and civil institutions of State, in
keeping with international professional criteria.

All of the spoilers and troublemakers who wish
to prevent the implementation of the Agreement must
understand that their attempts will not succeed, that
history will judge them, and that they must place the
mother country's interests over their own narrow,
personal interests. They must understand that they
can achieve nothing outside the framework the Libyan
Political Agreement, which was achieved over a year of
negotiations, with the facilitation of the United Nations,
following all other attempts to end the bloodshed and
Libya's failure to emerge from its crisis.

Under resolution 2259 (2015), ifthese troublemakers
were successful in preventing the Government from
exercising its authority and role from its headquarters
in the capital, they would be subject to international
sanctions. They have to understand that the international
community intends to help Libyans, under the guidance
of the Government of National Accord, and that it will
provide the assistance necessary to bolster security and
safety as part of the counter-terrorist struggle.

Daesh was able to take control of the city of Sirte
and to turn it into a colony for foreigners as a result
of the division and chaos in Libya, and the support
provided by certain States. It was able to ally itself
with elements of Ansar Al-Sharia and Al-Qaida and
to launch a campaign to recruit young, unemployed,
poorly educated individuals who are basically illiterate
but just about able to follow social networks and listen
to those who claim to be pious and to understand the
rules of Islam. Any delay in the implementation of the
Libyan Political Agreement will benefit terrorists and
extremists and promote their expansion throughout
Libya, allowing them to exploit its wealth. As a result,
the law of the jungle will prevail in Libya with the
assistance of foreign criminals from all over the world.

As a representative of Libya at the United Nations,
I can state unequivocally that all Security Council
members have a genuine desire to help Libyans
extricate themselves from their tragedy. Libyans yearn
to see the creation of a Government of National Accord
as rapidly as possible. Members of the Council wish to
see the House of Representatives assume its functions
and operations and cooperate in the implementation of
the Skhirat Agreement.

Libyans must unite. They must reject hatred.
They must foster trust among themselves and reject
conspiratorial thinking. The international community
has never conspired against them, and they themselves
must not conspire with foreigners against their mother
country. They can only unite to expel foreigners who bear
arms and seek to control the country and its resources.
That is the only path towards the reconstruction of our
country and the forging of a better future for themselves
and their children.

By way of conclusion, I would like to thank the
five members - Chad, Chile, Jordan, Malaysia and
Nigeria - whose mandate will be complete at the end
of this month for their very effective and invaluable
contribution to the work of the Council.

