Ms. Ziade (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe for his
comprehensive briefing.

Israel's raid on the freedom flotilla carrying
humanitarian supplies to besieged Gaza on 31 May
2010 still occupies the forefront of our Organization's
attention. That aggression constituted a flagrant
violation of international law, international
humanitarian law and the law of the sea. We reiterate
that the aggression, which took place in international
waters, was an act of piracy, and we agree with the
statement issued by the Secretariat that the tragedy
could have been avoided had Israel responded to the
repeated appeals of the international community to end
its blockade. Indeed, there will be no need for
humanitarian aid ships to Gaza when Israel lifts its
blockade of Gaza and opens the crossings.

In this connection, we would like to state the
following. First, we emphasize the need for the
Secretary-General to launch an urgent investigation
into the actions of the Israeli navy against the freedom
flotilla. It should be marked by impartiality, credibility
and transparency. As emphasized in the presidential
statement of 1 June 2010(S/PRST/2010/9), it should
conform to international standards with a view to
identifying responsibility, punishing the perpetrators of
these crimes and ensuring compensation for the
victims. It is unacceptable that impunity should
continue in this manner.

Secondly, we stress our rejection of the unilateral
Israeli investigation, which is neither credible,
impartial nor transparent and does not conform to
requisite international standards. Israel is the aggressor.
It determined the outcome of the investigation before it
started. It invoked the right of self-defence to justify its
attack on defenceless civilians. In this connection, we
reiterate our demand for the lifting of the blockade
imposed by Israel on the Gaza Strip, which violates
international norms and laws, including the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949, which enshrines the
protection of civilians in time of war.

The partial closing of the border crossings to
Gaza impedes freedom of movement and the delivery
of humanitarian assistance and necessary commodities
such as food, medicine and fuel. The blockade
constitutes collective punishment of more than 1.5
million Palestinians in Gaza. This tragedy must
unconditionally come to an end.

Once again, we condemn Israeli settlement
policy, which coincides with a rabid campaign to
demolish Palestinian homes and evict the Palestinian
residents of East Jerusalem. The policy is aimed at
disrupting the geographic contiguity of the Palestinian
territory and thwarting the two-State solution. We
would like to stress the need to follow up on the
updates of the Goldstone report (A/HRC/12/48)
transmitted by the Secretary-General to our Council.

We call on Israel to report on the implementation
of General Assembly resolution 64/10 of 5 November
2009, in emulation of the actions taken by Switzerland
and Palestine. Israel has intentionally hampered the
peace process, as proven by its lack of response to
United States efforts and refusal to freeze settlement
activities in East Jerusalem and the other occupied
territories at a time when the Arab States are making
their best efforts to facilitate the resumption of
negotiations, which, we emphasize, must address the
issue of a final settlement within a specified timeframe.
The negotiations must not merely be a confidence-
building measure.

With regard to the occupied Syrian Golan, we
stress once again the need to implement resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973). Israel must withdraw to the
line of 4 June 1967. We stress that any action taken by
Israel to transform the legal, physical or demographic
status of the occupied Syrian Golan, including the
expansion and building of settlements, is null and void.

On the actions undertaken in southern Lebanon
early this month, I note that the Lebanese Council of
Ministers held a meeting on 8 July and issued a
statement recalling its firm support for maintaining the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)

and the close and inextricable link between UNIFIL
and Lebanese citizens - yes, Lebanese citizens - for
decades. It emphasized the important role of UNIFIL
under resolution 1701 (2006) and the need to
implement all provisions of that resolution. I wonder
whether Israel complies with the provisions of
resolution 1701 (2006). Has Israel ceased Violating
Lebanese sovereignty by air, land and sea? Has Israel
withdrawn from the northern part of Al-Ghajar and the
surrounding area? We therefore call upon the
international community to put an end, once and for
all, to all Israeli violations of Lebanese sovereignty.

