Brazil is thankful to the presidency of Saint Vincent and Grenadines for organizing this high-level open video-teleconference on "Contemporary drivers of conflict and insecurity" in the context of peacebuilding and sustaining peace. We also thank the Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Amina Mohammed, and all the other briefers for their insightful considerations. Brazil takes this opportunity to reaffirm its support for peacebuilding. In many aspects, the sustaining peace agenda coincides with long-nurtured values of Brazilian foreign policy, especially the peaceful resolution of disputes, the interdependence between peace and development and the primacy of prevention. With a view to continuing to improve United Nations peacebuilding efforts and capacities, Brazil would like to put forward three brief considerations. First, our collective experience with peace efforts has taught us that the conditions that may lead a society to the paths of peace or conflict are often extremely complex. The analysis of the root causes or potential drivers of conflict and instability always requires a comprehensive exercise aimed at achieving a broad understanding of the interplay among various social, economic, political and cultural aspects of any specific situation. We should therefore refuse simplistic arguments that elevate one single factor as the main driver of instability and recognize that there is no single template to prevent conflict or build peace. Secondly, peacebuilding and sustaining peace are cross-pillar endeavours, realized only on the basis of respect for sovereignty and national ownership. This means that much of what we want to accomplish with peacebuilding has connections with topics that interest the whole United Nations membership and should be discussed and implemented under the leadership of other political forums, such as the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council, in accordance with their respective mandates. Furthermore, we should reject interpretations suggesting that sustaining peace could be seen as an all-encompassing framework. Recognizing the interdependence of the different United Nations pillars requires us to acknowledge each pillar's intrinsic value and specific mandate. Promoting development, protecting human rights and preventing conflict may all contribute to peacebuilding, but our efforts in each of those domains should also be assessed by their own merits. Lastly, the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) is uniquely positioned to bridge discussions across the various United Nations pillars. In order to strengthen the effectiveness and coherence of the United Nations peacebuilding efforts, the PBC should continue to enhance its advisory capacities with a view to providing recommendations to the Security Council, the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council as it deems necessary. To conclude, Brazil wishes to reiterate its appreciation for the opportunity to take part in this discussion. We welcome the decision of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to convene this meeting in a transparent and inclusive manner, open to the participation of the whole United Nations membership. We believe that this is a good practice worth replicating and encourage the Security Council members to ensure full inclusivity in all future discussions about cross-cutting matters related to peacebuilding.
