Ms. Squeff (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, Argentina wishes to express its sincere
condolences to the people and Government of Pakistan
and to the families of victims of the recent terrorist
attacks in that country.

I congratulate Pakistan on having assumed this
month's presidency of the Security Council and on the
effectiveness and transparency with which the Pakistani
delegation has been guiding our work. I further wish
to thank you, Madam, for having convened this very
important and timely debate on one of the greatest
threats to international peace and security. We are
pleased in particular that you are presiding over this
meeting.

Terrorism is a threat to life, human dignity, peaceful
and civilized coexistence, and international peace and
security. We believe that a comprehensive approach
to the problem is not only the most appropriate but in
fact the only approach with the potential to succeed. In
that regard, the approach proposed by the presidency
to addressing the issue of terrorism could not be more
timely.

Argentina is convinced that the United Nations
has a priority role to play in multilateral action. In that
respect, we consider the Assembly and the Security
Council and their relevant subsidiary bodies to be the
most appropriate forums for effective action to prevent
and eradicate terrorism. These are the bodies where we
are able to take the best decisions, and whose critical
effectiveness and legitimacy encourage joint action.
In this connection, we believe that the Council should
continue to work to ensure that these bodies are more
effective and transparent, and that they be endowed with
an appropriate mechanism to review the measures they
take. In all cases, such bodies should resolve problems
without creating consquences for the population in
general.

In September 2005, the former President of my
country, Mr. Nestor Kirchner, stated forcefully at
the Security Council summit that new threats to
international peace and security, such as terrorism,
"make us understand at last the true meaning of
solidarity among nations" (S/PV526], p. 6). In the
framework of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy, a comprehensive approach to this
matter strengthens our work in those areas where
there is the greatest deficit, principally with regard to
conditions that lead to the spread of terrorism and its
financing, such as ensuring respect for human rights
and the rule of law as the bases for our fight against
terrorism.

Neither religious nor ethnic differences nor
economic circumstances can justify terrorist acts.
On the other hand, tolerance and the rule of law,
with full social inclusion and dignified work, foster
an environment that counters the spread of terrorism
and fights this scourge, as recognized in the draft
presidential statement to be adopted by the Council.

Argentina's tragic experience of State terrorism,
which led to massive and systematic violations of
human rights, has led us to strengthen State policies
in various areas of human rights, in particular with
regard to memory, truth, justice and redress. In this
framework, we galvanized international support for
the progressive development of the right to truth with
the recent creation of a Special Rapporteur in the
Human Rights Council, and promoted the adoption of
the International Convention for the Protection of A11
Persons from Enforced Disappearance.

Moreover, my country has suffered directly from
international terrorism as the victim of two serious
bombings in Buenos Aires in 1992 against the embassy
of Israel and in 1994 against the headquarters of the
Argentine-Israeli Mutual Association, which is one of
the most important social organizations in Argentina.
Those acts killed more than 100 people, whose memory
is honoured by the Argentine people. A number of
victims and their families survive. Together with the
Government, they must walk the path towards truth,
justice and redress. That experience has reaffirmed
our conviction that terrorism must be fought in
the framework of the rule of law and respect for
fundamental freedoms. The struggle should be carried
out in full respect for the law, including respect for due
process and human rights.

Terrorism, as one of the so-called new threats,
is an illicit act with the capacity to affect domestic
security and undermine public institutions. Actions
to counteract it must correspond to the genuine risk
faced by each country as it identifies threats in order to
prioritize prevention. In Argentina, we have conferred
upon the Ministry of National Security the leader role
in coordinating inter-agency policy among the various
agencies that are competent in this field. For its part,
the Secretariat for Intelligence directs and coordinates
the national intelligence system through its practical
relationship with national intelligence bodies and
forums.

In that regard, we believe that the Security Council
must commit its efforts, thorugh its relevant bodies,
to promoting international cooperation in this area.
This includes judicial cooperation, both with regard
to extradiction and mutual assistance and in the fight
against the financing of terrorism. To this end, we
urge Member States to incorporate and apply in their
internal legislation international legal instruments and
United Nations resolutions relating to terrorism, so as
to ensure that those who are accused of such crimes
cannot exploit legal vacuums in order to evade justice.

Within the multilateral and regional systems, we
must work on speedy and effective mechanisms to freeze
terrorist funds, taking into account the importance
of dismantling the economic structures that support
such organizations. In our case, we drafted a law for
the effective implementation of resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1373 (2001) with regard to the procedure for the
official freezing of funds related to this crime. It has
been implemented by the competent body on fugitives
associated with State terrorism and who are being
investigated for crimes against humanity.

Before ending, I would stress that the leadership
is in the hands of the Organization, but its work is
complemented, as required by the Charter of the
United Nations, by subregional and regional efforts
and by specialized agencies cooperating on matters
of global intererst. One example of this is port and
aeroport security and border controls, in which we must
all continue to cooperate because they are additional,
critical elements in our joint action against international
terrorism.

In conclusion, I affirm that the Argentine Republic
supports the draft presidential statement to be read out
by the President on behalf of the Security Council.

