Mr. Shcherbak (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Our delegation welcomes the participation at
this meeting of the Security Council of the Chairman
of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Adnan Terzie.

We express our appreciation to the High
Representative in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Schwarz-Schilling, for the thorough briefing that
he has provided to the Security Council on recent
developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina in the current
stage of implementation of the Peace Agreement. For
more than 10 years, the Dayton Agreements have
proven to be an effective instrument for maintaining
stability and the foundation for the processes for the
comprehensive normalization in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. This normalization involves, in
particular, the priority issue of further strengthening
the climate of trust and of constructive dialogue among
the peoples of Bosnia and the patient search by the
Bosnian parties themselves for mutually acceptable
solutions in building a democratic and stable Bosnia
and Herzegovina as an integral, multi-ethnic State
composed of two entities and ensuring equality for its
three peoples.

We positively assess the work of Mr. Schwarz-
Schilling as High Representative. We note his balanced
approach to the interests of the Bosnian parties and his
focus on promoting achievement by those parties of
compromise solutions on the basis of a constructive
dialogue. We look forward to the High Representative
continuing to adhere to that course. We intend to do
everything we can to support the course of
Mr. Schwarz-Schilling on non-application of the Bonn
powers and for the advancement of the Brussels
agenda.

It is important to continue to do all we can to set
political and diplomatic mechanisms in motion,
including in terms of cooperation by the Bosnian
parties with the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia. We also give due credit to the
efforts of the High Representative in promoting
ongoing reform in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We do not
see a problem in the fact that those reforms are not
proceeding as quickly as one might have wished. We
are convinced that, in pursuing reform, we need to
proceed above all from the realities in the country and
weigh each step ever more carefully, fully bearing the
interests of all the Bosnian parties in mind.

Our delegation notes the generally successful
conduct of the general elections in Bosnia and
Herzegovina in October. Of course, it was not possible
to avoid all of the rough edges. We are convinced that
the High Representative, in his approach to
overcoming those pitfalls, will in the future, in view of
the fragility of the situation, continue to act with the
utmost caution, carefully weighing every step.

We support the further advance of political and
economic reforms in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
prompt transfer to the Bosnian parties of responsibility
for the state of affairs in their country, also bearing in
mind the tight deadlines for the upcoming closure of
the Office of the High Representative. In that regard,
we call for increased efforts in that area.

We also favourably assess the approach of
Mr. Schwarz-Schilling to working closely with the
United Nations in resolving the so-called problem of
decertified police officers. We are prepared to look
constructively at proposals for possible options for a
resolution of that problem, which certainly must be
based on the relevant decisions of the Security Council
and remain within the clear framework of international
law - first and foremost, the United Nations Charter.

Russia, as a member of the Steering Board of the
Peace Implementation Council and of the Contact
Group, will continue to work closely with the High
Representative in playing an active and constructive
role in the international facilitation of processes in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. That work will support the
efforts of their leadership to achieve a comprehensive
normalization in the country, especially in the interest
of ensuring long-term stability in the Balkan region.

