Ms. Ndhlovu (South Africa): My delegation
would like to congratulate you, Madam President, on
your stewardship of the Council for the month of
November, and we wish to commend you for extending
the Secretary-General's commitment to children by
holding this, our third open debate on children and
armed conflict. Once again, we are gathering to
consider urgent measures on how to deal with the
question of the exploitation of the world's children in
situations of armed conflict.

The reports of the Secretary-General make key
recommendations in the face of numbing statistics of
child suffering, recruitment of child soldiers, child
abduction, internal displacement, loss of parents,
sexual abuse, particularly of girls, and the spread of
HIV/AIDS. Similarly, the data of the United Nations
Children's Fund (UNICEF) paint an horrific picture of
children killed in armed conflict, with millions more
injured, traumatized and orphaned.

We therefore commend the Security Council for
its continued debate on the issue and, in this regard,
refer to resolution 1314 (2000), adopted in August last
year, calling upon the international community to
condemn in the strongest possible terms the deliberate
targeting of children in situations of armed conflict.
The effective implementation of the resolution involves
a willingness to find solutions to the plight of war-
affected children, and my delegation supports the
measures intended to protect them.

The consequences of war, acts of genocide, armed
conflicts, family violence, international terrorism,
organized crime, and trafficking in humans and drugs,
as well as weapons of mass destruction and the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons, have
devastating consequences for children and a profound
impact on their lives and their communities.

Children are generally susceptible to all forms of
abuse and exploitation, the effects of which often shape
and define their personalities in adult life. To recruit
and lure children under false pretence to become
soldiers is an affront to civilized values but also a
fundamental impediment to socio-economic
development.

The African continent has seen our children
suffer indescribable atrocities. Many are victims of
armed conflict or are forced to become soldiers. In
Burundi, Angola, Sierra Leone and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo children have been targets of
violence and even, unwillingly, perpetrators of
Violence. Now, children in Afghanistan are facing the
world through war and human rights abuse. The
world's children are in desperate need of protection.

South Africa ratified the Convention on the
Rights of the Child and supports its two Optional
Protocols on the involvement of children in armed
conflict and on the sale of children, child prostitution
and child pornography. We have also ratified the
African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child
without any reservation.

The Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in
armed conflict establishes 18 years as the minimum age
for participation in hostilities and prohibits recruitment
of persons under 18 years. In addition, the Protocol
bans all compulsory recruitment of children under
eighteen. South Africa amended its own legislation in
1999 when the Minister of Defence raised the age of
voluntary enlistment in the armed forces from 17 to 18
years. Currently, our Parliament is working towards
ensuring our speedy ratification of the Protocol.

We have also brought our voice into the
deliberations to finalize the draft outcome document
"A World Fit for Children" in preparation for the
special session of the General Assembly on children
due in May next year, in particular on the issue of
children in armed conflict. We hope that renewed
commitment at the highest political level during the
special session will ensure that many of the sentiments
of Security Council resolutions 1314 (2000) and 1261
(1999) will be fulfilled. We can no longer continue to
fail the children of the world.

Furthermore, South Africa supports the
provisions of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court and International Labour Organization
Convention No. 182, concerning the prohibition and
elimination of the worst forms of child labour. These
instruments deserve our full support because they offer
internationally recognized recourse to ensure the
protection of children in armed conflict. However,
formidable challenges remain. The impact of HIV/
AIDS will profoundly affect family structures.
International development targets for reducing infant
and under-five mortality rates in Africa remain illusive
goals. Chronic poverty, lack of affordable medical
interventions to reduce the risk factors associated with
the mother-to-child transmission of HIV/AIDS, and
high levels of unemployment add to the problem.

The Government of South Africa remains
determined to address these problems and is eager to
work with other Governments, multilateral institutions
and the United Nations to ensure the effective
enforcement of the relevant United Nations instruments
with regard to the rights of the child. This includes our
intention to sign and ratify the Optional Protocol on the
involvement of children in armed conflict and to
encourage other countries to ratify key international
treaties, conventions and protocols.
Commitments on paper and Security Council
debates remain a necessary but insufficient condition
for saving children from the scourge of armed conflict
and from being abused in order to further the war aims
of unscrupulous adults. While the consideration of this
important subject in the Council raises its political
profile, the Security Council needs to take a lead in
establishing the parameters of acceptable conduct with
regard to children in armed conflict situations.

The Council can act with a view to monitoring
and ensuring compliance with current Council
resolutions; improving communication and
coordination with other United Nations organs and
authoritative bodies involved in the protection of
civilians, particularly children; ensuring that the post-
conflict environment nurtures the rights and needs of
children, including rehabilitation, which is integral to
future stability and development; and ensuring that the
it takes an integrated and interdisciplinary approach
and gives due consideration to the rights of children
when considering peacekeeping operations.

We should therefore remain constantly vigilant
for signs of abuse. We stand ready to exert pressure
where it is necessary. We should also encourage
recalcitrant parties to adhere to the letter and the spirit
of those international instruments that provide the most
basic and appropriate protection of the rights of the
child in situations of armed conflict.

Our children have a right to live in peaceful
situations in a world without wars. This should be our
legacy to their future. Children are the most universally
treasured gifts to parents in all societies, yet they are
the most vulnerable members of our modern and
conflict-ridden societies.

We appeal to all nations to nurture and protect
children so that they may be able to build a better
world for themselves and their own children. Children
in South Africa played a pivotal role in transforming
our country into a democratic order. It is just possible
that children, given the chance, will be the ones to
work the miracle of reconciliation in the world.

In closing, my delegation would like to take this
opportunity to express our appreciation for the
continued and committed efforts by Ms. Carol Bellamy
of UNICEF and Mr. Olara Otunnu, the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict, to
ensure that we all remain seized of the plight of
children caught up in conflict globally. We also thank
Alhaji Babah Sawaneh for his moving personal account
of the life of a child soldier in Sierra Leone. We
welcome the Council's intention to adopt a resolution
on children in armed conflict after this meeting.

