Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I will not go into a discussion with my
Ukrainian colleague ofthe Charter ofthe UnitedNations,
international law or international humanitarian law,
for that matter, since too many of those instruments'
provisions are being violated by the Kyiv authorities
in their so-called anti-terrorist but in fact punitive
operations in eastern Ukraine.

I would like to make a few comments with regard
to the statement made by the representative of the
United States of America. In her statement, she raised
a very surprising issue - that of the Kyiv authorities'
provocation of hostilities by their systematic, months-
long attacks on cities. Is this not a provocation?
Unfortunately, the Council does not see that or Kyiv's
many other actions that violate the Minsk agreements
and impede the implementation of the political
provisions of the package of measures.

After the Sochi meeting with President Putin and
Foreign Minister Lavrov, Mr. Kerry called upon Kyiv
not to use force. Unfortunately, the request made by
the representative of the United States was not heard.
We would like United States diplomacy to be more
consistent and to follow up on the pronouncements of
its Secretary of State. We do not want to believe that
there is a war party in Washington, DC, like that in
Kyiv.

We cannot agree with the statement by our British
colleague that the crisis in Ukraine did not begin with
the unification of Crimea and Russia. The crisis began
with the externally supported campaign to overthrow
a democratically elected President of Ukraine. It was
exacerbated when efforts to implement the 21 February
2014 agreement failed. Political influences were also
at work, followed by the terror in Odessa in May 2014
and the campaign we are seeing now in the Donetsk and
Luhansk regions.

Finally, in our discussion today we have heard a
number of unfounded and extraordinarily polemical
statements, but I would still like to suggest that this
meeting has been helpful. We affirmed our commitment
to the Minsk agreement and to resolution 2202 (2015).
We think it important that various delegations called for
direct dialogue between Kyiv, Donetsk and Luhansk.
That theme was touched on even by the United States,
although too timidly. That kind of dialogue is absolutely
crucial to full compliance with the Minsk agreement,
which Russia continues to strive for.

