Mr. Mapuranga (Zimbabwe): I wish to thank you,
Sir, for giving me the floor at this eleventh hour and to
apologize for the fact that I was unable to take the floor
at the time that countries participating under rule 37 were
making their contributions.

The Government and people of Zimbabwe have
continued to follow developments in Angola with great
attention and immense interest. My delegation is therefore
pleased to participate in this open debate on the situation
in Angola.

Following the formation of the Government of Unity
and National Reconciliation, we were greatly encouraged
by the holding of the first meeting of the Council of
Ministers on 18 April and by the convening on 22 April
of a plenary session of the National Assembly at which
several deputies, including UNITA members, were elected
to posts in various parliamentary commissions.
Despite the recent apprehensions over tensions
caused by developments both inside Angola and in the
neighbouring subregion of Central Africa, we remain
optimistic that the peace process in Angola will not only
remain on course but also eventually bring tranquillity
and stability to that country. We are therefore in happy
agreement with the Secretary-General that despite
persistent difficulties and delays, events in Angola have
generally been moving in a positive direction.

We appeal to the Government of Angola and to
UNITA to resolve all lingering threats to the peace
process in the same selfless spirit of cooperation and
tolerance which characterized the initial steps of the
Government of Unity and National Reconciliation. In this

 

regard, we look forward to more progress in the
normalization of State administration in all areas,
particularly those which were under UNIT A control; the
demobilization of ex-combatants; and the formation of the
unified Angolan Armed Forces. We also call upon all those
who can make a contribution to maintain and pursue an
intensive and relentless public-awareness campaign towards
the effective narrowing and eventual elimination of the
psychological and political barriers which still exist within
the Angolan community.

When the Security Council last met formally on the
question of Angola, my delegation wholeheartedly
welcomed the Secretary-General's recommendations with
regard to the creation of an Observer Mission to succeed
the United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III). We also supported the Council's decision to consider
the Secretary-General's specific proposals at this current
stage. In this regard, and having studied the objectives, the
mandate and the organizational structure recommended by
the Secretary-General in section VII of his report contained
in document S/ 1997/438, my delegation unreservedly
supports the creation of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Angola (MONUA). Zimbabwe's personnel who
participated in UNAVEM. III under the overall command of
Major-General Sibanda of Zimbabwe, remain available to
the Observer Mission.

Zimbabwe is confident that this careful and systematic
transition in the United Nations involvement in Angola will
afford the people of that country the political, moral and
even psychological support they need as they incrementally
tighten their own grip on the reins of peace. We urge the
Government of Angola, and in particular UNITA, to make
haste and complete the remaining political and military
aspects of the peace process, including the normalization of
State administration throughout the national territory in
accordance with the agreed timetable and procedures; the
transformation of the UNITA radio station into a non-
partisan broadcasting facility; the registration and
demobilization of all remaining military elements; the
elimination of all obstacles to the free circulation of people
and goods; and the disarmament of the civilian population.

Lastly, we are grateful to the international community
for providing humanitarian assistance to the people of
Angola as they traverse this long period of discomfort. We
can only urge the continued provision of this and other
forms of assistance to facilitate the social reintegration of
ex-combatants, the resettlement of displaced persons and
the rehabilitation and reconstruction of the Angolan national

economy in order to consolidate the gains of the peace
process.

