Mr. Rodriguez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, I would like to commend the timely initiative of
the Mexican presidency to convene an open debate of
the Security Council on justice and the rule of law.

Four years have passed since the last debate was
held on this important topic. In the light of
developments surrounding various interlinked issues in
that regard, it is necessary to take stock in order to
support and focus the work of various United Nations

bodies. Strengthening the rule of law is a priority for
the United Nations and its Member States. The 2005
World Summit Outcome (see General Assembly resolution 60/1) recognized the need for universal
adherence to the rule of law and its enforcement at the
national and international levels as an indispensable
basis for a more peaceful, prosperous and just world.

As we can see from the topics proposed in the
concept paper (S/2010/322), the work to be done in the
area of the rule of law is cross-cutting in nature, both
when it comes to the issues involved and as it pertains
to developing that work at the institutional level in the
United Nations. With regard to the latter, there is a
need for the greatest coordination possible among the
various bodies that make up the Rule of Law
Coordination and Resource Group.

With regard to the promotion of the rule of law in
conflict and post-conflict situations, it should be
emphasized that, in accordance with Article 24 of the
Charter of the United Nations, the Security Council has
the primary, but not the sole, responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. Peru
believes that efforts should be focused on prevention in
order to avoid conflict situations. To that end, we
should continue to promote the implementation of the
concept of the responsibility to protect, especially
when it comes to the first two pillars set out in the
report of the Secretary-General contained in document
A/63/677.

Peru is a member of the Peacebuilding
Commission, the body mandated to advise the Security
Council and the General Assembly on peacebuilding in
post-conflict States. Strengthening the rule of law is
crucial to the work of the Commission - especially in
the areas of security, governance, development and
justice - so as to put in place a successful process
based on national ownership. In that regard, efforts
aimed at strengthening the rule of law should be a
substantive part of peacebuilding strategies.

When it comes to international justice and the
peaceful settlement of disputes, Article 1 of the United
Nations Charter establishes that States should resolve
their disputes through peaceful means and in
conformity with the principles of justice and
international law. As the sole international universal
body with general jurisdiction, the International Court
of Justice (ICJ) plays an essential role in that regard.

10-4285]

Thus, with very good sense, the Manila
Declaration on the Peaceful Settlement of International
Disputes, which was adopted by consensus by the
General Assembly in resolution 37/10, established that
international legal disputes should, as a general rule, be
referred by the parties to the International Court of
Justice and that doing so should not be considered an
unfriendly act between States.

It should be highlighted that, in accordance with
Article 36, paragraph 2, of the Court's Statute, Peru has
unconditionally recognized the jurisdiction of the ICJ.
We therefore call upon those States that have not yet
done so to adopt a decision to recognize the Court's
jurisdiction.

In the context of international criminal law, the
international tribunals established by the Security
Council have made it possible for those responsible for
the most heinous crimes against humanity to be tried.
Since some of those tribunals will soon conclude their
activities, it should be recognized that their findings,
practices and archives are a valuable contribution to
the development of the rule of law and, ultimately, to
international peace and justice.

Likewise, the International Criminal Court (ICC)
plays an essential role in preventing impunity in cases
of genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity.
As a result of the ICC Review Conference in Kampala,
we have succeeded in establishing a definition of the
crime of aggression. The relationship between the
United Nations, and especially the Security Council,
and the Court is essential to the work that the ICC must
carry out. We must therefore seek to ensure that this
relationship is geared both towards strengthening the
Court's independence and towards promoting the
integrity of the Rome Statute.

On the national level, States have the primary
responsibility to ensure the establishment of
independent legal systems that will make genuine
access to justice possible. In that regard, there is a need
to adopt measures to implement obligations under
international law, not only with regard to substantive
aspects but also in the areas of cooperation and legal
assistance, so as to effectively try those responsible for
crimes and strengthen a culture that can prevent
impunity.

With regard to the issue of sanctions regimes and
combating terrorism, the adoption of resolution 1904
(2009) is an important step forward towards greater

legitimacy. In addition, the appointment of Kimberly
Prost as Ombudsperson, which we welcome, will
provide us with a mechanism for greater transparency
in reviewing entries on the consolidated lists. We hope
that the consolidated list review process can be
concluded as soon as possible. However, we should
bear in mind that there are still major steps to be taken,
such as the adoption of guidelines for the effective
implementation of the resolution.

In that regard, Peru would like to reiterate that
sanctions regimes cannot be disassociated from
obligations to protect human rights, as indicated in
General Assembly resolution 64/118 and resolution
64/168, which Peru co-sponsored.

In order to disseminate the work of the Rule of
Law Unit more broadly and effectively, especially
among workers in the field, its website should also be
available in Spanish. Similarly, its publications should
be accessible in the United Nations official languages,
in accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolution 64/96 A-B on questions relating to
information.

Strengthening the rule of law is a task that falls to
all Members of the United Nations, and for which we
need the cooperation and financial assistance not only
of those States able to provide it, but also of
international organizations and civil society. Likewise,
efforts to strengthen the rule of law made at the
regional and subregional level should be coordinated,
since this is the only way we can ensure that such
efforts are not duplicated and that resources are used as
effectively as possible.

In conclusion, Peru reiterates its commitment to
actions aimed at strengthening the rule of law at both
the national and international levels, and expresses its
desire to contribute actively to the work in this area
conducted by the various bodies of the United Nations.

