Mr. Owada (Japan): At the 3650th meeting of the
Security Council, earlier this month, the delegation of
Japan expressed its gratitude to the departing President of
the Council, the Permanent Representative of Botswana,
for his service, and congratulated you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. I would like to add my own words, and to say

 

how happy I am to see you sitting in that position to
preside over this meeting.

In recent years we have witnessed steady progress in
the Middle East peace process. This progress has been
achieved through the best efforts of the parties directly
involved and with the support of many other members of
the international community who are committed to the
restoration of peace in the Middle East. I am referring in
particular to the successful elections held last January for
the Palestinian Council; a total of 650 election monitors,
including 77 from my own country, participated in the
orderly administration of those elections. This is just one
example of the efforts which the international community
is making to ensure that progress towards stability and
prosperity in the Middle East is irreversible.

In the light of that progress, the situation as it is now
evolving is all the more disturbing. Japan joins the other
countries that have expressed in this Council their grave
concern over recent developments in the region. There is a
very real danger that the chain reaction triggered by the
recent terrorist bombings in Israel, which killed and
wounded scores of innocent citizens, could threaten the
peace process itself. The vicious circle of terrorism and
countermeasures is creating a dangerous situation that could
jeopardize the positive developments that have been made
in the West Bank and Gaza.

The same applies to the situation in Lebanon. I cannot
but express alarm over the recent developments in southern
Lebanon, where the attacks on northern Israel by Hezbollah
and the counter-attacks on Lebanese soil by Israeli forces,
have resulted in a large number of casualties. The plight of
innocent citizens cannot but arouse our humanitarian
concern.

Japan is deeply concerned that all these developments
will be detrimental to the peace process, and calls for all
the parties concerned to exercise utmost self-restraint.

There is no question that, in order to prevent further
acts of terrorism and to get the peace process back on track,
efforts by the parties concerned, with the support of the
international community, are of primary importance. It is
significant in this regard that the Summit of Peacemakers
in the Middle East, which was held in Sharm El Sheikh
under the co-sponsorship of Egypt and the United States,
condemned terrorism unequivocally. The Summit sent two
important messages: that further progress in the peace
process is imperative, and that the international community
will cooperate to fight terrorism to ensure that such
progress is made.

It is thus incumbent upon both the Government of
Israel and the Palestinian Authority to discharge their
respective responsibilities by taking genuinely effective
measures to protect their peoples against terrorist attacks.
Those measures must be assisted and supported by the
international community, since terrorism, which does not
respect national boundaries, can only be suppressed
through concerted international cooperation.

The recent events in the Middle East demonstrate yet
again that poverty and unemployment provide a fertile
breeding ground for terrorism. If we are to bolster the
foundations of the peace process and help to build a
society that is free of terrorism, it is essential that the
economic and social environment of the Palestinian
inhabitants of the West Bank and Gaza be improved.
Measures to maintain order in the two areas must take
due account of the socio-economic realities of the
Palestinian inhabitants.

Japan fully understands the need for Israel to have
peace and security ensured in the West Bank and Gaza.
However, if the economic and social environment in
which the Palestinians live continues to deteriorate, with
rising levels of unemployment among Palestinian workers
and severe shortages of basic commodities, I am afraid
that Israel's counter-terrorism measures could very well
be self-defeating and could undermine the overall peace
process. That is exactly what those who are trying to
sabotage the peace process are hoping for.

At the Summit of Peacemakers, Japan announced its
decision to provide an assistance package for creating
employment, valued at approximately $10 million. It has,
in fact, already implemented this assistance, and is ready
to participate actively in the subsequent efforts. Thus it
welcomed the emergency plan designed to improve the
economic situation in the West Bank and Gaza which was
announced at the Washington follow-up meeting to the
Summit of Peacemakers. It is Japan's earnest hope that
the smooth implementation of the Plan will rapidly
improve the economic situation in these two areas, and
that the parties directly involved will likewise make every
good-faith effort to improve the situation.

The peace process that has been pursued so
courageously by the parties concerned during the past few
years is the only realistic option for bringing to an end,
once and for all, the long and tragic history of conflict in

 

the Middle East. Japan strongly urges both the Government
of Israel and the Palestinian Authority to remain firmly
committed to the peace process. This will require that they
redouble their efforts to build mutual confidence and also
proceed with the faithful implementation of the agreement
expanding Palestinian interim self- government on schedule.
The international community, for its part, must support such
efforts by the parties concerned and do its utmost to help
create an environment conducive to peace by cooperating
actively for the suppression of terrorism and for the
improvement of the social and economic conditions of the
Palestinian people. Japan will continue to extend its active
assistance to the Palestinian people in the conviction that
such support will help strengthen the peace process and
ultimately contribute to the stability of the entire region.

