Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank the Secretary
General for his briefing and for all that he has done to
bring this issue before the Security Council.

As a long-standing friend of the Burmese people, the
United Kingdom has watched in horror at the violence
that has erupted over the past month. What began as
a series of attacks by the Arakan Rohingya Salvation
Army has spiralled into an acute humanitarian crisis,
one which now poses a threat to stability and security
in the region.

We have all heard the reports. We have all heard of
the extrajudicial killings and the burning of villages.
We have heard of the cruelty, the sexual violence and
the landmines laid along routes taken by refugees. Half
a million people have fled, many bearing the scars of
the violence. The vast majority are Rohingya Muslims,
although they also include Buddhists, Hindus and other
minorities, but make no mistake - this is a human
tragedy and an acute humanitarian crisis that has
exploded with almost unprecedented speed.

At the outset, I want to pay tribute to the Government
and the people of Bangladesh for providing safety
and shelter to so many until they can return safely,
voluntarily and sustainably to their homes in Burma.
I also want to acknowledge the important diplomatic
efforts undertaken by Indonesia, the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations, the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation and the United Nations.

It is becoming increasingly clear that world
opinion, whether among countries or international
organizations, is coming together on this issue. In the
face of such opinion, it falls on Burma, in particular the
Burmese military, to respond. The Burmese military
bear the primary responsibility for resolving this crisis,
but there is a way out.

First, the Burmese military under
Commander-in-Chief Min Aung Hlaing must
immediately stop the violence in Rakhine state and
ensure the protection of all civilians, including the
Rohingya. In this Chamber, I repeat my Government's
condemnation of the attacks carried out by the Arakan
Rohingya Salvation Army last month, but military
operations in response have been excessive, and
vigilante groups have carried out sectarian violence
unchecked. That cannot continue. The hate speech and
incitement to violence must stop. The Burmese military
must act immediately and uphold the rule of law. We
are particularly concerned to ensure that the violence
does not spread to central Rakhine.

Secondly, the Burmese authorities need to grant
United Nations agencies and their partners full and
unhindered humanitarian access to Rakhine State.
We welcome the Government's cooperation with
humanitarian agencies, such as the International
Committee of the Red Cross, and we welcome the
efforts of the Red Cross to respond to the crisis. But
the humanitarian needs inside Rakhine state vastly
exceed the capacity of the Red Cross. Only United
Nations agencies and their partners can provide urgent
life-saving assistance on the scale required. We believe
that the authorities should tone down the anti-United
Nations rhetoric and stop it immediately in State
media outlets.

Thirdly, Burma should work with Bangladesh
to establish a safe, voluntary and sustainable way for
those who have fled Rakhine to return to their homes.
We welcome the civilian Government's commitment
to the right of return, but previous arrangements have
been inadequate. A process is needed that allows those
who have fled to register as refugees. It needs to be
a process that acknowledges that many fled without
documents, or never had them in the first place, a
process that allows people to return to their homes and
places of origin safely, voluntarily and sustainably.
We welcome the willingness of the United Nations to
support this endeavour.

Fourthly, the recommendations of the Advisory
Commission on Rakhine State must be implemented
swiftly and in full. We welcome the Burmese authorities'
public commitment to that and the establishment of
the ministerial Implementation Committee for the
recommendations on Rakhine State. It is essential that
we now see progress, particularly on citizenship.

Fifthly, we urge the Burmese authorities to
cooperate with the United Nations Fact-Finding Mission
on Myanmar established by the Human Rights Council.
If the Burmese authorities have any doubt about what
is happening, that is how reports can be independently
verified and those responsible held to account.

The Council considers many crises around the
world, but the situation in Burma strikes many of us
around this table with particular poignancy. Many of us
here today have stood by the people of Burma for long
years, have watched the inspiring steps taken towards
democracy and have welcomed the country back into
the international community with open arms.

Given our history and long-standing friendship
with Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, we remain committed to
Burma and to all of its people. We want to see further
progress towards democracy, and we want Burma
to thrive within the international community. Our
commitment is the reason that we speak so frankly
today in this Chamber. This crisis now casts a deep
shadow over Burma's international reputation, on its
leaders and on its military. The Burmese authorities
must now take the decisions that will decide their place
in history. They can choose to end the violence, protect
civilians and defend human rights They can choose to
allow humanitarian access, including by the United
Nations. They can work with Bangladesh on the return
of refugees, and they can address the long-term issues
raised by the Advisory Commission on Rakhine State.
But should they fail to do so, they will find themselves
on the wrong side of history, and the Council must then
be ready to take further action.

