The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Maintenance of international peace and security
Conflicts in Europe

Letter dated 3 February 2017 from the
Permanent Representative of Ukraine
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2017/108)

The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
Secretary-General, Ministers and other distinguished
representatives present in the Security Council Chamber.
Their presence today emphasizes and underscores the
importance of the subject matter under discussion.

In accordance with rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Albania, Armenia, Australia,
Azerbaijan, Belarus, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Estonia, Georgia, Germany,
Hungary, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Malaysia,
Montenegro, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Poland, the Republic of Moldova, Romania, Serbia,
Slovenia, Switzerland, Turkey, Uzbekistan and the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to participate in
this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Lamberto
Zannier, Secretary General of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, and Ms. Helga
Schmid, Secretary General of the European Union's
European External Action Service.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite Mr. Altai
Efendiev, Secretary General of the Organization for
Democracy and Economic Development - GUAM, to
participate in today's meeting.

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document 8/2017/108, which contains a letter dated
3 February 2017 from the Permanent Representative
of Ukraine addressed to the Secretary-General,
transmitting a concept paper on the item under
consideration.

I now give the floor to the Secretary-General.


