Mr. Edjang Nnaga (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I thank Mr. Martin Griffiths
and Mr. Mark Lowcock for their very detailed briefings
and congratulate them on the tremendous work that
they are doing in Yemen.

At the last Security Council meeting on Yemen
held in 2018 (see S/PV.8439), we were convinced that
we had turned a new page in the conflict and that the
constant years-long hard work of the Council and the
international community had paid off. My delegation
is grateful to Mr. Griffiths for his leadership and to
all those who enabled the parties to meet and reach
initial agreements, which have facilitated the opening
of a political process to find a sustainable solution to
the conflict.

We commend the timely reaction of the Council,
which, in keeping with the spirit of ensuring compliance
with the Stockholm agreements, unanimously adopted
resolution 2451 (2018) on 21 December 2018, which
authorizes, inter alia, sending a team to monitor,
support and facilitate the immediate implementation of
the commitments undertaken in of Stockholm, which
include a ceasefire in the strategic city of Al-Hudaydah
and other parts of the country. In that regard, the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea calls on the warring and
all other parties concerned in Yemen to strictly observe
the terms of the truce. We nevertheless welcome the
fact that, to a certain extent, the parties have begun
to fulfil their commitments, as demonstrated by the
gradual reopening of the city of Al-Hudaydah.

We warmly welcome the historic meeting of the
representatives of the Redeployment Coordination
Committee, the Government of Yemen and the Houthis,
and encourage the national parties to pool their efforts
to carry out the Committee's mandates and thereby
foster the trust necessary to better facilitate the
implementation of the agreement on Al-Hudaydah. My
delegation shares all the concerns of those who have
reported on the real need to move the Yemen process
forward, especially those contained in the report of the
Secretary-General on the status of implementation of
resolution 2451 (2018) (S/2019/11). There are crucial
aspects that require immediate responses from the
warring parties, such as the opening ofspecific highways
to ensure the mobilization of humanitarian teams
and the expedited issuance of visas to humanitarian
personnel so that they can enter the country, as well
as addressing other regulations hindering access. I call
on the Yemeni Government and the Houthis to prevent
the diversion of food and other basic supplies from the
country's most vulnerable people, who are in dire need
of them.

Lastly, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea expresses
its full support for the efforts of the United Nations in
Yemen, in the hope that the achievements of Stockholm
will be increasingly productive and serve as a reference
for future meetings. In that regard, we encourage the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen and
all other intermediaries in that country to continue
working to find a political solution to the conflict.

