Ms. Rice (United States of America): On behalf
of Ambassador Churkin, with whom I co-led the trip to
the Sudan, I would like to make the following report.

Unfortunately, the situation in Abyei rapidly
deteriorated as we travelled to the region. Thus, our
mission had three overriding purposes: first, to urge a
halt to the fighting and to restore calm to Abyei;
secondly, to press the North and the South to quickly
resolve all outstanding issues necessary to pave the
way for two peaceful and successful States beginning
on 9 July; and thirdly, to better understand what an
independent South Sudan will need from the United
Nations and the international community.

The crisis in Abyei affected both our itinerary and
our agenda, and we were unable to visit the Abyei area
as planned. But being on the ground in the Sudan
enabled us to press this critical issue with both parties
and to respond to the emerging crisis in real time. That
included issuing a strong press statement while we
were in Khartoum that called for the immediate
withdrawal of all forces from Abyei and its environs.

Our Visit to the Sudan included travel not only to
Khartoum but also to Wau, Juba and Malau. We began
in Khartoum, where we met with several Government
officials. Foreign Minister Karti, unfortunately, was ill
and did not join our meeting as planned. However, we
met with the Minister of State for the Presidency, Amin
Hassan Omer; Ambassador Daffa-Alla Elhag Ali
Osman, our colleague here at the United Nations; and a
number of other Sudanese interlocutors.

We reiterated the Council's commitment to
supporting two Viable and successful States as of
9July. We emphasized the need for a peaceful
resolution to the Abyei conflict. We deplored the
19 May attack on a convoy of the United Nations
11-36348

Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS), and pointed out that
the escalatory response from the Sudanese Armed
Forces was unacceptable and constituted a gross
violation of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
(CPA). We expressed the Council's deep concern over
the level of violence in Darfur and the Sudanese
Government's continued restrictions of access for
humanitarian organizations and the African Union-
United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID).

We asked the Government of the Sudan to fulfil
its commitment to processing all UNAMID visas in a
timely manner - an urgent issue, given that UNAMID
had more than 800 visa requests pending at the time of
our meeting. The Government said that it would follow
through on its visa commitments; it also reaffirmed its
support for the Doha process and committed to lifting
the state of emergency in Darfur after the adoption of a
final document from the Doha negotiations.

The Council also stressed the need for the
Government to protect the rights of southerners living
in the North. The Government assured us that the basic
rights of southerners in the North would be protected.

The Sudanese cancelled a previously scheduled
meeting with Vice-President Taha at the last minute. As
Ambassador Churkin explained at the press conference
later that day, this was an important opportunity missed
by the Government to discuss Abyei and other pressing
issues with the Council.

Separately, we received informative briefings on
UNMIS and UNAMID that added to our understanding
of their work and the challenges that they face in the
field day to day. Joint Special Representative Gambari
and Force Commander Nyamvumba detailed the
increasingly robust posture of UNAMID. We
welcomed the news that the Mission has increased its
patrols to an average of 160 per day, up from
approximately 90 per day in late 20l0. The
humanitarian briefing, however, was dispiriting. We
learned that only 250 or so international staff remain in
Darfur, which, as members of the Council know, is an
area roughly the size of France. That number used to
be around 1,000.

In Khartoum, we also met with former South
African President Thabo Mbeki, the Chair of the
African Union High-Level Implementation Panel. He
helpfully outlined his efforts to facilitate negotiations
on outstanding CPA issues and the key post-
3
referendum arrangements. President Mbeki emphasized
that we are at the point at which these arrangements
must be resolved by parties at a senior political level.
The Council agreed and expressed its strong support
for his ongoing work.

We Visited the Mayo Camp for internally
displaced persons on the outskirts of Khartoum, where
we heard the concerns of southerners about a lack of
protection, health care, education and job prospects.
Many have lived in the camp for decades, but all
expressed a keen desire to return to the South. These
hopes remain largely unrealized for that group in the
face of poverty, insufficient transportation and security
concerns. Some returnees have reportedly been
attacked as they journeyed back to the South.

We also met with Misseriya and Ngok Dinka
representatives during our time in the Sudan. We felt
that it was critical to hear first hand from both groups.
In each meeting, we emphasized the Council's
commitment to implementing the CPA and to finding a
peaceful solution to the crisis in Abyei.

After Khartoum, the Council visited Wau in
Western Bahr el-Ghazal, South Sudan. We were moved
by the deep commitment of the staff at the Mary Help
Centre. Our tour of its health clinic, school and related
facilities underscored the lack of infrastructure
throughout the South. We were fortunate to have the
opportunity to speak with students and representatives
of civil society organizations. They described their
excitement about independence, as well as the vast
challenges still to be overcome. Several asked for the
international community's help in demarcating the
North-South border and in creating a buffer zone
between northern and southern forces. We heard
repeatedly of the economic hardship caused by the
North's recent closure of several border crossings.
Above all, we heard the expression of a strong
yearning for greater educational opportunities and
better health care.

From Wau, we went to Juba, where the Council
had a productive meeting with President Salva Kiir,
Vice-President Riek Mashar and the Government of
South Sudan's ministers. We reiterated our View that
the fates and well-being of the peoples of the North
and South are intertwined, and urged both parties to
resume and intensify their dialogue to resolve the
status of Abyei and all remaining issues. We reiterated
our grave concern regarding events in Abyei, including
the Council's condemnation of the attack undertaken
by the Sudan People's Liberation Army on the United
Nations convoy on 19 May. President Kiir agreed that
stability in the South depends on a stable neighbour in
the North. He provided a broad overview of the
remaining CPA and post-referendum issues and, with
respect to Abyei, expressed regret to the United
Nations for the attack on its convoy.

The Council travelled by helicopter to Malau, a
small Village in Jonglei state, to View a demonstration
by a newly formed livestock protection unit. The tour
of Malau underscored the magnitude of the Challenges
facing the South, particularly with respect to internal
security. While the livestock protection unit is a worthy
initiative, the economic, social and political effects of
cattle-rustling and associated child abductions remain
daunting.

We later visited Jebel Kujur, a way station in Juba
operated by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, where vulnerable
returnees are provided with food, water and medical
services while the International Organization for
Migration arranges for their onward transport. We
spoke with recent returnees as they waited to load their
possessions onto buses to continue their journey to
other parts of the South. Nearly 341,000 southerners
living in the North returned to Southern Sudan and the
three areas between 30 October 2010 and 3 May 2011.
We made a point again of including civil society
groups in as much of our programme as possible. In
particular, we had a working lunch in Juba with a wide
range of representatives of non-governmental
organizations. Their work to provide services is
inspiring.

The Council also conducted an important initial
discussion regarding the successor mission to UNMIS,
which we are continuing in New York. Last week's
consultations were another important step in this
ongoing assessment.

Throughout our time in the Sudan, we
emphasized the Council's commitment to the full
implementation of the CPA and the need for the parties
to resolve outstanding issues before the South gains its
independence on 9 July. The crisis in Abyei only
reaffirms the urgency of meeting that deadline. We
urged the leaders with whom we met to act quickly to
reach the political compromises necessary to
facilitating two peaceful and successful States
11-36348
emerging next month, when we will welcome the
Republic of South Sudan to the international
community.

