Mr. Dorda (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): I would like to extend to you, Sir, my thanks
for having responded to the request that I addressed to
you on behalf of the Arab Group to convene this
meeting. And on behalf of the Arab Group let me say
that the question of Palestine -I am not calling it the
Middle East question because there is no Middle East
question; there is no geography or history of the
Middle East. This concept of course exists, but let
someone tell me where the Middle East is. The Middle
East is a creation designed to replace Palestine and to
integrate the occupying State into the region. That is
why I am here discussing the question of Palestine
rather than the question of the Middle East. The Middle
East does not exist in our minds either geographically
or historically. The question of Palestine is a question
of occupation.

Numerous people have come from various
corners of the world to occupy Palestine. The land of
Palestine is the land of all religions. It is a question of
occupation and must be addressed as such: occupation.

We all are aware of the consecutive wars that
have taken place. We all are aware of the political
consequences of those wars. And we are all aware of
the occupiers' claims that they want peace, not war.
They said they were going to strive for the experience
of peace, because they are the prophets of peace. The
Arabs believe in peace, and the Arabs begin their
greetings with a declaration of peace, as I have done at
the beginning of my speech.

What is the result of this process, incorrectly
labelled the "peace process"? There is a process - that
is true - but there is no peace. Why? The negotiations,
beginning in Madrid, continuing in Oslo, in
Washington and Wye Plantation, in Sharm el-Sheikh
and Camp David, as well as all the other venues - all
those negotiations have remained a dead letter. From
one instrument to another, from one convention to
another, from one accord to another, there has been no
implementation. This includes the Palestinian
Authority; it has no authority. The events have
demonstrated this in front of the entire world - the
Palestinian Authority has no true authority over its
land. Entries and exits from Gaza and the West Bank
have been blocked and blockaded by those who
actually possess the authority - that is, the occupying
Power.
What have the Arab regimes that participated in
the peace process ended up with? Three decades have
elapsed since the inception of the process and no
results whatsoever were achieved. The land of
Palestine is still occupied. The Palestinian people are
still outside of Palestine. The land has not been
restored; refugees have not returned home; Palestinians
residing in refugee camps continue to be refugees
scattered throughout the world. What kind of peace can
be established without restitution of the land? What
sort of peace can be concluded without a return of
Palestinians to their homes, their work, their schools
and their land? Recent events have proven the social
truth - that there is a Palestinian people that does
reside in its land.

Moreover, what we are witnessing today is not
peace but imposition of submission to the conditions
dictated by the occupier. Even the Palestinian
delegation at Camp David - according to a statement
made by Mr. Zaanoun, the head of the Central
Palestinian Council here in the United Nations, at a
meeting of the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) last
September - was told by the American team: either
you accept these conditions or there will be no
recognition of you as a liberation movement. You will
be treated as terrorists and we will break our relations
with you. We will break off our assistance and our
dialogue with you. What kind of peace is this when
such conditions are imposed upon the Palestinians?
How can it be considered a negotiating process or an
equitable negotiation? Can such a process succeed?
Can this kind of process lead to a truly peaceful
outcome that would restore the rights, land and
property, to the injured party?

Between the Israelis and the Arabs, there are
those who are armed; these include nuclear armaments,
surface-to-air missiles, anti-missile missiles and so
forth. Certain parties are given technology, expertise
and all kinds of financing - that is, one party, Israel.
The other party is prevented, indeed prohibited, from
even manufacturing the smallest light weapon, pistol or
rifle. Thus, if there is cooperation from other States in
the creation of defensive disarmament, pressures are
exerted on the other parties to cease cooperation with
the Arab States. What can happen given such an
equation? What is happening in the region is an attempt
to impose capitulation - not peace. And, if there is
such a peace, it cannot be a lasting one, because it is
not based on justice, law and equality.

How many resolutions have been adopted by this
Council? My brother, the representative of Palestine,
has enumerated dozens of them. Pressure has been
exerted by the United States not to implement these
resolutions. The United States has supported the
occupying Power. It is not something to be proud of
when a State proffers such support. Why have the
dozens of Security Council resolutions not been
implemented and applied?

Recently, a Security Council meeting was
convened in the wake of the deaths of three people in
West Timor, and the representatives of all States stood
up to observe a minute of silence or prayer. The Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya is opposed to the killing of any human
being, for whomever they may work. But why has no
one done anything about the murder of hundreds of
Palestinians? Where was the Council? Is there one kind
of peace for some and another kind of peace for others?
Are we talking of an international Security Council or
a United States National Security Council? We know
the answer. But who can pronounce this truth? Fear no
one but God, the Almighty, the Creator.

More than 200 martyrs have fallen in Palestine
because of the occupation, and no one in the United
Nations has lifted a finger, including the Security
Council. More than 10,000 people have been injured,
maimed and have joined the ranks of the handicapped,
as if they were not even human. Meanwhile, those who
invoke the principles of human rights say nothing when
they take the floor.

And yet, are human beings not the same all over
the world? Where are the rights of the Palestinian
people? The Economic and Social Council, despite all
the pressures brought to bear by the United States
delegation, has defended the rights of the Palestinian
people. A member of the Economic and Social Council
told me today that he was, to all intents and purposes,
taken out of the room - abducted, in a sense, to
prevent him from voting. So where are these human
rights? This is happening today, right here in the
United Nations.

There is no hope for peace for the Palestinian
people, because they live under occupation. How can
we talk about peace in the face of the violence that is
taking place in the region and in a situation in which
the occupier and the occupied are placed on an equal
footing? What is the cause, and what is the effect? Is it
the violence that is causing the occupation, or is it the
occupation that is causing the violence?

Let us look at the causes. The real cause is
occupation, and violence is the effect. To stop the
violence is to stop the occupation. What the
Palestinians want is their historical rights, which they
are free to demand. But not even 20 per cent of their
legitimate rights have been given them. Colonies of
armed settlers surround their autonomous land and they
are prevented from enjoying these rights. How can
there be peace if their lands are not restored? Refugees
cannot return home. Those Palestinians who are abroad
will not come back. So what peace are we speaking of?

The Palestinian Authority has no authority in its
own land. The children who are throwing stones were
born after 1967, in occupied Palestine. If this is the
case with this generation, what will happen to
succeeding generations? This will become a cause
embraced by all Arab peoples; the events that have
occurred in Arab capitals are proof of this.

With respect to establishing relations with Israel,
some Arab Governments have succumbed to pressure
from the Arab people and have retreated from such
relations. No people can accept capitulation. We are
advocates of peace. The former United States Secretary
of State, James Baker, said this in his book. Read it,
and it will become clear. "I ask the Israelis what their
positions are. I go to the Arabs and relay that
information. Then I go back to the Israelis." This is not
our testimony, but that of James Baker.

If the Council is to express, as it should, the will
of the international community and if it is to maintain
international peace and security, we would ask only
one thing of it: that it be just and that it shoulder its
responsibilities under the Charter of the United Nations
and its own resolutions, as set forth in the relevant
international instruments.

We are not asking for the impossible. We are
asking for justice, for our rights, for law.

On behalf of the Arab Group, we ask the
following: first, that an international observer force be
sent to protect the Palestinian people in the occupied
territories; secondly, that a fact-finding mission be sent
to inquire into all the acts of violence perpetrated
against the Palestinian people, and that the conclusions
it reaches be submitted to the International Criminal
Court; and thirdly, that the relevant Security Council
resolutions be implemented. The Arab Group may be
obliged to revisit the question in coming days, with a
view to seeing what the Council will do.

Mr. President, I hope that you can take this
request into account.

