Mrs. Pinto Lopes d'Alva (Guinea-Bissau): I thank
you, Mr. President, for inviting my delegation to the
Security Council table. At the outset, I would like to
congratulate you and Egypt on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of August and
to wish you successful deliberations.

Allow me to exted to you, Sir, and to all Council
members the greetings of His Excellency Mr. Jose'
Mario Vaz, President of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau,
on behalf of Bissau-Guineans, with special thanks to
the Secretary General, His Excellency Mr. Antonio
Guterres, for the report on the situation in Guinea-Bissa
(S/2017/695) presented by his Special Representative
for Guinea-Bissau, Mr. Modibo Toure. The continued
support of the United Nations to our country through
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) and the entire United
Nations country team on the ground, working together
with Bissau-Guineans for sustainable peace and
development, is very much appreciated.

The commitment of the United Nations to Guinea-
Bissau is undoubtedly extensive and diversified.
It touches almost all sectors of our political and
institutional life, from defence and security to health,
education, culture, the promotion of women, human
rights, the fight against transnational organized crime,
social communication for national reconciliation and
constitutional order and peacebuilding - as is clearly
detailed in the report. For all that support, we cannot
but express our boundless gratitude and recognition of
the commitment of the United Nations to our country.
We hope that the engagement of the United Nations
will continue to lead us to much-needed peace so
that, together with our bilateral and other multilateral
partners, we can finally engage in new partnerships for
the development of Guinea-Bissau.

Permit me also to thank His Excellency Mr. Mauro
Vieira, Permanent Representative of Brazil to the
United Nations, Chair of Guinea-Bissau configuration

of the Peacebuilding Commission and Chair of the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP),
for his statements in those two capacities.

The engagement of the Commission, demonstrated
by the recent visit of the configuration to Guinea-
Bissau, where Ambassador Vieira had a chance to
meet personally with the main political stakeholders
and civil society, served to reassure our people that the
international community is still standing with them on
many fronts, through the United Nations, in their quest
for the consolidation of peace.
As Chair of the CPLP, Ambassador Vieira's
stop in Lisbon, with a peace message on Guinea-
Bissau, once again reassures us that our group of nine
Portuguese-speaking countries, which share not only a
language but also a culture and history as well, also
has an important role to play in fostering dialogue and
long-lasting peace in our country.

We would like to thank His Excellency Ambassador
Elbio Rosselli, Permanent Representative of Uruguay
to the United Nations and Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2048 (2012),
concerning Guinea-Bissau, for his statement and for the
report on his recent visit to our country, where he also
met with all the relevant political actors. We believe that
visit enabled him to better assess the present sanctions
on Guinea- Bissau.

The diligent efforts of our subregion and of the
African Union to achieve peace in Guinea-Bissau have
been important. We thank His Excellency Ambassador
Kokou Kpayedo, Permanent Representative of Togo to
the United Nations and present Chair of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), for his
diligence and for his statement to the Security Council.

We are aware that we bear the ultimate responsibility
for resolving the crisis in our country. We understand
the concern expressed in the report about the evolution
of the political situation and the final observations,
which focus on the political and institutional impasse
that, unfortunately, we are still not able to overcome.
In general, the analyses that were done do not reflect a
lack of objectivity.

Without intending to comment on the analysis
and conclusions of the report, allow me to express
our appreciation for the patience and the wisdom that
has characterized United Nations interventions and
the actions of ECOWAS and African Union on the
front lines of the process to resolve the situation in
Guinea-Bissau. Such patience and wisdom will assist
in finding the sustainable solution that we all seek, with
the support of ECOWAS, the African Union and the
United Nations. Such a solution will require a strong
and irreplaceable internal commitment from State
institutions and political parties. That point is very well
reflected in the report and we cannot agree more that,
indeed, Bissau-Guineans will have to work harder to
make that commitment.

From the outside looking in, it seems that politics
has come to an end in Guinea-Bissau. However, the
truth is that our institutions, as strategic political
actors, are seeking answers and finding solutions that
are adequate and sustainable. The recent initiative by
the group of women facilitators of dialogue, which
was deservedly embraced by the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office in Guinea-Bissau and
gained immediate visibility, was the result of efforts
made at many levels, but always away from the media
spotlight. We thank those courageous women for their
important work. In Guinea-Bissau, since our struggle
for independence, women have always been involved in
every aspect of our political life and there are no better
messengers of peace than women.

One of the most significant things that should
be pointed out is the fact that the institutional crisis
remains somehow circumscribed in the ambit of
political institutions, Parliament and Government. In
reality, we could say that it is a political party crisis,
which has disarticulated the functional relationship
between the National Assembly and the Government.

There is a need for broader dialogue, in particular
within political parties, which is the recognized
path that must be taken to generate consensus, make
commitments, dissolve internal political tensions and
break the persistent political-institutional impasse that
has become entrenched in our political order. It is the
path outlined by the report of Secretary-General, and
it is the path that President Vaz has always called for.
Despite the institutional crises, Guinea-Bissau lives in
peace and there have been no disturbances for the past
five years.

We can state that there have been no human rights
violations in Guinea-Bissau worthy of report in recent
years. The everyday life of civil servants has become
increasingly normal, as salaries are now paid early
and regularly, like never before seen in Guinea-Bissau.
Political tension, which is normal in a democracy, has
nevertheless been reduced and is almost insignificant.
We therefore do not agree with the sanctions because
they seem excessive and counterproductive in the light

of Guinea-Bissau's political context.

In conclusion, we have faith that Guinea-Bissau
will overcome its institutional crises. With the
Council's continued support, solidarity and patience,
we will consolidate our democracy by working out
our differences, achieve long-lasting peace and
lead our nation to the path of development and the
implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals.

