Mr. Madeira: Let me first of all thank you,
Mr. President, for allowing me to address this body. Let
me also thank all the members of the Security Council
for their unanimous support and encouragement for the
efforts that are being made to put an end to the activities
of the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA).
Further to my statement in the Council in June 2012
(see S/PV.6796) on the progress by the African Union
in the operationalization of its Regional Cooperation
Initiative for the Elimination of the Lord's Resistance
Army, I would like to highlight for the Council the
subsequent progress made in the region by the African
Union (AU) in coordination with troop-contributing
countries, with the support of United States special
rorces, the European Union and the United Nations
offices and missions on the ground, very particularly
the efforts deployed by my colleague Mr. Abou Moussa
and the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa (UNOCA).

The Council may recall that, in January, the Joint
Support and Coordination Mechanism adopted the key
mission documents for the African Union Regional
Task Force, namely, the strategic directives, the
concept of operations, standard operating procedures
for the handling of persons suspected ofinvolvement in
LRA activities, and the rules of engagement. Later, on
13 February, the Congolese armed forces handed over to
the Task Force a contingent of 500 troops, in a ceremony
that the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and I witnessed in Dungu. Those two events marked
the end of the first phase of the operationalization of
the Regional Task Force, the military component of
the AU-led Regional Cooperation Initiative for the
elimination of the LRA.

However, it was difficult to enter into the second
phase, which consisted of the commencement of a
military operation, due to serious logistical challenges
faced by the contingents, particularly those from the
Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and South Sudan. That left the Ugandan
contingent, supported by United States special forces,
to continue conducting counter-LRA operations in the
Central African Republic until July. They nonetheless
achieved several major successes, which included the
killing of 9 LRA fighters, the reception of 14 defectors
and the recovery of 17 modern fire arms, 4 traditional
weapons, 1,429 pieces of ammunition and 6 pieces of
ivory.

That momentum suffered a major setback following
the coup d'etat that took place in Bangui on 24 March.
The then prevailing situation generated tension between
Sele'ka and the Regional Task Force, forcing the latter
and United States special forces to suspend operations
in the Central African Republic. Meanwhile the LRA
exploited the lull in operations to reorganize, step up
cross-border movements between Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Central African Republic and carry
out attacks on villages and displace civilians in the
Mbomou and Haut-Mbomou prefectures of the Central
African Republic.

The situation was further complicated by the attack
in Obo town on 24 May by a group of 87 armed Arrow
Boys from Tumbura,Western Equatoria state of South
Sudan. The Regional Task Force apprehended 42 of the
attackers and handed them over to the International
Committee of the Red Cross for repatriation to South
Sudan. By July, the Regional Task Force had repatriated
80 civilians, including the Arrow Boys.

The Obo situation regenerated the tension between
Se'le'ka and the Regional Task Force, commanded
by the African Union, with the authorities in Bangui
agitating to deploy Seleka troops in the Obo, Haut-
Mbomou prefecture, which was being controlled by
the Regional Task Force. However, through my joint
diplomatic efforts with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, mutual trust and confidence were
built between the new leadership of the Central African
Republic and the African Union, and the tension was
diffused. We also obtained an official commitment
from the head of the National Transition Council in the
Central African Republic, Mr. Michel Djotodia, for the
continued implementation of the Regional Cooperation
Initiative, including the resumption of the Regional Task
Force military operations in the country. Meanwhile,
between July and August, the various contingents of
the Regional Task Force underwent retraining and
counter-LRA combat rehearsals, facilitated by United
States special forces.

On the diplomatic front, working in close cooperation
and coordination with the United States of America, I
managed to obtain a green light from the authorities of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo for the Regional
Task Force to conduct cross-border operations against
the LRA on Congolese territory - something that was
not happening before. That was a major breakthrough.

I am happy to inform the Council that the
developments to which I have referred, together with
the extension of United States training and logistical
support to all the Task Force contingents, paved way
for the resumption of its military operations in the
Central African Republic on 9 August, as well as the
operationalization of the Congolese and the South
Sudanese contingents in September.

Henceforth, the Task Force, with a current total
strength of 3,114 men, made up of 29 headquarters
staff, 2,000 Ugandan soldiers, 500 South Sudanese,
500 Congolese, and 85 Central Africans who are not
members of the Se'le'ka, resumed operations against
LRA in the Central African Republic on 9 August.
The operations are ongoing, on a high tempo and with
intense intelligence collection, including the destruction
of LRA camps and denying them permanent bases in
all sectors.

The current military pressure has kept the LRA
on the run, including its leader Joseph Kony. That
heightened pressure has forced the LRA to try his
time-tested tricks of buying time by duping the
authorities of the Central African Republic into
negotiations to purportedly allow Kony and his LRA
to surrender and resettle in Nzako. According to Task
Force reports we have received, Kony only used that
window of opportunity to move many of his fighters
and relocate them further up to the north-eastern part
of the Central African Republic. The Regional Task
Force will therefore not relent on the military pressure
against the LRA until Kony and his top commanders,
particularly those wanted by the International Criminal
Court, surrender or are removed from the battlefield
and taken to the Court.

The current momentum needs to be sustained with
adequate funding and logistical support to enhance
our objective of eliminating the LRA. I am happy to
know that all the members of the Security Council
have stressed that aspect. Funding and equipping
the Regional Task Force headquarters with robust
communications remains a critical requirement in
facilitating its ability to effectively plan, coordinate and
monitor the ongoing operations in all sectors. I would
like to take this opportunity to thank Luxembourg
for its very generous gesture to help the headquarters
become more operational.

I would also like to take this opportunity to convey
the appreciation of the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, Ms. Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma,
to the LRA-affected countries, the United States
Administration, the European Union and the United
Nations for their active engagement on ensuring success
on the LRA issue.

