Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I too would
like to start by thanking the Under-Secretary-General
Ladsous and the three Police Commissioners of police
components for their briefings. I would also like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening a meeting in
the same format one year after the meeting on the topic
of the protection of civilians in United Nations peace
operations (see S/PV.7317).

When one is talking about the protection ofcivilians,
it is always apt to recall that the principal responsibility
for the protection of civilians belongs with the host
country. It is good to bear that in mind. Nothing that we
say here takes mitigates the responsibility of the host

country in that area. Having said that, obviously the
United Nations, and more specifically the police and
gendarmerie components of peacekeeping operations,
can have a central role to play, in particular in putting
all necessary measures in place when they are needed.

We have talked a great deal about the means and
capacities that are necessary to enable the United
Nations police to carry out their missions. Of course,
as many have said, the training issue comes into play.
Beyond that, there is also the issue of harmonization
and consistency. We have to prevent the norms and
practices that the police-contributing countries transfer
to the host countries from varying too much from
one contributor to another. I welcome the work on the
development of operational standards and guidelines
carried out by the Police Division of the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations for several years. That is
important, even essential, to ensure the performance of
the police dimension of peacekeeping operations.

The linguistic dimension is another central issue.
Here once again, if we want to ensure that peacekeeping
operations perform well, we must deploy police officers
and gendarmes who speak the language and know the
culture of the country to which they are deployed.
That is absolutely essential in order to facilitate the
relationship with the population and to guarantee
performance, in particular with regard to the training
carried out by the United Nations police.

Lastly, many speakers have said this but it merits
repeating, there is a gender element. We must deploy
a greater number of female police officer to facilitate
relations with the population, especially those who are
most exposed to human rights abuses - women and
children - and they certainly bring a value added to
sexual violence investigations. I will listen with great
interest to the answer to the question posed by the
Ambassador of Lithuania on the experience that each
of the Police Commissioners has had with their female
police contingent.

I will conclude with several brief comments and
questions.
First, I wish to emphasize that, just like the military
component, United Nations police should not wait for
attacks to happen to intervene. Instead, they should be
proactive and ready to take action, through the setting
up of prevention and rapid-response mechanisms in
situations in which civilian populations are under
threat.

Secondly, I would stress the importance ofthe issue
of the penal chain. The Security Council, when it went
to Haiti on mission last January, was truly shocked to
see to what extent the judiciary and penal component
in Haiti was, shall we say, in ruins. There was a stark
contrast between the considerable and effective effort
that had been made by the police and the total lack
of engagement by the host country in particular on
judiciary and penal issues. I think that it is vital to have
a comprehensive View of the penal chain in order to
ensure its effectiveness. This is of course not the case
only for peacekeeping operations, and it is not the
responsibility of the United Nations alone. But I think
that all stakeholders must have a comprehensive view
of the penal chain so as to avert situations such as the
one we saw in Haiti.

Lastly, a question was asked about modern
technologies. They are essential, of course, and
can play an important role in terms of warning and
evidence-gathering. The Lithuanian Ambassador also
asked a question on this issue. I would be interested in
hearing how Commissioners have been able to use these
technologies. I believe that General Champion said that
he no longer used them. Why is that, and what does he
need in order to be able to use them to a greater extent?

I would ask one last question of General Champion,
since the light is not yet blinking. A very specific part of
his briefing related to the strategy to combat insecurity
that he put together in Beni. He very clearly underscored
the need to take an integrated approach to the protection
of civilians by showing that this was the only effective
means of doing so. Having said that, we are aware that
his resources and equipment are limited and that police
mandates in peacekeeping operations are increasingly
multidimensional. They are being given many tasks: to
protect communities, ensure the continuing training of
their own police and of local police, and build capacity.
I am sure that he has to prioritize and make choices, and
I would be interested in hearing what criteria he uses in
order to allocate his resources.

