Ms. Gamba: First, I would like to thank the current
President of the Security Council, Sweden, for giving
me the opportunity to brief the Council today and share
the most recent updates on the situation of children
affected by the armed conflict in the Syrian Arab
Republic. I concur with the statement delivered just now
by my colleague from the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Mark Lowcock.

The monitoring and reporting mechanism, created
through resolution 1612 (2005) in 2005, collects
information on the six grave violations against children
in armed conflict situations. The Reporting Mechanism
in Syria was established in 2013 following the listing
of the Syrian Government for the killing and maiming
of children and attacks on schools and hospitals. Every
year since then, there has been a tremendous increase
in all grave violations committed by all parties to
the conflict.
This specific Mechanism is unique in its set up,
as it operates as a regional mechanism, gathering
information from inside of Syria as well as from
neighbouring countries, allowing for a broader scope in
monitoring and capturing violations committed across
Syria, while large parts of the country is inaccessible
to the United Nations. However, I must stress that,
although the cases documented by the Mechanism have
all been verified by the United Nations, they represent
only a mere fraction of violations committed in Syria
as of today.

Since the beginning of the Syrian crisis in March
2011, the United Nations has verified through the
Mechanism that more than 7,000 children have lost
their lives or have been maimed as a result of this
conflict. I must stress that this is the verified number
alone; the unverified reports reflect numbers that go
way beyond 20,000 child casualties. The Mechanism
makes a distinction between reported and verified
cases. Only verified cases lead to the listing of parties.
The methodology of verification is carefully elaborated
and requires a thorough triangulation of information
procedures, which makes it a very strict mechanism that
generates data that appears lower than figures in other
monitoring initiatives and mechanisms of the United
Nations. Indiscriminate and disproportionate attacks by
all parties, of which now we tally over 88 - including
the use of weapons prohibited under international law,
aerial attacks, mortars and rockets, indiscriminate
shelling and improvised explosive devices - have been
used against civilian areas and civilian infrastructures
and have had a deadly toll on children.

As Council members know, the Mechanism reports
on six grave violations: recruitment and use, killing
and maiming, rape and other forms of sexual violence,
attacks on hospitals and schools, abductions, and denial
of humanitarian access. Over the years the Secretary-
General has listed in the annexes of his annual report on
children and armed conflict seven parties committing
grave violations against children in Syria.

Since the beginning of 2018 alone - a period of
six months - the Mechanism has verified over 1,200
violations against children. Of these, more than 600
children have been killed or maimed, more than 180
recruited and used, and more than 60 schools attacked,
while over 100 attacks on hospitals and medical
facilities or personnel have been all verified. Most of
these verified grave violations have occurred in the last
six months in the context of military surges by various
parties in the areas of Afrin, Hama, Idlib, eastern
Ghouta and Dar'a. Each of these surges has resulted in
hundreds of thousands of displaced people, of which a
vast proportion are children.

As war rages, detention of children for alleged
association with armed forces and armed groups has
exponentially increased. In 2018 alone, over 1,300
children are reportedly held by parties in the north-
eastern part of Syria, of which the Mechanism could
verify only seven cases since the beginning of the year
due to the inaccessibility of the area and the relevant
actors. In other parts of Syria, detention of children is
also reported, and the Mechanism was able to verify
more than 300 cases since 2014.

The figures emerging from the first six months of
2018 reflect large increases, as compared to previous
similar reporting periods. For example, in the first
quarter of 2018, there was an increase of 25 per cent
in recruitment and use of children, and a 348 per cent
increase in killing and maiming, both as compared to
the previous quarter. In fact, the total number of grave
violations for the first quarter marks a 109 per cent
increase over the last quarter of 2017.

Attribution for these violations indicates that all
recruitment and use in 2018 have been committed
by non-State actors, while most killing and maiming
figures are attributed to Syrian Government and pro-
Government forces. Although figures for the beginning
of 2018 include few verified cases of sexual violence
and abduction, these are violations reported across all
the years since the establishment of the Mechanism in
Syria. For example, boys and girls have been sexually
abused and exploited, sold as sexual slaves and forcibly
married to fighters for the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant. Rape has been used as a means of torture,
especially when children were being deprived of their
liberty. Despite being underreported, cases of sexual
violence against children in Syria also reflect the
despicable nature of this conflict.

Attacks on schools and medical facilities have
been one of the persistent features of the conflict in
Syria. One in three schools are estimated to be out of
use - either damaged, destroyed or used as a shelter
or for military purposes. An estimated 2.1 million
children alone are out of school inside Syria, due to a
range of factors including insecurity, lack of facilities
and quality education, poverty and displacement.

In the upcoming months, the Security Council-
mandated country report of the Secretary-General
on children and armed conflict in Syria will be
published, covering almost five years of the conflict.
The findings of the Mechanism over that period of
time are utterly unsettling. I am deeply disturbed by
the stories of children born and raised throughout
this conflict, children who have never seen peace in
Syria, children who have suffered repeatedly from
all types of violations in their homes, communities,
schools, detention centres and in refugee and internally
displaced persons settings. We have to think that these
children are in severe psychosocial distress. They do
not know the meaning of the word "peace".

The violence Syrian children have been subjected
to, and are still being subject to - as well as the pain
they and their families have faced throughout these
years of crisis - is simply unacceptable. Given the
dynamics and violations occurring against children
this year, I am especially concerned about children
deprived of their liberty and the conditions of detention
of children allegedly associated with parties to the
conflict. These children must be treated primarily as
victims of violations of international law.

I call on all parties involved in the conflict in
Syria to comply with applicable obligations under the
Convention of the Rights of the Child and its optional
protocol on the involvement of children in armed
conflict and to give civilian child-protection actors
access to children deprived of liberty for association
or alleged association with armed forces and groups.
I further call on all parties to the conflict in Syria
to take immediate measures to ensure that their
military operations are conducted in full compliance
with international law, including through respecting
the principles of distinction, proportionality and
precaution. Humanitarian access must be granted to
all children in all locations in Syria, including through
the implementation of humanitarian corridors and
pauses for the delivery of humanitarian assistance that
are indispensable for their survival and development,
without any discrimination. This standard should also
be applicable to returnees.

I would like to conclude by emphasizing that
children continue to be disproportionately affected
by the armed conflict in Syria. It is essential that
the Security Council does everything in its power
to put pressure on parties to the conflict to comply
with their obligations under international law and
ensure that children are no longer subject to grave
violations of their rights. Parties to conflict must take
immediate, concrete and effective action to prevent
child casualties during the conduct of hostilities,
including by immediately ceasing to use means and
methods of warfare that are inherently indiscriminate
or disproportionate in nature and ensure that children
deprived of their liberty be treated primarily as victims
of violations of international law.

There is clearly no alternative other than peace to
stop the increasing violations against children in Syria.
We must make peace a priority and, in the pursuit of
that peace, we must ensure that all peace negotiations
include children at the centre of the discussion.
Nowhere it is more important to consider children as
an indispensable part of peace processes than in the
Syrian conflict. There will be hundreds of thousands of
children who will need assistance and we must prepare
to meet their needs.

The prolonged exposure to war has immediate
and major detrimental effects on the psychosocial
well-being of children. If left untreated, the long-term
negative consequences will affect them for the rest of
their lives. In that regard, recalling the recently adopted
resolution 2427 (2018), children affected by the conflict
must be able to access protection programmes designed
to meet their needs in an integrated and comprehensive
approach to mental health and psychosocial support,
including the specific needs ofchildren with disabilities.
The international community must prioritize funding
and provision for quality education for all children at
all levels, from the initial stages of child development
through to vocational training for youth. No one must
be left behind, especially those who, through no fault
of their own, have been robbed of their most important
developmental years.

It is time for the children of Syria to believe in their
own future and to learn what peace means. It is time
for them to retake the childhood that was taken away
from them. It is time for them to stop being victims and
become game changers in the restoration of normality
in peace and justice. They have been used and abused
by, in and for this armed conflict for far too long.

