Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): I wish
first to thank the Secretary-General for his statement
and welcome the presence - in addition to yourself,
Sir - the presence of a number of ministers, including
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Somalia. I wish to
pay tribute to the commitment of Ms. Condi Rice, who
took the initiative of requesting the Organization to
convene this meeting. We welcome the adoption of
resolution 1851 (2008).

The most recent reports available to us, from the
United Nations and the International Maritime
Organization, confirm that piracy attacks are becoming
increasingly numerous and violent, and increasingly
sophisticated. They represent today a major danger for
the Somali people first, because of the roughly
3.5 million displaced persons and particularly because
of all those who depend on international humanitarian
food aid. The attacks also jeopardize international
maritime shipping along the Somali coast, which is one
of the world's most dense shipping lanes.

The deep roots of that phenomenon, as has
already been said, are to be sought on land, not in the
sea. War, the absence of a State, the lack of legal
economic outlets and the actions of criminal groups -
these are the root causes. While the Somali crisis has
gone on for 18 years now, it is only in the last two or
three years that piracy has become a veritable criminal
industry along the Somali coast. We are convinced that
through determined action at sea it will be possible to
end this vicious circle without waiting for all necessary
conditions to be met in order to eliminate piracy
completely and to thus permit at least the provision of
food aid.

My delegation notes that for several months this
year when the World Food Programme (WFP) did not
have sufficient protection for its ships for Somalia,
deliveries fell by 50 per cent, to the immediate
detriment of the population. France and the European
Union are acting. As the President of the Republic
stated here in September 2007, France took the
initiative to ensure the protection of maritime convoys
of the WFP, which was later assumed by the
Netherlands, Denmark and Canada.

The European Union decided on 10 November to
deploy the first naval operation in its history to combat
piracy along the Somali coast, using naval and aerial
measures, in response to the Security Council's call in
resolutions 1816 (2008) and 1838 (2008). That
operation started on 8 December. It has a very clear
European mandate that will enable it to guarantee
protection for convoys under the WFP for one year and
to provide decisive support to other vulnerable vessels.

A couple of weeks ago, resolution 1846 (2008)
gave the international community what it required as a
minimum - namely, a one-year extension of the
authorization, with conditions, for entrance into Somali
waters and to combat pirates. Over the past week we
have worked assiduously to make further progress,
particularly to encourage the establishment of an
international coordination mechanism. It goes without
saying that, given the immensity of the area to be
covered, the European Union will not be working
alone, but together with its major partners. NATO has
been ensuring protection for facilities of the World
Food Programme. Russia and India are also active in
the area, and many other States have indicated their
interest.

In nearly three months' time, we will consider a
report of the Secretary-General on the role that the
United Nations can play. France is convinced that the
Secretariat can play a key role in continuing to
mobilize the international community. In that regard, I
welcome the Secretary-General's appointment of a
unique liaison point within its teams. It is clear that we
must all coordinate our efforts without delay by
creating an appropriate mechanism, which will, of
course, include the Secretariat.

Several speakers have referred to the fact that the
international community, and the Council in particular,
must become more actively involved in the Somali
crisis itself. As recommended by the Special
Representative, whose commitment I commend, the
Security Council has equipped itself with individual
sanctions measures to exert pressure on those who have
been opposing the peace process. The Council has also
indicated its readiness to support a multinational force
that would, as requested by the signatories to the
Djibouti Agreement, be deployed to Mogadishu.

My delegation is mindful of the fact that it has
not been possible to constitute such a force. We also
note that a conventional peacekeeping operation would
not be realistic in Somalia today. There would have to
be tens of thousands of troops equipped and trained in
specific urban combat techniques, totally self-
sustaining, with very heavy military equipment. Above
all, however, the encouraging progress of the political
process has not yet been concretely reflected on the
ground, and thus security conditions have not improved
today. Moreover, the situation is very fluid, and the
announced withdrawal of Ethiopian troops is not only a
destabilizing factor in terms of security, but also a
political opportunity.

The Secretary-General just outlined several
courses of action. He referred to decisive support for
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) -
financial, logistical and political support to ensure its
increased reinforcement. France, which has supported
the deployment of Burundian battalions, favours such
support. Perhaps the time has come to go further and
create a trust fund for that operation.

Likewise, we believe that the international
community must do everything in its power to
support- including in financial terms - the joint
force that the Transitional Federal Government and the
Alliance for the Re-Liberation of Somalia have decided
to establish. It is essential to devise a financing
mechanism that will enable such support to materialize
and will enable the Somali parties to begin to create
conditions for a way out of the crisis. Making swift
progress in that regard is necessary, but it may not be
sufficient if AMISOM. is soon left alone on the ground,
despite its courage. However, we are not condemned to
an impossible choice between inaction and measures
that are dangerous for the United Nations and would
not provide any concrete assistance to the Somali
population.

France is convinced that, as in the case of piracy,
we can come up with a novel approach. For example,
we believe that we should collectively consider the
possibility of a multiphase United Nations operation,
with a first phase of stabilization, limited in scope, that
would enable us to promote political dialogue, foster
the re-establishment of the United Nations Political
Office in Somalia, facilitate humanitarian access to
Mogadishu and keep coordinating with a strengthened
and financially supported AMISOM. Following that
would be a consolidation phase that would see a
conventional peacekeeping operation. We note with
great interest the report being prepared by the
Secretary-General, which apparently reflects a similar
approach.

Through the adoption of resolutions 1846 (2008)
and 1851 (2008), we have the legal means to combat
piracy more effectively. The European Union, like
others, has begun to act. We must continue this effort
and, whenever possible, continue to provide tangible
assistance to the Somali population.

