Mr. Heusgen (Germany): First of all, we
congratulate you, Mr. President, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council, and Germany
greatly appreciates the fact that you will leave us free at
least a few weekends during the month. In this regard,
I appreciate what Mr. Vassily Nebenzia, Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation, did in the
presidency last month.

With regard to the topic at hand, it is greatly
appreciated that South Africa put it at the top of its
agenda. I do not know if it was done intentionally just
one week after we witnessed several hundred thousand
young people on the streets of New York City, when
Greta Thunberg and many other young people were at
the United Nations to express their will, enthusiasm
and initiatives for combating the huge problem of
climate change.

I therefore very much appreciate the fact, Sir, that
you are now once again putting the emphasis on youth,
particularly on young people as drivers of change.
In the briefings of the four youth briefers, we heard
numerous examples in which young people are already
engaged. I listened carefully to what Ms. Aya Chebbi,
African Union Special Envoy on Youth, had to say with
regard to concrete examples in which young people are
already drivers of change.
We have to make it a general practice that,
whenever we have negotiations, women and youth are
included. As we were preparing our statement today,
we took on board what the German youth delegates to
the United Nations had prepared. We are very happy to
have not only African Union youth representatives here
in the Chamber, but also German youth delegates. We
are including in this statement what these young people
have to say.

First, I want to start where my colleague from Cote
d'Ivoire left off, namely, with regard to the African
Union. Germany fully supports the African Union
Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative. It is very positive
that the Council endorsed it, but 2020 is just around the
corner and a lot of work remains to be done in the fight
against the proliferation of weapons and ammunition,
which, after all, is the hard fuel of conflicts.

The fight against the proliferation of weapons
and disarmament is also a priority for members of the
Security Council.

We partner in concrete terms with the African
Union to cut the flows of arms and ammunition to
fragile States, and we are training a new generation of
experts to take the lead in arms control. We have also
presented to Member States what we do in the western
Balkans on small-arms control so as to transfer our
experience in that area to African countries.

Germany also provides protection and basic
services to those particularly threatened and who have
been Victims of conflict in the Lake Chad region,
with support projects by Plan International aimed at
providing psychosocial support to young survivors of
sexual and gender-based violence. We support Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Gamba and
her efforts to reintegrate child soldiers into society.
This is for us a very important precondition for
sustainable peacebuilding.

I would like to go back to Ms. Aya Chebbi. She
listed a number of nexuses, and I would like to start
with her first one, the nexus with governance. I have
mentioned here several times already the 2017 United
Nations Development Programme study "Journey to
extremism in Africa", in which it is very clearly spelled
out that bad governance, the absence of the rule of law
and a lack of education and economic opportunities
lead young people into extremism, so good governance
is key.

Concerning the nexus with inequality, the German
youth delegates put inequality at the top of their list. As
to the nexus with climate change, we are very happy
that she picked this up, because we, too, believe that this
is very important, and we heard a lot about it last week.

The last point I wanted to pick up from her statement
was the need to replace bullets with books. That is one
of the key points in the demands of the German youth
delegates; this is about weapons. We listened to Victor
Ochen when in his statement he mentioned a youth who
said that his gun was his life. This is a huge problem,
and we have to do to change this.

How can this be done? It can be done by trying
to stop the production of weapons and the prohibition
of firearms. Short of this, forbid the export of arms
and in particular stop arms deliveries to crisis and
conflict regions. Instead of financing arms, one should
finance books, education or other projects. Ijust want
to highlight one project that Germany is supporting
in Bamako, in which young people are encouraged
and supported to engage in cultural activities such as
hip-hop, rap and modern dance; Jerry is invited there.
This strengthens their role in society and provides
alternatives to what extremists and violent groups offer.

Let me conclude by saying that there were a few
operational proposals; one of them was to have more
youth briefers, not only today but also on other subjects.
When Germany held the presidency in April, we had a
few young briefers, and I want to remind the Council
about the young Syrian girl with disabilities who had
fled in her wheelchair from Syria to Germany (see S/PV.8515). She was a very impressive young woman.

I heard, and I want to stop at this, a proposal put
forward by Ms. Gawanas with regard to an expert group
or informal working group on youth. Maybe this is not

the right time or place, but perhaps she could explain at
some stage how such a group would make a difference.
Would this be a group where young people are actually
sitting around the table, or would it once again be us
old men sitting around the table discussing it? We must
bring young people to the table so that they can they
discuss the issues.

