Mr. Corr (Ireland): We are very grateful to you,
Mr. Minister, for your presence with us today. It is
especially fitting that Singapore should preside over
our solemn deliberations today as we celebrate the
independence of East Timor.

Ireland associates itself fully with the statement
delivered earlier by the representative of Spain on
behalf of the European Union.

The happy events taking place in East Timor
today are ones in which Ireland is honoured to share.
For all of its people, East Timor now belongs to them:
a nation as well as a home. From today, it is the dreams
of the people of East Timor that will shape the destiny
of their country. It is their goals and achievements that
will write its history.

There are many who can rightly share the credit
for allowing us to reach this historic point. However,
today belongs entirely to the people of East Timor.
Valour and fortitude have marked, over long years, the
struggles of the people of East Timor. For many years
they faced a bleak and cold world. And in their valour,
all of us today celebrate a victory of the human spirit
and wish the people of East Timor well as a free and
honoured nation.

The United Nations, too, can be proud of the
positive role it has played in East Timor's story,
especially in recent years. We pay warm tribute today
to all the men and women who have helped and have
served in United Nations missions in East Timor. The
swift action of the Council in 1999 and the impeccable
administration of the territory until today by the
Secretary-General's Special Representative together
represent an example of our Organization at its best.
The resolution adopted on Friday, 17 May 2002, by the
Council, establishing the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor, is a natural extension of this.

Today the people of East Timor face a new world
as they take charge of their own affairs. The leadership
that they have elected has inspired them during some of
their most difficult moments. That leadership must now
show the same spirit and courage that have brought
East Timor to this special point. Even on an occasion
such as this, we must not forget that East Timor is one
of the world's poorest countries. It is graced, though,
with people of great resilience and with natural

resources which, if properly exploited, can, in the
medium term, help to make a better life for all.

The international community must now do all it
can to help bring this about. We now have an
opportunity to make a real contribution to East Timor
just as it crosses the threshold of national
independence. The new United Nations Mission in the
country and last week's donor conference in Dili
represent a good start in this regard. Ireland will play
its own direct part. We have opened a Representation
Office in Dili, and East Timor has been identified by
Ireland's Development Aid Programme as a priority for
reconstruction and rehabilitation activity.

Reconstruction and rehabilitation constitute more
than a physical task, though. The establishment of the
Commission for Reception, Truth and Reconciliation
has been an important step. We very much hope that
the Commission will be able to assist the people of
East Timor to achieve accountability through truth-
telling and healing through reconciliation.

The establishment of good relations with its
neighbours is also critical to the future development of
East Timor. We encourage East Timor and Indonesia to
continue their efforts to improve their important
relationship. We strongly support the steps the two
neighbours are taking in this regard, including the
recent meeting in Jakarta between President Megawati
Soekarnoputri and President Gusmao. We welcome
President Megawati Soekarnoputri's attendance at
today's independence ceremonies.

The independence of East Timor represents the
arrival of the first new State of the twenty-first century.
We look forward to welcoming East Timor to its place
among the Member States of the United Nations.
Ultimate responsibility for its destiny as an
independent nation lies in the hands of its people and
those they choose as their leaders. We in the
international community also have a great
responsibility and interest in ensuring that East Timor
can fulfil its potential. We owe no less to the people of
East Timor. Ireland wishes the new nation well and
pledges to continue to offer our strong support in the
tasks that lie ahead.

