Ms. Laj (Denmark): Let me start by thanking the
Special Coordinator, Mr. De Soto, for his briefing to us

today. Let me also say that Denmark fully aligns itself
with the statement to be delivered later by the
Permanent Representative of Finland on behalf of the
European Union. Allow me to make the following
remarks.

When our ministers met in this Chamber a month
ago to discuss the situation in the Middle East, they
were all deeply concerned about the deteriorating
situation. In that regard, we regret the continuous loss
of civilian life, but the ministers also expressed hope
that, with concerted efforts, the peace process could be
restarted. They agreed that it was essential to seek to
overcome the growing sense of desperation through
credible prospects for a better future for the people of
the Middle East, and they reconfirmed that a
comprehensive settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict
should have at its core a negotiated two-State solution
to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

The challenge for the parties to the conflict, as
well as for the international community, is to ensure
that we embark on a process leading towards lasting
peace in the Middle East. The framework is already in
place through the Arab peace initiative, the
performance-based road map for a permanent two-State
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, as well as
relevant Security Council resolutions, all based on the
principle of land for peace. We welcome the Quartet's
intentions to reinforce its activities, and we hope that
the Quartet will soon succeed in that endeavour.

It is now, as it has been so often before, up to the
parties to avail themselves of this window of
opportunity. We have continuously stressed the
necessity of an early resumption of dialogue between
the two parties with a view to relaunching negotiations
on the basis of the road map.

We have continuously expressed support for
President Abbas. We encourage his efforts to promote
national unity and the formation of a Government with
a political platform reflecting the Quartet principles.
Such a Government is crucial for the governing of the
Palestinian territories. Moreover, such a Government is
essential if the international community is to have a
Viable Palestinian partner in the efforts to support the
relaunching of the peace process and to strengthen the
capacities of the Palestinian institutions. The internal
strife between Palestinian factions only hampers such
efforts and is not serving the interests of the Palestinian
people. We therefore call on all factions to bring an end

to their internal strife. We also encourage regional
partners to do their utmost to support efforts to restart
the peace process.

The humanitarian situation in the Palestinian
territories remains of serious concern. There is an
urgent need to foster positive developments in the
Palestinian economy. It is urgent that the Agreement on
Movement and Access be implemented fully and that
the Palestinian tax and customs revenue, currently
withheld by Israel, be released. Those revenues could
be channelled through the temporary international
mechanism, which has proved its capacity to target
aide directly to the Palestinian people.

However, to be successful, such steps must be
accompanied by the immediate release of the captured
Israeli soldier. The Palestinian ministers and legislators
in Israeli custody must also be freed immediately, and
there must be an end to violence. Palestinian factions
must immediately stop their attacks, just as all Israeli
military activities in the Palestinian territories must
cease.

In conclusion, I would like to underline the
importance of making the best use of the current
opportunity to restart the peace process. The parties
must take the lead; the neighbours, including Syria,
must constructively play along; and the international
community must do what it can to provide the
necessary incentives.

