Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, I wish to thank Under-Secretary-General
Gue'henno and Executive Director Piot for their
comprehensive briefings. I wish also to thank the Joint
United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS)
for its report on the subject of this agenda item. The
briefings helped us to understand the status of the
international community's implementation of
resolution 1308 (2000) over the past five years. The
recommendations put forward are highly enlightening
and deserve serious consideration by the Security
Council.

In recent years, the international community has
been increasingly concerned about the issue of
HIV/AIDS, particularly its disastrous affects. AIDS has
not only constituted a major threat to human life and
health, but has also seriously affected the economic
development and social stability of the countries and
regions concerned. Thus it has become one of the most
important non-traditional security issues. The Security
Council, in accordance with its mandate, has therefore
been devoting increased attention to the issue of
peacekeepers and HIV/AIDS and to the impact of
AIDS on peace and security.

China welcomes the series of measures
undertaken by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO), in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions, aimed at improving
HIV/AIDS awareness programmes for peacekeepers,
establishing the post of HIV/AIDS policy adviser and
revising the code of conduct for peacekeepers. We
believe that all those measures will serve to protect the
safety of peacekeepers and to ensure the smooth
conduct of peacekeeping missions.

Over the years, UNAIDS has undertaken many
positive efforts, has contributed to international efforts
and has played an important role in coordinating with
and assisting United Nations missions in preventing
HIV/AIDS in peacekeeping operations. China
welcomes all those measures and hopes that DPKO can
continue its active coordination and cooperation with
UNAIDS and other international organizations.

China supports the draft presidential statement
submitted by the Greek delegation and wishes to thank
Greece for its efforts in that regard.

