Mr. Miyet (Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations) (interpretation from French): It is a great
honour for me to set this precedent in the Security Council
of being able to speak to members from a seat that is not
customarily mine. If possible I shall nonetheless endeavour
to provide the Council with the same quality of
information as in the past.

The third progress report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Observer Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNOMSIL) has just been issued in document
S/1998/1176, in accordance with resolution 1181 (1998),
which established the United Nations Observer Mission in
Sierra Leone in July 1998. The report under consideration
describes the political, military and security developments
in the country since the second progress report was issued
on 16 October 1998. It also describes the humanitarian
aspects of issues relating to human rights and to the
civilian police component of the Mission and submits the
Secretary-General's recommendations on future activities
for the Mission.

With regard to the military and security situation in
the country, in general, as noted in the report, the
Government of Sierra Leone has continued to consolidate
its political authority during the period under review. The
military and security situation, however, continues to be
extremely volatile and unpredictable because of the
persistent resistance of elements of the former military
junta, which are especially active in the east and north of
the country. The Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) Monitoring Group (ECOMOG), and
the Civil Defence Forces of Sierra Leone, which are
assisting the Government in the restoration of law and
order in the country, are currently overstretched and, as
the report states, in great need of logistical support.

Since the drafting of the report was completed a few
days ago, new developments have taken place at the
security level. Elements of the former junta in the north-
west of the country have advanced southwards, attacking
villages again, killing and mutilating civilians, looting and
again destroying property. Thousands of people have been
displaced or have fled to the capital, Freetown, for safety.
Despite this renewed military activity on the part of
elements of the former junta, which repeats a familiar
pattern, ECOMOG now states that the rebels have been
repulsed and that the roads leading from the capital are
now clear. There has also been a rise in tension in other
parts of the country owing to rebel activity, especially in
the north-east and east.

As the Council is aware, part of the Mission's
mandate is to assist the Government to carry out its
programme to disarm, demobilize and reintegrate into
civil society all Sierra Leonean fighters, including former
members of the Republic of Sierra Leone Military Forces

 

who had surrendered to ECOMOG. In view of the uncertain
security situation, most of those former soldiers have now
been reinducted to fight alongside ECOMOG and the Civil
Defence Forces against the rebels.

With regard to the Mission itself, the Security Council
authorized the deployment of up to 70 military observers,
as well as a medical unit of 15 people. We are
endeavouring to bring this about, although it depends on the
permanence of the security situation in the country and on
the extent to which the Government is able to carry out its
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme.
Since the security situation has not improved, and the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme
has not progressed, only 40 military observers and the
medical team have been deployed to date. The military
observers are currently based in Freetown, Hastings, Lungi,
Bo, Kenema and Makeni, where they are co-deployed with
ECOMOG brigades.

The Mission has also deployed five civilian police
officers to advise the Government on the restructuring of
the Sierra Leonean police force, which was widely
discredited because of the links that it had previously
established with the junta, and which is suffering from a
severe shortage of the resources needed to carry out its
task. In this context, the civilian police component of the
Mission is working very closely with police officers
deployed by the Commonwealth to work with the
Government on specific projects.

(spoke in English)
I turn to the question of human rights.

In addition to describing the human rights violations
committed by the rebels, the human rights section of the
Secretary-General's report also describes the treason trials
conducted by the Government against civilian and military
supporters of the junta now in custody. A total of 96
persons have now been tried in five separate trials in
Freetown, of whom 77 have been sentenced to death. On
19 October the Government executed by firing squad 24
military officers who had been condemned to death by a
court martial without the right of appeal. All the civilian
convicts are now appealing the verdict or sentence,
including the leader of the Revolutionary United Front,
Corporal Foday Sankoh, who was found guilty of treason
by the court on 23 October. On 16 November the
Secretary-General wrote to President Kabbah, appealing to
him to give every consideration, once the appeals process
had been exhausted, to extending mercy to those who had
been condemned to death.

The human rights section of the report also describes
a number of technical cooperation initiatives undertaken
to improve domestic observance of human rights in Sierra
Leone. In order to strengthen UNOMSIL's human rights
capacity, the Secretary-General is planning to deploy a
further five human rights officers to Sierra Leone.

With regard to the humanitarian situation, the efforts
of the humanitarian community to maintain access to
populations in need, especially in the north and the east,
have been disrupted further in the last few days by
a spate of rebel attacks near Freetown, which has caused
thousands of villagers to flee and has rendered the roads
unsafe. There is general insecurity on the roads in all
parts of the country. The report estimates that more than
300,000 people have now been displaced within the
country since February 1998, an increase of nearly 60,000
since the second progress report. In the wake of recent
fighting near Freetown, travel outside the capital for
United Nations and humanitarian personnel is now
conducted only by air and only to destinations where
ECOMOG is present and confirms safety upon arrival.

Yesterday, the 1999 consolidated inter-agency appeal
for Sierra Leone was launched in Geneva in the amount
of $28 million. The appeal was prepared by United
Nations agencies, in consultation with Governments,
national and international non- governmental organizations
and donors, and comprises 29 projects ranging from
immediate life-saving needs to longer-term projects to
promote peace and sustainable socio-economic
development.

On 30 July 1998, the Secretariat convened a Special
Conference on Sierra Leone, in which pledges were made
to support the Government and ECOMOG's efforts. The
Conference was followed by a meeting of the Contact
Group on Sierra Leone in London on 5 November. In
Freetown, a Government working group, chaired by the
Minister of Finance, Development and Economic
Planning, Mr. James Jonah, is following up on the
pledges and commitments made in order to ensure speedy
disbursement.

Taking all these elements into account, the
Secretary-General, as can be seen from the report, is
recommending that the Security Council extend the
mandate of UNOMSIL by a further six months when its
mandate expires on 13 January 1999.

 

