Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): Let me firstjoin others in
thanking Ms. Fatou Bensouda for her briefing.

We have taken note of the twenty-ninth report of
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) on the investigation of the situation in Darfur,
submitted pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005).

My statement today will focus on three key issues,
namely, the situation in Darfur, accountability for
human rights violations and ICC proceedings.

With regard to the first issue, the security
situation in Darfur remains relatively stable, with little
disruption to the trends that have emerged since 2016.
Intercommunal clashes continue to decline, thanks to
the extension of State authority and mediation efforts
by local authorities and the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).

Meanwhile, Darfuri rebel groups have already
lost their foothold. One remaining armed group
inside Darfur has been gradually fragmented and
its operational capabilities have been significantly
reduced. The special report of the Chairperson of
the African Union Commission and the Secretary-
General on the strategic assessment of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(S/2019/445) attests to those facts. Of course, we are
cognizant of the many persistent challenges, many of
which we raised in the Council's briefing on UNAMID
a few days ago (see S/PV.8549).

The Darfur peace process is stalling. Several
conflict drivers are yet to be addressed. Internally
displaced persons (IDPs) are confronted by security
challenges, as well as a lack of access to land and
economic opportunities. My delegation continues
to observe very carefully developments in the Sudan
and their potential impact on the security situation
in Darfur.

Secondly, Indonesia stresses the need for the
protection of civilians and the strict observance of
international human rights and humanitarian law. It
is deeply troubling that human rights violations and
abuses continue to occur across Darfur, targeting those
who are most vulnerable, including IDPs, women and
children. We note with concern reports that such abuses
tend to be underreported due to fear and restricted
access. My delegation will never tolerate the use of
violence against innocent civilians. We extend our
deepest sympathies and solidarity to the victims for
their suffering, as well as to the people of the Sudan,
who continue to face the impact of the conflicts in their
country. We particularly see the need to ensure that the
Sudanese regain their confidence in law enforcement
and judicial institutions. To that end, accountability
must always be upheld. No efforts should be spared to
bring the perpetrators of human rights violations and
abuses to justice.

That brings me to my third point. Efforts to
pursue justice must pay due regard to the wider efforts
to achieve peace in Darfur. While peace cannot be
complete and sustainable without justice, justice
cannot prosper in the absence of peace. Actions taken
by the international community must not jeopardize
the ongoing dialogue among Sudanese stakeholders.
We recognize and underline the responsibility of the
Security Council to ensure that the Government of the
Sudan complies with the provisions of resolution 1593
(2005). At the same time, in accordance with the Rome
Statute, the role of the ICC should be complementary to
national criminal jurisdiction.

In that regard, it is also imperative for the
international community to continue to support the
Government of the Sudan through various capacity-
building measures in the area of the justice system. My
delegation believes that the referral of the situation in
Darfur and actions taken by the Prosecutor shall neither
nullify the principle of complementarity nor prevent the
Sudanese national court from invoking its jurisdiction
against the perpetrators of human rights violations
and abuses. Indonesia therefore calls on the Sudanese
Government to take up those responsibilities promptly
and properly.

