The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as Minister for Foreign Affairs of New
Zealand.
I would like to start by thanking our distinguished
briefers for their informative contributions and the
heads of Government and Ministers, who have come to
New York to participate in this debate. Of the 44 small
island developing States (SIDS), only six have served on
the Security Council. We called for this debate in order
to give the Council an opportunity that it rarely has to
hear what security looks like to small island developing
States, and to give small island States, which constitute
nearly a fifth of the United Nations membership, a
chance to have their voices heard in the Council.

New Zealand is a Pacific country with a significant
stake in the peace and security of the small island
developing States in our region. By their very size,
isolation and nature, SIDS often find themselves
walking a thin line between success and failure. Let us
look at some key characteristics. SIDS are small: three
quarters of them have a population of less than one
million. The majority in our region have populations
below a half a million. They are islands with exclusive
economic zones significantly larger than their land
masses and are often without the capacity to conduct
surveillance of their zones - let alone defend them.
They are developing: most receive some level of
development assistance to balance the books. Their
size and capacity limitations can make them a target
for transnational criminal networks, including those
involved in piracy or the smuggling of drugs, arms and
people.

Today I am sure we will hear directly from
representatives about the impact of climate change - as
we have just now heard from our briefers - and of
natural disasters on small island developing States. The
recent cyclone in Vanuatu caused $360 million worth
of damage - approximately 45 per cent of Vanuatu's
gross domestic product (GDP), and Hurricane Sandy
cost $315 million in damage across the Caribbean, but
the important point here is notjust the impact of climate
change or natural disasters themselves. Rather, it is their
impact on countries that are already vulnerable. Most
SIDS simply do not have the economic diversity or the
resources to handle major shocks. Being a small island
developing State is to have an inbuilt force multiplier
whenever a natural disaster or man-made conflict
strikes, and such security and development challenges
can have regional consequences.

New Zealand views its own peace and security as
being directly affected by the prosperity and stability
of the SIDS in our region, the Pacific. Therefore, the
important strategic question for the Council and for
the wider United Nations community is, in my view:
how do we take meaningful steps to make SIDS less
vulnerable in the face of threats to their security from
natural disasters and man-made challenges. I want to
discuss just two areas in which we have been working
with partners in our region to increase resilience.

Firstly, we can build the resilience of SIDS by
helping them to derive full benefit from the sustainable
use of their often limited resource base. The Pacific's
largest asset is the only truly healthy tuna fishery in the

world, which should be used to make its owners more
economically sustainable than they are today. Last year,
the value of the tuna caught in the exclusive economic
zones ofthe Pacific countries was $3.4 billion - double
the development assistance to the region from all
sources. An additional approximately $400 million
of tuna is estimated to have been taken from the zone
illegally or through under-reporting. They - the
Pacific owners - receive approximately 14 per cent of
the market value of the resource. Many other players
clip the ticket along the way.

My point is simple: SIDS need the international
community to cooperate to ensure that they receive a
fair return from their economic assets, and we need
a concerted international effort to stamp out illegal
fishing and underreporting practices: They amount to
literally stealing from some of the poorest people on
the planet. For the SIDS in our region the practical

impact of achieving those goals would be - quite
simply - transformational for their prosperity and
security.

My second point relates to an equally
transformational change that can be made on the other
side of the economic ledger: dealing with the energy
insecurity caused by dependence on hugely expensive
fossil fuels. The Pacific region is, in common with
most of the SIDS, heavily dependent on diesel fuel for
electricity generation, yet a liter or gallon of diesel in the
Pacific costs more than double what one would pay for
it here in New York. Up to one third of the total import
bill of SIDS is the cost ofoil for electricity - on average
10 percent of their GDPs. That is why my country has
been at the forefront of an attempt to quickly move the
small island States in the Pacific from fossil fuels to
renewable energy.

I can report that we are making good progress.
When one is small, one can make things happen quickly.
All three atolls in the Tokelau Islands - previously
wholly dependent upon fossil fuels for electricity - are
now effectively 100 per cent renewable through the
installation of solar generation. All five islands in
the Northern Cook Islands have been, as of this year,
moved from 100 per cent dependency on fossil fuels
to 100 per cent renewable. Most of the Southern Cook
Islands will follow in the next year. By the end of this
year, all of the islands in Tuvalu, except Funifuti, will
be 100 per cent renewable, and, in more populated parts
of the region, significant progress has been made in
substituting renewables - mostly solar - for diesel-
generated power in Tonga, Samoa, and the Cook Islands
capital of Rarotonga.

More recently, we have become involved in
transporting some of the renewable energy skills
acquired in our region to some of the States in the
Caribbean and Indian Ocean. These are not only
life-changing developments in their own right. They
also make a huge contribution to making small island
developing States more resilient and less vulnerable to
economic shocks and serious acts of nature.

In conclusion, I want to revert to a point I made
earlier. Being small has its disadvantages, but it has one
huge advantage: one can make things happen quickly.
That is the approach we need to take in ensuring that
small island developing States become better equipped
to deal with the challenges to their security today.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the other members of the Council.

