Mr. Grant (Canada) (spoke in French): At the outset,
allow me, on behalf of the Government of Canada, to
extend our deepest condolences to the families and
friends of those persons killed in the recent attack in
Ouagadougou, among them six Canadian humanitarian
aid workers and volunteers. We wish a speedy recovery
to all those who were injured.

Canada firmly condemns in the strongest terms
all acts that threaten the safety of civilians, including
those who strive to improve the lives of vulnerable
people around the world. Working in challenging and
dangerous situations, their efforts to establish lasting
ties between peoples, while building a more just and
peaceful world, will never cease. The attack I just
mentioned is yet again another reminder of the danger
that terrorism poses around the world for Canadians and
for all our citizens throughout the world. It is reminder
of the need to work with partners to deal with global
threats.

(spoke in English)

I would like to thank Uruguay for its initiative to
hold this open debate today and for allowing delegations
broad scope to raise our concerns with regard to
the protection of civilians. It is essential that the
Security Council devote its attention to the mounting
protection challenges. Canada would therefore also
like to acknowledge and welcome the Council's recent
presidential statement (S/PRST/2015/23), which will
enable States to more regularly and comprehensively
address those concerns.

Canada is deeply concerned by the scale on which
civilian populations are suffering, and often targeted, in
armed conflicts by State as well as non-State actors. The
growing complexity of armed conflicts, marked by the
fragmentation of armed groups, asymmetrical warfare
and the regionalization of conflicts, demonstrates the
need for sustained international attention to meet the
protection needs of populations affected by violence
and armed conflict. In too many places, men, women
and children are victims of indiscriminate attacks,
sexual violence, the denial of humanitarian assistance
and other violations of international law. Warring
parties today are exhibiting what the Secretary-General
has rightly called a casual disregard for human life and
dignity, and with it, unacceptable contempt for the
rules of war.

It is Canada's View that the fundamental issue is not
that there are legal or normative gaps, but rather that
there is an alarming rate of failure to fully and properly
implement international humanitarian law obligations.
The full implementation of international humanitarian
law is essential for the protection of civilians during
times of armed conflict. It is therefore essential that the
international community and the Council re-energize
their efforts to ensure compliance with international
humanitarian law, enable humanitarian access, promote
and protect human rights and, most important, prevent
and resolve conflict.

(spoke in French)

We hope that the upcoming World Humanitarian
Summit will allow us to call attention to protection
issues. The Summit will provide an opportunity to
examine key aspects of actions aimed at promoting
the protection of civilians in armed conflicts, such as
compliance with international humanitarian law, the
fight against sexual violence, as well as access to safe
and unhindered humanitarian aid. It will allow us to
prepare the ground for better responses to humanitarian
and protection needs, notably in confronting the
current crisis of historic proportions provoked by the
displacement of populations fleeing violence.

Finally, while national Governments bear the
responsibility for protecting civilians, the United
Nations and the Council also play an important role
in that area, in addition to having the necessary tools
to prevent conflicts and to respond to and resolve
them. Humanitarian operations currently under way
in Madaya and other besieged communities must be
sustained and expanded, but they are just one example
of what can be done. The recommendations of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations and
promising initiatives such as the Kigali Principles on
the Protection of Civilians can guide us in strengthening
our capacity to protect civilians in the field.

Moreover, we urge the Council, in its resolutions
concerning conflict and the protection of civilians,
to apply an approach that addresses the gender
perspective. One of the best ways to protect women,
men and children is to take into account the various
impacts that conflicts have on each of those groups, as
well as the different contributions they can make to the
prevention and resolution of conflicts.

(spoke in English)

In conclusion, Canada emphasizes that we must
summon the will to act in the face of the challenges
before us. People must not lose hope. As daunting as
the circumstances may be, we see encouraging signs
that must be nurtured and opportunities that must be
seized. We thank the Uruguayan presidency for this
opportunity to express our concerns. We look forward
to collaborating on renewed efforts to enhance the
protection of civilians.

