Mr. Mugoya (Uganda): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, and the delegation
of China on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I thank you for
organizing this important and timely debate on the
need for a comprehensive strategy for the realization of
peace and security in Somalia. I also thank the
Secretary-General for his statement and his
commitment to Somalia.

We welcome the participation in today's debate
by Prime Minister Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed,
Mr. Boubacar Diarra, Special Representative of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission for
Somalia, and Ambassador Mahiga, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General.

Uganda commends the efforts made by
Transitional Federal Government (TFG) and the
Somali people towards restoring peace, security and
stability in the country, in spite of the challenges. We
are convinced that durable peace and stability in
Somalia is attainable. What is needed now, more than
ever before, is a comprehensive approach that
addresses the political, security, rule of law and
socio-economic dimensions. That approach should take
into account the fact that the primary responsibility for
durable peace and stability in Somalia remains with its
Government and people. Support by the international
community in that regard is key.

We encourage the TFG to intensify its efforts in
reaching out to those groups willing to cooperate in a
spirit of reconciliation and inclusiveness within the
framework of the Djibouti Agreement. It is also
essential to intensify efforts to complete the
outstanding transitional tasks and ensure that the
constitution-making process is completed in a
consultative and timely manner.

Uganda is encouraged by the initiatives aimed at
building the capacity of the Transitional Federal
Institutions, especially in the security sector. However,
more needs to be done to build on the gradual but
steady progress made by the Somali Security Forces,
with the support of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), in consolidating security and
stability in Mogadishu and beyond. That will facilitate
the creation of the necessary conditions for the
political process to take place.

On the problem of piracy, we reiterate the need
for a holistic approach that includes addressing its root
causes.

Resolute action must be taken against armed
groups, especially Al-Shabaab, that commit attacks,
including terrorist attacks against the TFG, AMISOM,
civilians and humanitarian workers. Action must also
be taken against spoilers within and outside Somalia
who continue to undermine the peace process.

Furthermore, Somalia requires sustained
financial, material and technical support for the
delivery of basic services and reconstruction and for
setting up basic economic infrastructure in order to
improve the livelihood of its population.
We call upon the international community to
redouble its commitment and support for Somalia,
including at the next meeting of the International
Contact Group on Somalia, scheduled for later this
month in Kampala. We welcome the announcement by
the United Kingdom of an additional contribution to
the Trust Fund for Somalia without caveats, as well as
that of Japan to provide training and facilities for the
Somali police.

Finally, we commend Special Representative
Ambassador Augustine Mahiga and African Union
Special Representative Baboucar Diarra and their
teams for their work under challenging circumstances.

