The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Somalia in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the discussion on the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Hashi
(Somalia) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now continue its consideration of the item
on its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Somalia, contained in document S/2002/ 1201.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council, recalling its
previous decisions concerning the situation in
Somalia, in particular the statement of its
President of 28 March 2002 (S/PRST/2002/8),
resolution 733 (1992) of 23 January 1992 and
resolution 1425 (2002) of 22 July 2002, and
taking note of the report of the Secretary-General
of 25 October 2002 (S/2002/1201), reaffirms its
commitment to a comprehensive and lasting
settlement of the situation in Somalia and
reaffirms its respect for the sovereignty, territorial
integrity, political independence and unity of the

country, consistent with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
"The Security Council firmly supports the
unified approach of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) to national
reconciliation in Somalia, and reiterates its strong
support for the Somalia National Reconciliation
Process and the ongoing Somalia National
Reconciliation Conference in Eldoret, Kenya, as
sponsored by IGAD. The Council urges all parties
throughout Somalia to participate in the process
in accordance with the framework established by
IGAD, and expects the decisions adopted
throughout the process to be abided by and
implemented expeditiously, including the
Declaration on Cessation of Hostilities and the
Structures and Principles of the Somalia National
Reconciliation Process, signed by all delegates in
Eldoret on 27 October 2002 (hereinafter referred to as the 'Eldoret Declaration').

"The Security Council welcomes the
Eldoret Declaration as an important step towards
the overriding objective of ending the violence
and the suffering of the Somali people and
bringing them the peace they so dearly deserve.
The Council calls on all parties to cease all acts
of violence and to respect the cessation of
hostilities.

"The Security Council further welcomes the
Joint Declaration issued by the involved parties in
Mogadishu on 2 December 2002 (hereinafter referred to as the 'Mogadishu Declaration'),
including their stated commitment to cease all
hostilities and jointly bring an end to all killings
and abductions of innocent people and hijacking
of public transportation in the city, as well as to
solve all differences through dialogue and
goodwill. The Council notes the further
agreement reached on 4 December 2002 by
involved parties to cooperate through peaceful
means in order, inter alia, to reopen the
International Airport and Seaport in Mogadishu
and to restore public services in the city.

"The Security Council notes with
satisfaction the commencement of the second
phase of the Somalia National Reconciliation
Process in Eldoret on 2 December 2002 and
welcomes this as a significant step forward. The

Council will continue to follow this Process with
keen interest and strongly encourages all parties
to continue to participate constructively, in
accordance with the framework established by the
IGAD Technical Committee, in a spirit of
tolerance and mutual accommodation during each
phase of the Process.

"The Security Council commends the
Government of Kenya for its special commitment
as host and IGAD's Technical Committee,
comprised of the three frontline States, Kenya,
Ethiopia and Djibouti, for its crucial role in
facilitating the Process. The Council strongly
encourages their continued active and positive
role in promoting the Process.

"The Security Council encourages Member
States in a position to do so urgently to provide
further contributions in support of the Process
through the IGAD Technical Committee.

"The Security Council, condemning recent
attacks on humanitarian personnel and civilians in
Somalia, welcomes the agreement by all
delegates in Eldoret to guarantee the security of
all humanitarian and development personnel and
installations, and urges them to take practical
steps to grant safe and unfettered access to
humanitarian personnel in their efforts to deliver
assistance throughout Somalia.

"The Security Council expresses serious
concern regarding the situation of displaced
persons in Somalia and urges relevant authorities
and Member States to provide support for the
return and reintegration of Somali refugees and
the provision of urgent humanitarian assistance
to, and protection for, those who have been
internally displaced. It notes with particular
concern the situation of 150,000 internally
displaced persons in areas of Mogadishu that
remain inaccessible to humanitarian workers. The
Council calls on the armed factions to provide
immediate safe access to these and other
vulnerable populations throughout the country,
consistent with the Eldoret Declaration and the
Mogadishu Declaration.

"The Security Council calls again on all
Member States, entities and individuals to respect
fully the arms embargo established by resolution
733 (1992), as strengthened by resolution 1425
(2002), and urges all Somali and regional parties
as well as Government officials and other actors
contacted outside the region to cooperate fully
with the Panel of Experts in its quest for
information related to the embargo, in accordance
with resolution 1425 (2002) and article 2.5 of the
Eldoret Declaration. The Council appreciates the
the

Panel's oral briefing on 14 November 2002 to the
Council, through the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 751 (1992)
concerning Somalia, and looks forward to the
Panel's written report at the end of its mandated
period.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to continue putting in place, in
a coherent manner, preparatory activities on the
ground for a comprehensive post-conflict peace-
building mission in Somalia once security
conditions permit, as stipulated in the statement
by the President of the Council of 28 March
2002.

"The Security Council recognizes that a
comprehensive post-conflict programme for
disarmament, demobilization, rehabilitation and
reintegration will be an important contribution for
peace and stability in Somalia.

"The Security Council encourages the
Secretary-General to support actively the IGAD-
sponsored Somalia National Reconciliation
Process and the ongoing Conference in Eldoret.

"The Security Council expresses its
commitment to assist the parties in the
implementation of the steps and conclusions for
peace, as adopted throughout the Somalia
National Reconciliation Process."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2002/35.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.

