The President: Protocol requires me to thank the
Russian representative for his statement. I will turn to
some of his allegations in a moment. In my capacity
as President, may I remind members of the Security
Council and other speakers of presidential note
S/2017/507 and that they should keep their remarks to a
maximum of five minutes.

I will now speak in my national capacity - and I
will certainly do that.

I would like to join other speakers in thanking
John Ging and paying tribute to humanitarian workers:
they work in extraordinarily difficult circumstances. I
also want to reject the allegations we have just heard
against the Department for Political Affairs. To the best
of my knowledge, everybody in the United Nations is
trying to do their best for the people of Syria and for
the political process.

I think it is clear from everything we have heard
today that the situation, especially in Idlib, is dire. All
of the purported achievements on the list read out by
the Russian representative are chimera. They will not
help the people of Idlib. There are 3 million civilians
at risk in Idlib, and yet the Syrian regime is escalating
its military action against them. I would be grateful to
know which forces have been relocated to Idlib, and
I would like to say that we will hold the commanders
responsible for attacks on civilians.

I would also like to echo the words of the
representatives of the United States and France. The
United Kingdom, too, will respond appropriately if
the Al-Assad regime repeats its illegal use of chemical
weapons, which has already had such devastating
humanitarian consequences for the Syrian population.

I have three questions relating to the humanitarian
situation. They centre around the fact that United
Nations convoys have not had access to 6,000 internally
displaced persons in Damascus and eastern Ghouta for
two months, that 1 million people remain in hard-to-
reach areas, where only 11 per cent of inter-agency
convoys are able to conduct needs assessments and
deliver aid, and that the United Nations continues not
to be given the necessary security assurances so that
humanitarian convoys can go through the Al-Ramtha
border crossing from Jordan, which is in violation, as we
have heard, of resolution 2393 (2017). I hope the Syrian
representative will be able to give us an explanation in
his remarks.

The Russian representative referred to refugees
going home. I think the ongoing military operations, the
lack of humanitarian access, the bombing of schools,
the arbitrary arrests and the bombing of hospitals show
exactly why the situation is not right for refugees to go
home en masse.

Mr. Ging stated that Idlib represented a scale
that we have not yet seen. We are used to superlatives
when it comes to Syria, and we are used to them being
surpassed. He also mentioned Kofi Annan, and, like
others, I think the best tribute we can offer Mr. Annan
is to continue our efforts to accelerate the political
process and bring peace to Syria.

I do want to make a point reconstruction. As
our Syrian colleague set out, and as echoed by every
European Union member State and by the United
States, there will be no reconstruction assistance until
there is a credible and ongoing political process. There
will not be a Marshall Plan for Syria; there will not be a
Brussels plan for Syria. If there is any plan, it will need
to be in Moscow and a Putin plan.

I would now like to turn to some of the other
statements made by the Russian Ambassador. The
Russian Ministry of Defense today gave a briefing in
which it said - and this has been echoed by members
of his own Mission - that the United Kingdom
and the White Helmets were involved in preparing
chemical-weapons attacks against the Syrian people. I
did not use the word "comical" in my press briefing.
What I said was that, even by the egregious standards
of Russian propaganda, this is an extraordinary
allegation. It is wholly untrue. And it has been denied
by the commander of the British forces in Kuwait, who
is supporting the coalition. I am happy to repeat that
denial now. And I am happy to rebut any allegation that
the British Government or British forces engage with
terrorists on the ground in Syria.
The only plausible explanation we have a for why
these stories are being floated at the time, other than
to increase the amount of fake news in the system, is
as a smoke screen for a possible impending attack by
the Syrian regime once again against its own people in
Idlib. I repeat the statement that I, the French and the
Americans made earlier about responding appropriately:
we have no information about chlorine being delivered
and, therefore, if the Russian Ministry does have that,
the most probable explanation is that it as a pre-emptive
attempt to set the agenda and the narrative for an
appalling attack to come. I would appeal to Russia to
use all its persuasive powers to convince the Syrian
authorities not to attack their own population and never
again to use prohibited chemical weapons.

I would draw the Council's attention to the fact that
we have had a letter from the Syrian authorities about
warning of an impending attack. I would recall for the
Council that, on 10 March, the Syrian authorities wrote
to the Security Council to warn of a chemical attack
in eastern Ghouta, and one month later, on 10 April,
such an attack took place and is attributed to the
Syrian authorities.

I repeat again our abhorrence of chemical weapons.
And I repeat gain that the British Government will
always uphold its commitment to prohibit the use of
such weapons and work with our international partners
to ensure that that prohibition is upheld.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.

