Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): May I
offer my congratulations on your assumption, Sir, of
the Council presidency for the month of September. I
also add my thanks to those of others to Ambassador
Puri and his team for their stewardship of the Council
in the month of August.

I should like to thank Ambassador Osorio for his
briefing to the Council today and for his report on the
vital work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006) and its Panel of Experts.

The Committee's report makes clear that Iran
continues to violate the Council's sanctions as a
proliferator of nuclear and conventional weapons alike.
The Iranians themselves say as much. In August, they
announced that they had begun the transfer of
centrifuges to their site at Qom in order to triple the
capacity to enrich uranium to 20 per cent. This directly
contravenes six Security Council resolutions requiring
Iran to suspend enrichment. It also illustrates how
inconsistent with peaceful purposes Iran's illegal
enrichment programme is. There is no credible civilian
justification for producing this much 20 per cent-
enriched uranium.

The latest report of the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) makes
clear that once again Iran has not fully cooperated with
the Agency and highlights his "increasing concerns" at
the possible military dimensions to Iran's programme.

This reporting period has demonstrated the
continuing need for vigilance on violations of
sanctions. In this regard, we reported with France,
Germany and the United States a violation of
paragraph 9 of resolution 1929 (2010) - namely, the
launch of the Rassad-l satellite, which is dependent on
ballistic missile technology. We request that the
Committee take forward investigation of this and all
pending violations as a matter of urgency, with the
close assistance of the Panel of Experts.

Quick and thorough investigation of violations
will contribute to a clearer picture of the broader
pattern of violations by Iran. This will enable the wider
membership to focus on areas for particular vigilance.
It is important that Member States be equipped with
the knowledge and expertise to identify and act upon
suspected violations. We therefore welcome the Panel's
efforts to raise awareness of steps that all Member
States are required to take to implement sanctions and
to foster greater knowledge-sharing and collaboration
between States.

We welcome the implementation assistance
notices that the Panel of Experts has produced and
which are before the Committee for consideration.
These will be of great benefit in raising awareness
among Member States of their responsibilities and the
actions they can take to prevent further violations. We
look forward to quick agreement and publication of
these notices on the Committee website.

We regret that the Panel's report has not yet been
made public. The Committee is denying the wider
membership of the United Nations access to this
valuable assessment, which will assist with the
implementation of sanctions. The Committee should
agree to release the report as a matter of urgency.

We remain committed to engaging Iran to address
these concerns, but it is clear that Iran continues to
proliferate and to pursue a nuclear weapons
programme. Iran has given us no reason to believe that
engagement on a nuclear programme will be
reciprocated in a meaningful way. If the dual-track
strategy is to succeed, rigorous implementation by
States of the measures contained in resolution 1929
(2010) and the Council's prior resolutions is therefore
essential.

