Mr. Choi: During the recent Security Council
consultations on Cote d'Ivoire on 17 March, I reported
that, for the immediate future, two issues -
reunification and elections - were likely to dominate
the Ivorian peace process.

Indeed, since last March, the pairing of
reunification and elections has emerged as the
governing dynamic of Ivorian politics. Unfortunately,
it has produced a political impasse, which has proved
to be as complex as it is delicate. The reason for this
impasse is that the three major protagonists of the
Ivorian crisis are now dealing with their core interests.
The presidential camp wants reunification before
elections; the opposition wants elections before
reunification; and the Forces nouvelles wants
identification before reunification. Moreover, by virtue
of their ambiguities, the provisions of the
Ouagadougou Political Agreement allow each of the
three major protagonists to claim legitimacy in support
of their respective position.

This political stalemate is hardly encouraging.
Indeed, during the eight years since the outbreak of the
crisis, perennial delays in implementing the various
peace agreements have been a source of deep
frustration for the Ivorian people as well as the
international community. They are all the more so
since the elections appeared to be within our grasp
until several months ago. The full ownership of the
peace process by the Ivorian parties, as defined in the
Ouagadougou Political Agreement, comes with an
obligation to make it work. The events of February and
March 2010 demonstrated that the continuing failure to
hold elections in Cote d'Ivoire and to materialize the
reunification of the country contributes to heightening
tensions and hampers constitutional, political,
economic and social normalization.

It is against this backdrop that a technical
assessment mission visited Cote d'Ivoire in April with
a View to formulating options for the future of the
United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI).
The mission considered four options: first,
strengthening UNOCI's mandate to organize elections;
secondly, withdrawing the Operation; thirdly,
maintaining the status quo; and, fourthly, rationalizing
the Operation's mandate and configuration.

The first option, the organization of elections by
UNOCI, has been strongly recommended by the
opposition. The second option, the withdrawal of
10-38676
UNOCI, has been recommended by some observers
who claim that the perennial delays of elections and
reunification would no longer justify UNOCI's
presence in C6te d'Ivoire. The third option, the status
quo, has been recommended by the Forces nouvelles
and the Facilitator on the grounds that, despite the
failure to produce elections, the Ouagadougou Political
Agreement has made a considerable contribution to the
stabilization of the situation in Cote d'Ivoire and to
significant achievements, such as the mobile courts
operation, the identification operation and the
production of the provisional list, among others. The
fourth option, the rationalization of UNOCI's mandate
and configuration, has been recommended by some
informed experts on Cote d'Ivoire.

Amid this complex and delicate situation, and
after much reflection, it is recommended, as indicated
in the twenty-fourth report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire
(S/2010/245), which is before the members of the
Council, that UNOCI maintain the current strength of
its military and police components until the end of
2010. Should this recommendation meet with the
approval of the Security Council, the Secretariat would
conduct a review of the Ivorian peace process and
submit further recommendations on the future of
UNOCI before the end of this year.

Meanwhile, UNOCI shall maintain three priority
objectives for the immediate future, as reported in my
previous briefing (see S/PV.6284). These are, first,
10-38676

maintaining peace and stability in Cote d'Ivoire,
including the protection of civilians as mandated by the
Security Council in its resolutions 1894 (2009) and
1911 (2010); secondly, safeguarding past achievements
in both the elections and reunification domains and
continuing to provide support towards the
implementation of these two crucial processes; and,
thirdly, helping to establish the definitive electoral list
as expeditiously as possible. This list constitutes a sine
qua non not only for the holding of elections but also
for the completion of the identification operation and
the subsequent distribution of the national identity
cards.

In particular, with regard to the first point,
UNOCI and the United Nations country team in Cote
d'Ivoire will continue their efforts to develop a
comprehensive strategy for the protection of civilians.
This strategy, once developed, shall allow UNOCI to
fully implement the mandates given by the Security
Council.

