Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Lord Ashdown, High
Representative for the Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina, for his
comprehensive report to the Security Council and for
his detailed briefing on the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We also welcome the participation of
Judge Theodor Meron, President of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, in
today's meeting, and we are grateful to him for his
statement.

Russia notes with satisfaction the substantial
progress achieved in the implementation of the Dayton
Peace Agreement and in the establishment and
strengthening of statehood in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We believe that the situation in that country is reaching
the level at which greater authority must be gradually
transferred to its legally elected bodies, which must
bear responsibility for their country and peoples. In
that connection, the strengthening of mutual
understanding and trust among the peoples of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and the achievement of consensus on
all matters relating to state-building become all the
more important.

We support the activities of High Representative
Lord Ashdown in the implementation of the approved
programme of the Peace Implementation Council (PIC)
Steering Board in the economic and social spheres and
in strengthening the primacy of law and State authority
as a whole. We proceed on the basis of the premise that
the implementation of these priorities will be
undertaken in strict observance of the Dayton
Agreement and the Constitution of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and on the basis of a consensus among all
Bosnian parties.

We welcome the pursuit of dialogue among the
Bosnian parties on military reform and we note the
progress achieved towards putting the armed forces of
the entities under effective civilian control with a view
to the eventual establishment of a unified command
structure.

Bearing in mind the fragility of the overall
political situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, we
believe it appropriate to continue international
monitoring of the situation with regard to ensuring
public safety in the country and of the activities of
local police forces. In this connection, we welcome the
work, which began on 1 January 2003, of the European
Union Police Mission. We strongly believe that the
Security Council, as the major organ responsible for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
will continue to receive regular reports on the conduct
of the Police Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We support the further elaboration of the concept
of the establishment, within the framework of the
Bosnia and Herzegovina State Court, of a special
chamber to investigate war crimes. We welcome the
steps taken by the High Representative to implement
the relevant decisions of the PIC Steering Board and
trust that the Security Council shall continue carefully
to follow the efforts made to that end. In this regard,
we expect the Council to receive information on a
regular basis from Lord Ashdown and the President of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, Judge Meron, on the progress of work
towards forming the special chamber.

The information submitted today allows us to be
optimistic that the deadlines set for late 2004 or early
2005 for launching the chamber will be met. We hope
that all aspects of the preparatory work will be given
due attention, beginning with the reconstruction of the
court's building and ending with the revision and
adaptation of local legislation. We regard the transfer
of cases from the International Criminal Tribunal to the
emerging Bosnian court as a major element of the
successful implementation of the strategy to fulfil the
Tribunal's mandate. We believe that a consideration of
similar cases should also involve the competent legal
bodies of other Balkan States.

Russia, as one of the guarantors of the Dayton
Agreement, will continue to lend all necessary
assistance in the political, economic and military
reforms under way in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In this
connection, we proceed from the premise that the
principal, fundamental provisions of Dayton will be
respected by all sides.

