Mr. Al-Bader (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like first to thank you, Ms. President, for convening
this meeting, which is providing additional information
to Council members about events in an important part
of the world. Qatar is convinced of the need to settle
disputes through peaceful means, in particular through
negotiations based on international resolutions and
peace initiatives such as the road map and the Arab
peace initiative adopted at the Beirut summit.

The violence and repressive practices carried out
by the Israeli army of occupation are in flagrant
contravention of international law and the resolutions
of international legitimacy. Those practices target
innocent men, women, children and disabled persons;
they include extrajudicial assassinations and have led
to counter-measures, have increased instability and
have prevented any peaceful settlement.
We reaffirm that the elections to the Palestinian
parliament were honest and democratic and the
outcome was a free expression of the Palestinian
people's democratic choice. We stress the fact that the
Palestinian people's freely expressed choice must be
respected, as must the authorities elected by the
Palestinian people.

Secondly, any unilateral settlement that
contravenes the reference texts and the bases of the
peace process will not provide a comprehensive and
lasting peace.

Thirdly, repressive measures and illegal policies
such as the building and expansion of settlements, the
construction of the barrier and the isolation of
Palestinian towns and villages pose further obstacles to
peace and exacerbate the humanitarian crisis afflicting
the Palestinian people in the occupied territories.

Fourthly, owing to changes in the Government,
the Palestinian people are at a crucial juncture with
respect to their future, since the Security Council has
repeatedly called for the creation of a sovereign,
democratic and viable Palestinian State, existing side
by side with Israel in peace and security.

The Council and the international community, in
particular the sponsors of the peace process - that is,
the Quartet - should deploy greater efforts to bring
about the resumption of the process on the agreed
bases, in particular the resolutions of the Security
Council, the principle of land for peace and the Arab
peace initiative adopted at the Beirut summit, to which
Arab leaders referred recently in Khartoum.

The State of Qatar appeals to the parties
concerned to shoulder their responsibilities and to
return to the negotiating table. We call on the Israeli
Government seriously to engage in the peace process
and to withdraw to the 4 June 1967 boundary line. The
primary reason for the existence of this conflict is
Israel's continued occupation of Palestinian land,
which stands in the way of a just and lasting peace in
the region.

