Mr. Van Shalkwyk (South Africa): Allow me to
begin by thanking the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for his
briefing. In that regard, I would also like to commend
UNAMA's personnel and Mr. Yamamoto for their
vital contribution to supporting Afghanistan's efforts
towards restoring peace and stability in the country,
particularly with regard to the recent election process
and UNAMA's efforts to support that process.

I would also like to extend our appreciation to
Ms. Khurram and the Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan for their briefings.

With regard to the peace process, South Africa
encourages all Afghan stakeholders who are committed
to the nation's peace talks to renew their efforts as they
rebuild trust and work towards peace and reconciliation.
That would also assist in promoting national unity
and cohesion, aimed at achieving a lasting political
solution. In that regard, the only way for Afghanistan
to achieve durable peace and stability is through a
comprehensive and inclusive Afghan-led and Afghan-
owned political process, leading to a negotiated
settlement of the conflict.

My delegation is of the view that any engagement
towards long-lasting peace and security for the people
of Afghanistan should be considered. However, it is also
important that all sectors of the Afghan Government
and society be included in those discussions so as to
ensure that a comprehensive and inclusive peace is
established and sustained.

South Africa strongly believes that an integral aspect
of that engagement is the inclusion and participation of
women. The inclusion of women's voices in the peace
talks is vital to ensuring that the significant gains in
women's and girl's rights are protected. The unique
perspectives of Afghan women would also provide
additional viewpoints that are necessary to the peace
process. The efforts of the Afghan Government in
advancing those integral rights are welcomed and
encouraged to continue.

The continuing high levels of violence in
Afghanistan, particularly the indiscriminate attacks
perpetrated against civilians, women, children and
the elderly remain of concern to South Africa. The
continuing violence will undermine the progress
made in the political process. The effect of that
violence is particularly felt by the most vulnerable in
society, including women, children and those living
with disabilities. We call on all parties to ensure the
protection of civilians and to adhere to their obligations
under international humanitarian law and international
human rights law.

The Afghan people recently went to the polls to
elect a new President. We hope that the Independent
Election Commission can conclude its important
work with regard to the electoral process and is able
to announce the results of the presidential elections in
due course.

