Mrs. Robinson: I must say that it has been a rich
debate and very instructive to listen to the very specific
proposals put forward. I would welcome the
opportunity to respond briefly to some of these
suggestions. A number of them were repeated by
members of the Security Council.
I should like to begin with the points made by the
representative of Bangladesh, who began by referring
to the importance of prevention, and I think that is a
theme that others took up. It was also the subject of a
report that I made last year to the Commission on
Human Rights, setting out, from a human rights
perspective, the different ways in which we can add to
a debate on prevention. I would recommend that as a
source, perhaps, to look at.

The representative also talked about possible
mediation by high-level personalities. I would suggest
that, if there is to be mediation, it should draw on the
work of country or thematic rapporteurs, the present
work of our Office or components of peacekeeping,
and have this material in relation to any attempts at
mediation.

Reference was made by a number of
representatives to the debate with non-State actors.
Again, our offices on the ground are involved in a
debate with non-State actors, and we would be very
happy to share some of this experience, if it could be
helpful. One of the areas that we are seeking actively to
make progress in is to use the approach of trying to get
non-State actors to subscribe to basic international
human rights and humanitarian law. We succeeded in
some part with a manifesto on human rights in Sierra
Leone, and the Revolutionary United Front (RUF) also
subscribed to this.

We are very keen now, in the context of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and perhaps during
the seminar on human rights that has been proposed for
the month of May, to have a human rights text that all
parties could subscribe to as a basis for moving
forward. We have also been encouraging this in the
context of Colombia 4 that the different state and non-
state actors would subscribe to a text of international
human rights and humanitarian law. We would
certainly be happy to share those experiences.

In relation to the contribution of the
representative of Ukraine, I would also, as he does,
welcome the forthcoming discussion with the
Economic and Social Council Bureau and wider
linkage within the system, which is another innovation
of the Security Council that I very much welcome. He
and a number of other contributors referred to the
separation of refugees and armed elements in camps.
Obviously, this is a key recommendation, but it also
brought to my mind the role and discussion that we are
having now in the Inter-Agency Standing Committee
on protection of internally displaced persons. This is
being held with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, with Special Coordinator Dennis
McNamara and with the different agencies, because we
recognize so many gaps in the protection of internally
displaced persons and that we must work with the
Governments in the context of internally displaced
persons. Perhaps the Security Council should be more
aware of this intensive debate that has been taking
place, at very regular intervals now, in the context of
the Inter-Agency Standing Committee.

The representative of Tunisia referred to the
importance of media and of having a code of ethics or a
way of controlling and curtailing hate speech. We will
be looking at this, as I said, in preparation for the
Durban World Conference against Racism. He also
referred to the question of a working group, if that
emerges from this discussion. I would simply say that,
if there is a working group or a task force, we in our
Office would certainly wish to offer any support of a
practical nature to that working group and to interact
with it.

I was interested in the innovative idea of the
representative of Singapore concerning the possibility,
at the end of a given year, of some kind of objective
audit on the number of conflicts on which it had been
possible to have some impact. Again, in gathering in or
looking at that audit, I think it would be appropriate to
look to the work being done on the ground, especially
in relation to links with armed groups and attempts to
have them adhere to international human rights and
humanitarian standards. Also, obviously, he made
reference to the proposed manual of best practices of
the Inter-Agency Standing Committee. We would hope
to make a significant contribution to that.

The representative of Jamaica referred to the
"Arria formula" meetings. I was very pleased that she
did, because we in the human rights community have
greatly welcomed the fact that the Security Council has
been hearing, in particular, Mr. Garreton, the Special
Rapporteur for the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
I would urge that there be wider use made of the
experts, the special rapporteurs and special
representatives. She also referred to the issue of hate
speech and to the need to monitor the media. Again, I
look to the World Conference and its practical
measures as being a way to have a whole range of
issues that can be addressed to combat this new form of
communicating racism and stirring up ethnic conflict.

The representative of France focused in particular
on the situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. This gives me an opportunity to really
emphasize the resource of the work of our Office on
the ground, both in Kinshasa and in Goma. When I was
there last October, I was really impressed by the work
that can take place in situations of quite serious
conflict, especially the linkages and support for human
rights non-governmental organizations and their very
close working relationship with the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. I hope that, in the opportunities that are
now opening up, we can reinforce the work of our
Office and that it can be more known to and drawn
upon by the Security Council in its assessment of the
situation and in the role of enhanced peacekeeping in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The representative of China again emphasized the
role of prevention. I must say that I am very glad to see
this so high among the priorities. If we are going to
link all of the elements and resources, this requires a
comprehensive role and the human rights community
does have a lot to offer in that regard. He also referred
to the impact of sanctions. There again, there is some
study by some of the human rights committees of the
impact of sanctions. If the Security Council is
discussing this issue, I think it should look into the
information on sanctions, which we would be happy to
provide.

The representative of the United States referred in
particular to the situations in Sierra Leone, in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and, indeed, in
West Africa. Again, I think we have missions that have
just taken place, including the particular mission to
West Africa, which I believe are an important resource
for the Security Council and for the human rights
community. As I understand it, there is a proposal for a
possible office in West Africa, which I feel would need
to have a strong human rights component because of
the subregional human rights issues that need to be
addressed. Reference was also made to the Sierra
Leone Special Court. This Special Court sends
enormously important signals in that subregion. I
believe it is vital that the Security Council find the
means for effective financial resourcing and support for
that Court because of its important signal of really
tackling impunity and what can be built on in relation
to it.
I have to say in conclusion that it is very
instructive from my point of view to see how practical
the contributions have been from the members of the
Security Council. I am very encouraged by this and it
confirms that making a closer link with Geneva and the
human rights machinery makes every sense in this
context.

