Mr. Dahlgren (Sweden): Let me first say that I
associate myself fully with the statement made by the
representative of the United Kingdom on behalf of the
European Union.

It is, indeed, appalling to learn how children of all
ages are affected by armed conflict. They are recruited into
armed combat - often by force, and sometimes by
desperation when societies are falling apart. They are forced
to kill, to torture and to humiliate other human beings,
sometimes even other children. Children are killed or
severely injured and end up disabled, deprived of their
future. In armed conflicts the principal victims are always
the weakest ones: civilians rather than soldiers, children
rather than grown-ups.

Children witness atrocities committed against their
families, neighbours and friends. The social fabric of
families, schools and society is torn apart. Child refugees
are all too often deprived of their rights to education.
Children in refugee camps, in particular girls, are
vulnerable to violence and sexual abuse.

These outright breaches of established global norms
of humanitarianism and human rights, in particular
concerning children, that we witness in many conflicts
today constitute a threat to peace, stability and
development, within societies as well as between them.

The statement made this morning in the Security
Council by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict was
an excellent start for what we hope will be a recurring
contact on this important issue. His programme of work
and his stated priorities for action demonstrate an agenda
of significant humanitarian and political importance. In
discharging our duties with regard to international peace
and security, there are also a number of things that we in
the Security Council can do with regard to the protection
of children in armed conflict.

Let me raise some points of particular importance to
us, areas where my Government feels that the Security
Council, the United Nations as a whole and the
international community should act. First, children must
be kept out of acts of armed conflict. The age of 18
should be the minimum age of recruitment and
participation in military activities. An optional protocol to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child could achieve
this. Sweden welcomes the new mandate of the
Chairperson of the working group of the Commission on
Human Rights on the draft of such a protocol to hold
broad informal consultations on how to break the present
stalemate in the work of the group.

Secondly, the Security Council should give particular
consideration to the need for demobilization and
rehabilitation, as well as the physical and social
reintegration of child soldiers and child combatants in
post-conflict peace-building operations.

Thirdly, as others have said, landmines kill, hurt and
disable children at work or at play. Children constitute a
major part of the civilian victims of landmines. Sweden
welcomes the new mandate of the United Nations

 

Children's Fund to work on mine-awareness programmes.
We would also like to emphasize the importance of the
catalytic role of the Special Representative in the prevention
and rehabilitation of child victims. But for a lasting solution
to this menace, it is evident that the Ottawa agreement on
landmines must be fully implemented.

Fourthly, small arms are increasingly available,
including to children, with disastrous consequences.
Restricting the supply of small arms in areas of conflict is
a necessary step in halting armed conflicts and their
harmful impact on children.

Fifthly, the Security Council should pay attention to
the importance of special training for peacekeepers and
civilian police who while on mission will come into contact
with child combatants or children who have been abused.
This is also an important task for the Special Representative
in collaboration with the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations. Peacekeepers and civilian police should be well
versed in international humanitarian law and human rights,
in particular the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
Sweden welcomes the initiative of the Special
Representative to form a joint working group with the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations.

Sixthly, the Special Representative should also
continue to keep track of crimes against children in the
context of armed conflict. He should be able to alert the
international criminal court, once it is established, as well
as the international community at large. Political actors
should know from the outset what kind of consequences
they will face if they take part in these types of crimes.
Impunity for crimes against humanity, and in particular
crimes against vulnerable children, cannot be accepted.

Lastly, particular attention must also be paid to how
children are affected by the humanitarian consequences of
sanctions. It is our View that sanctions should be designed
in such a way that negative humanitarian consequences on
vulnerable groups, in particular children, are minimized and
that the appropriate humanitarian exemptions are made.

The issue before us today is of relevance to the work
of the Security Council in yet another way. The impact of
armed conflict on children - the generation on which all
our future relations depend - will also influence the way
they will settle their disputes and conflicts. To build a
foundation for a peaceful world where violence and war
will no longer be used as a means for settling disputes and
conflicts, children's education is important and should
emphasize the values of peace, tolerance, understanding
and dialogue. In this regard, we all are teachers.

We have witnessed throughout the years the arduous
process of bringing about sustainable peace and
reconciliation in the many civil wars and conflicts of our
time. Even if it is not easy, a grown-up soldier can return
to the life he had before the war - to farm his own piece
of land, to take up his previous profession, to reconcile,
hopefully, with his neighbours. But a child, who might
have lost both parents and who has been prevented from
going to school, growing up instead amid violence and
fear, has nothing to return to. His or her only skill,
perhaps, is handling a weapon. Only with strong support
from parents or foster-parents, teachers and other adults
can this damage be repaired. But there is a risk that these
children will continue to live the only lives they know: to
obey orders and to kill, this time as criminals in their own
countries. That is why the recruitment and use of children
for armed conflicts is not only a violation of international
law and the rights of the child, but could also have
serious consequences for peace and security in the future.

In 1990 the World Summit for Children was held
here in New York. It brought together more Heads of
State and Government than had ever assembled before,
and those leaders agreed among themselves to work
carefully to protect children from the scourge of war and
to take measures to prevent further armed conflicts, in
order to give children everywhere a peaceful and secure
future. That pledge will need to be continuously renewed
as long as children continue to suffer in armed conflicts.
The Special Representative has a very important mission
in that field, but all of us, including the Council, have a
responsibility to meet that commitment.

