Judge Owada: It is a great privilege for me once
again address the Security Council on matters pertaining
to our shared endeavour to achieve international
peace and security. As former President and a senior
member of the International Court of Justice, I make
my statement today on behalf of my esteemed colleague
His Excellency Judge Abdulqawi Ahmed Yusuf, who
is now the President of the Court and, regrettably, is
unable attend this Security Council meeting. I recall
that during my own mandate as President of the Court,
from 2009 to 2012, I had opportunities on several
occasions to emphasize the constructive dialogue
that these annual meetings foster between the Court
and the Security Council. I therefore wholeheartedly
welcome and embrace the present initiative of the
Polish presidency to hold an open debate on upholding
international law within the context of the maintenance
of international peace and security. In my view, this
is a most opportune moment to provide a platform for
wider discussion, especially within the context of a
number of volatile situations that, sadly, we face in the
world today.

Let me begin by bringing to the Council's attention
the common roots of our two institutions and their
complementary roles. Both the International Court
of Justice and the Security Council were established
in 1945 by the Charter of the United Nations as
principal organs of the United Nations. During the
crucial post-war period, in fact, it was paramount to
build a robust structure that could ensure international
peace and security through the creation of a truly
effective international organization in this area. That
is highlighted by the fact that Article 1, paragraph 1, of
the Charter refers to the maintenance of international
peace and security as one ofthe primary purposes ofthe
United Nations. Of utmost importance, it is to be noted
that such a purpose is to be achieved, "in conformity
with the principles of justice and international law".
In particular, Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Charter
specifically provides that all Members of the United
Nations shall settle their disputes "by peaceful means
in such a manner that international peace and security,
and justice, are not endangered."

n

I underscored the insertion of the words and
justice" because the inclusion of the element ofjustice
in that context clearly signifies that international peace
and security are to be maintained in parallel with the
realization ofjustice. For that reason, the International
Court of Justice can play a role in actively contributing
to the maintenance of peace and security in parallel
with the Security Council, which bears the primary
responsibility for that purpose.

That point is fundamental to today's discussion
in the sense that the constitutional framework of the
United Nations envisages an organic and synergetic
relationship between the Security Council and the
Court, with the potential of peace being reinforced
by combining political and judicial approaches to
finding solutions. Beyond the division of power or
competence of the two United Nations organs, the
question to be discussed in this context, to my mind,
is the following: In order to realize the ultimate goal
of the United Nations to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war, which dominated the world
before 1945, how can and should the Security Council
and the Court interrelate with one another in concretely
resolving disputes and situations?

In my statement today, I will begin by saying a
few words about the international mechanism of links
between the Council and the Court provided for in the
Charter. I will then refer to several specific instances
whereby the involvement of the Court as the adjudicative
body working together with the Council might be called
on to deal with a situation in a synergetic manner, with
each organ approaching the given situation from its
respective perspective. I will therefore begin with the
institutional link between the Court and the Security
Council as provided for by the Charter.

Under the Charter, the Security Council is assigned
functions of an executive nature, whereas the Court
exercises purely judicial functions; that is the difference.
Nevertheless, there is a correlation between those two
roles. That is why the institutional underpinning of
our activities deserves some crucial attention. There
are a number of important provisions that are meant to
strengthen the coordination and cooperation between
the Court and the Council as we strive to discharge our
respective roles in maintaining international peace and
security. In that regard, I would like to highlight the
following three provisions.

First, in relation to its function in dispute
settlement between Member States, the Security
Council is empowered, at any stage of a dispute, to
make recommendations as part of its duty. The Security
Council should take into consideration the fact that,
as stated in Article 36 of the Charter, "legal disputes
should as a general rule be referred by the parties to the
International Court of Justice."

It was pursuant to that Charter provision that
the Security Council recommended that the United
Kingdom and Albania defer their dispute with regard to
the Corfu Channel to the newly established Court at that
time. That historically notable example of institutional
complementarity was all the more significant as it
resulted in the very first contentious case brought
before the Court. That case clarified the legal aspects
of the dispute, thereby leading to its resolution.

The second aspect to that institutional interaction
is provided for in Article 94, paragraph 1, which
states that

"Each Member of the United Nations undertakes
to comply with the decision of the International Court
of Justice in any case to which it is a party."
I am happy to say that there are very few cases where
there has been non-compliance with a judgment
of the Court. However, in the event of a case of
non-compliance, Article 94, paragraph 2, can be put in
motion. According to that provision,

"If any party to a case fails to perform the
obligations incumbent upon it under a judgment
rendered by the Court, the other party may have
recourse to the Security Council, which may, if
it deems necessary, make recommendations or
decide upon measures to be taken to give effect to
the judgment".

Admittedly, that is not a provision for the direct
enforcement of the Court's judgment by the Security
Council. It nevertheless provides a useful and precise
framework within which the Council can ensure that the
decisions of the Court be given effect. Moreover, that
provision accords to the parties that bring cases to the
Court a broader sense of institutional reassurance that
complying with the Court's decision is of paramount
importance to the international community.

The third provision I wish to mention is Article
96 of the Charter, under which the Security Council
may request the International Court of Justice to give
an advisory opinion on any legal question. Unlike the
Court's contentious procedure, its advisory function
is not aimed at a resolution, per se, of the conflict in
question. Rather, the purpose is to give an authentic
opinion on that matter to other United Nations organs,
including the Security Council, with a view to clarifying
the issues involved in a given situation. With reference
to situations before the Security Council relating to the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
advisory function of the Court could be a very useful
tool by elucidating the relevant and legal questions
involved in a situation, which may assist the Council
in its consideration of a complex state of affairs of the
situation at hand, and could be very helpful.

An apposite precedent in which the Security
Council requested an advisory opinion of that nature
on an issue that was directly raised before the Security
Council regarding the activities of the Council was a
case brought in July 1970 on the legal consequences
for States of the continued presence of South Africa
in Namibia. It is recalled that the discussion on the
issue within the Council continued in tandem with the
Court's consideration of the legal questions involved.
Ultimately, the Court's opinion helped to strengthen
the Security Council's position regarding the line of
conduct expected of States in order to resolve that
political impasse.

In concluding my brief remarks on that aspect
of such interrelations, namely, the institutional link
between the Court and the Security Council, I find it
interesting to note that the Charter's provisions on this
point, although succinct, manage to be quite flexible
and comprehensive, allowing the possibility of the
Council encouraging States to bring their disputes to
the Court, support States in the event that they have
issues regarding the compliance of an International
Court judgement and give them time to request that
legal questions of significance in relation to the work
of the Council be considered by the Court. In that way,
an effective institutional structure could indeed be in
place, and the United Nations, and by extension the
international community, could benefit from its greater
use of those three relevant provisions that are provided
for in the Charter.

I will now turn to the second part of my statement,
on the interaction between the substantive work of the
Court and the activities of the Security Council, which
are not necessarily provided for in the Charter in its
express terms. Let me address some areas of substantive
interaction between the Court and the Security Council
that go beyond the linked institutional framework that
I have mentioned.

In that connection, in addition to dealing with
specific bilateral disputes between States, the
International Court of Justice has also been called upon
to deal with cases, both contentious and advisory, that
relate to the same set of events that form an integral
part of the situations that come before the Security
Council. It can safely be said that there is no exclusive
authority pertaining to either of the two organs over
a situation, which in most cases include overlapping
aspects of law and politics. Indeed, as I already
mentioned, the clarification of certain legal aspects
of a case by the Court can benefit the Council in
arriving at a comprehensive solution to the situation in
question, bearing in mind the legal implications of the
issues involved.

For the sake of the discussion today, I shall refer
to three examples that illustrate how the Court and
the Security Council can interact with each other to
contribute to the maintenance of international peace
and security. All three cases relate to situations arising
from armed conflicts or clashes in border areas that
would require a response from the Security Council.
For example, the Security Council would act to
conduct peacekeeping initiatives. At the same time, a
legal clarification of the situation by the Court would
be extremely important in the same context because
of the very nature and gravity of conflict situations
between States, which constantly require the Council's
attention. At the same time, because of complex and
more important issues they raise, they are also at the
core of disputes that can be brought before the Court as
legal matters.

One tragic example is the bloody conflict in the
Balkans following the collapse of Yugoslavia in the
early 1990s. In tandem with the many initiatives by the
Security Council to deal with the conflict, including
the deployment of a large-scale peacekeeping force,
the creation of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia with a mandate to prosecute the
culprits as individuals for their heinous criminal acts was
an important part of efforts by the Security Council to
maintain international peace and security. In parallel to
those activities by the Council, the International Court
of Justice was also involved in playing an important
role in determining the international responsibility of
a State given its alleged commission of internationally
wrongful acts in relation to the conflict. I refer here
to the two cases that came before the Court, namely,
the application of the Convention on the Prevention
and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide - the first
brought by Bosnia and Herzegovina against Serbia and
Montenegro and the second by Croatia against Serbia.

To bring about lasting peace in the region, it was
essential that the international community could rely not
only on the Security Council to take measures to make
it possible to determine the criminal responsibility of
individuals for their acts, but also on the other principal

judicial organ of the United Nations - the International
Court of Justice - to place on record the degree of
accountability of the respondent State for not having
taken the necessary measures to prevent genocide.

A second illustrative example is the situation
that arose in 2008 in the area of the Temple of Preah
Vihear, situated on the boundary between Cambodia
and Thailand, as a result of competing claims of
territorial sovereignty between the two States. Despite
the Court's judgment in 1962 in the case Temple of
Preah Vihear (Cambodia v. Thailand), in which the
Court found that the temple was situated on territory
under the sovereignty of Cambodia, disagreement
persisted between the two neighbouring States as to the
extent of the geographical scope of the sovereignty. As
a result of the ongoing armed conflict over the issue,
the matter was brought to the Security Council, which
issued a press statement in February 2011 (SC/10174)
entitled "Cambodia-Thailand Border Situation", which
exhorted both sides to show restraint, establish a
ceasefire and engage in dialogue. The Security Council
also expressed its support for the active efforts of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) to
find a peaceful resolution of the matter. However, the
armed clashes did not subside and one of the parties
to the conflict, Cambodia, brought the dispute before
the Court in April 2011 in the form of a request for an
interpretation of the judgement in the 1962 case.

Simultaneously, the applicant requested that the
Court also indicate provisional measures of protection
because of the urgency of the matter. In granting the
request for the indication of provisional measures, for
the first time in its history, the Court set up a provisional
demiIitarized zone to be kept provisionally free of all
military personnel. Although the Court's immediate
objective and purpose is a strictly judicial one, namely,
to prevent irreparable damage from occurring until
the delivery of the final judgment, nevertheless the
measure also contributed in a practical way to the
efforts of the Security Council to maintain peace and
security in the region. In addition, the Courtjoined the
Council in drawing the parties' particular attention to
the important role of ASEAN in establishing a dialogue
between them.

The third and final example I wish to give today
is the conflict situation in the Great Lakes region that
erupted in the 1990s. In that situation, the Court was
seized of the case Armed Activities on the Territory
of the Congo (Democratic Republic of the Congo v. Uganda). The Security Council was closely monitoring
the situation concerning the Democratic Republic of
the Congo at the same time. In June 2000, the Council
adopted resolution 1304 (2000), which demanded that
all parties refrain from any offensive action, and that
same month the Court indicated provisional measures
whereby both parties were ordered to take all measures
necessary to comply with all of their obligations
under international law, explicitly including those
under resolution 1304 (2000). While the eventual
non-compliance of the provisional measures of the
Court under a resolution is regrettable, the case
illustrates that the Court can complement the activities
of the Security Council by legally scrutinizing and
analysing the issue of compliance with regard to the
relevant Security Council resolutions.

I hope that those examples show that the Court
can make an active contribution to reducing tensions
in conflict situations and preventing the aggravation
of a dispute, while working in parallel with the
Security Council.

Let me address my final point, which includes some
suggestions for the Security Council and the Court on
strengthening the role of maintaining international
peace and security. Before concluding my statement,
let me draw the Council's attention to the question I
posed at the beginning of my presentation, namely,
how the Security Council and the Court can, or should,
relate to each other with regard to concrete cases or
situations. For the sake of discussion, I would like to
add three observations.

First, it is hoped - at least on the part of the
Court - that the Security Council could pay more
attention to its discretionary power under Article 36,
paragraph 3, of the Charter, by which it can make
recommendations to refer a legal dispute to Court. The
significance ofthe precedent of the Corfu Channel case,
to which I referred, would demonstrate how the basis of
that argument could still be valid. Regrettably, however,
it has become an isolated precedent. I would therefore
invite the Security Council to take inspiration from that
early instance of constructive cooperation between our
institutions and consider additional possibilities under
Article 36 of the Charter.

Secondly, with regard to the other example I provided
at the beginning of my statement, the Security Council
can have a greater active role in the post-adjudication
phase of a dispute that has beenjudicially settled by the
Court. Although the number of reported non-compliant
judgements is not very large, any disregard or negligence
on the part of the parties relating to the implementation
of a decision of the Court is regrettable and not to
be welcomed. Non-compliance by one of the parties
with a judgment of the Court can easily complicate the
situation subsequent to the delivery of the judgment,
as exemplified by the case concerning Avena and
Other Mexican Nationals (Mexico v. United States of America). Here the Security Council could have a
meaningful role to play in monitoring compliance with
the Court's decisions, even when the recommendation
is not formally adopted under Article 94, paragraph
2, of the Charter. At least we could consider how the
institutional link between the Court and the Council, as
provided for in Article 94 of the Charter, particularly the
potential involvement of the Council, could enhance,
formally or informally, the institutional reassurance
for the parties to the dispute about compliance with the
Court's decision and, through that, enhance the rule of
law in the international community. Such involvement
of the Security Council in the post-adjudication phase
of a dispute would, in my view, strengthen the rule of
law through the interaction between the two United
Nations organs.

Thirdly, and lastly, it is hoped that the Security
Council could consider the possibility of making use
of the advisory opinions of the Court in relation to
the activities of which the Security Council is seized
under Article 96 of the Charter. In terms of statistics,
26 requests for advisory opinions have been made so
far, giving the Court the opportunity to offer its own
advisory opinions. However, there have been very
few requests from the Security Council, except for the
Namibia case to which I referred earlier. By way of
comparison, the General Assembly has so far made 15
requests. In replying to those requests, the Court has
contributed, we believe, to the work of the respective
organs by clarifying the bigger issues involved in a
given question. Recent notable examples include the
opinions on the Legal consequences ofthe construction
of a wall in the occupied Palestinian territory (see A/ES-10/273) and on the Accordance with international
law of the unilateral declaration of independence in
respect ofKosovo (see A/64/881), on which the Court
gave its opinion in, respectively, 2004 and 2010. These
examples demonstrate that the advisory proceedings
of the Court should be used also for promoting the
activities of the Security Council.

Iwish to conclude my brief statement by commending
the foresight of the drafters of the Charter, who created
a flexible and interconnected organizational structure
to ensure proper institutional support for the lofty
aims of the United Nations, namely, the promotion and
maintenance of international peace and security. The
Security Council, which has the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security,
has a wide spectrum of options on how to perform its
functions effectively in achieving its goal. I hope that
my statement today can make a modest contribution
to a reflection on the possibility of the role that the
International Court of Justice, as the principal judicial
organ of the United Nations, could play in this regard.

The authority, judicial expertise and commitment of
the Court to the promotion of the rule of law in today's
world will, we hope, make a significant contribution to
the work and the activities of the Security Council in
dealing with this issue and burning issues in the context
of the current situation relating to how to effectively
maintain international peace and security, as this is the
Council's primary responsibility under the mandate
given it by the Charter.
