Mr. Akbaruddin (India): I thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this open debate on an
issue that is germane for all of us. I also thank the
Secretary-General, the representative of the President
of the General Assembly and the Presidents of the
Economic and Social Council and the International
Court of Justice for their briefings.

As many speakers before me have said, this month
we commemorate the one hundredth anniversary of the
end of what was then known as the war to end all wars.
India lost 1 million of its population during that war.
As we all now know, the war to end all wars turned out
to be anything but that. More wars followed, resulting
in more devastation and leading to more geopolitical
changes.

Multilateralism, as an organizing principle for
international cooperation, survived the collapse of the
League of Nations, which was established following the
end ofthe so-called war to end all wars. The international
adjustments made, in the form of the arrangement
we now have with the Security Council playing a
controlling role in efforts to multilaterally address
matters relating to global peace, were set more than 70
years ago and have stayed the course. One can say that
the experiment of States with multilateralism has grown,
as have the interdependencies and interconnectedness
of our world, but if we dig deeper, it is obvious that
the Security Council is facing manifold crises with
regard to performance, credibility, legitimacy and
relevance. However, to blame multilateralism for the
dismal situation of the Council is, to use a New York
sporting analogy, like blaming Madison Square Garden
for the failure of the New York Knicks in the National
Basketball Association year after year.

Nimble organizations seek to replace routinized
procedures with initiatives, continuity with flexibility
and rules with results. However, the Council has
remained rooted in the historical events that gave birth
to it. The Council's path dependence is reflected in
its aversion to reforming its membership and working
methods. The Council's membership today diverges
from the distribution of global power and is unable
to accommodate contemporary realities. Also, large
sections of global populations are left disenchanted and
are nursing a sense of historical grievance owing to the
Council's anachronistic composition.

In terms of working methods, even as the
Council has spawned an entire range of subordinate
bodies, the functioning of that subterranean universe
of subordinate bodies has become Byzantine. For
example, in place of five members having a veto in
formal meetings, all 15 members have been bestowed
with a veto in the subterranean universe of the
sanctions committees. Furthermore, in an age where
informed publics increasingly demand transparency
from public institutions, the sanctions committees are
the most egregious examples of opacity and the lack
of accountability. Those bodies of the subterranean
universe are ostensibly acting on behalf of the entire
membership of the United Nations. Yet, they do not
inform us that, owing to a negative vote cast by one of
their 15 members, they have decided not to sanction an
entity or individual proposed by a Member State.

Even as the task of promoting and maintaining
international peace and security has grown more
daunting, the Council has been found wanting. It has
failed to provide leadership on issues that are contested
in spaces that no State controls but that all rely on for
their security and prosperity - the global commons.
The domains of maritime space, outer space and
cyberspace are the principal channels for the flow of
goods, capital, data, people and ideas - all of which
are key factors in our interconnectedness. They all cry
for multilateral solutions. The Council, alas, is missing
in action. Therefore, a patchwork of "plurilaterals",
"minilaterals" and other regional forums are becoming
the venues of convenience, stitching together codes of
conduct, ad hoc coalitions of the willing and partnership
agreements on issues of global peace and security.

It is time that we renovate, reinvigorate and reform
the multilateralism practised by the Security Council.
Otherwise, instead of a world at peace, we are likely
to see a world order in pieces, even as the welter of
piecemeal arrangements extends its sprawl to deliver
partial measures of international cooperation and the
Council courts obsolescence.

