Mr. Apakan (Turkey): Let me begin by
extending a warm welcome to President Radmanovic'
and thanking him for his statement. I would also like to
congratulate him, as well as Mr. Izetbegovie and
Mr. Komsie, for their elections as members of the
Council of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and for the successful conduct of the elections.

We are also pleased to see High Representative
Inzko among us again. I want to thank him for his
tireless efforts and leadership and for his
comprehensive report (see S/2010/575, annex) and the
insightful briefing he provided today.
In a few days, we will celebrate the fifteenth
anniversary of the signing of the Dayton of Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina. These 15 years
have certainly not been easy. But, despite the
difficulties, there have been significant positive
developments. We can definitely say that Bosnia and
Herzegovina has proved itself to be viable as a State.
As such, the presence of Bosnia and Herzegovina in
the Security Council is a clear sign of the confidence
that the international community has in the country.

In the same vein, we are pleased that the elections
held on 3 October were successfully carried out and
that they were characterized by international observers
as being generally in accordance with international
standards. We welcome the maturity displayed by all
components of the country and we hope that a broad-
based Government will be formed soon to tackle the
many issues that lie ahead.

As a Balkan country itself, Turkey attaches great
importance to achieving lasting peace and stability in
the region. We consider a sovereign, democratic, stable
and functional State of Bosnia and Herzegovina, with
its internationally recognized borders, as an
indispensable prerequisite for achieving that objective.
That is why, in addition to our excellent bilateral
relations, as illustrated by the recent visits of our
President and Minister for Foreign Affairs, as
underlined once again in the report of the High
Representative, Turkey continues to make every effort
to assist Bosnia and Herzegovina in its endeavours to
promote regional cooperation. Indeed, regional
ownership and inclusiveness should be a key element
in our quest for peace and stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

In this context, the Turkish initiative to hold high-
level trilateral meetings between Turkey, Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Croatia, as well as between Turkey,
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia, has surely
contributed to the enhancement of regional
understanding and collaboration. In that regard, we
welcome the recent improvement in relations among
the regional partners. The visit of the President of
Serbia to Srebrenica, the decision of the Serbian
Parliament on Srebrenica, the declaration by
Mr. Izetbegovie on crimes committed during the war
and a similar declaration by President Tadie on
Vukovar are positive steps towards regional
reconciliation. We encourage these acts and gestures,
which will promote regional cooperation and
contribute to improving the daily lives of the peoples
of the region.

In the same vein, we welcome the decision of the
European Union to liberalize the visa regime applied to
the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We believe
that this decision is yet another step that serves to keep
alive Bosnia and Herzegovina's European perspective.
Furthermore, Turkey supports and appreciates the
efforts of the European Union to assist Bosnia and
Herzegovina to take its rightful place in the European
family of nations, including by providing stability
through its Police Mission and Operation Althea.

As an active contributor to both of these missions,
Turkey supports the extension of the executive
mandate of the European Union-led peacekeeping force
and remains ready to continue with its contributions.
We believe that the future of the region is closely tied
to that of Europe as a whole. We firmly support Bosnia
and Herzegovina's aspirations to fully integrate into
Euro-Atlantic institutions. We hope that those
institutions will also embrace Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We also hope that the internal difficulties impeding
Bosnia and Herzegovina's effective cooperation with
NATO will soon be resolved.

Having mentioned the internal difficulties, we
cannot help but share the concerns of Mr. Inzko
regarding several aspects of the domestic situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, in particular with respect to
the continued anti-Dayton rhetoric and actions that
challenge the sovereignty and constitutional order of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The lack of progress in the
reforms necessary for the integration of the country
into Euro-Atlantic institutions is a direct consequence
of the divisions and negative stances in the internal
political situation. I should say that this trend stands in
clear contradiction to the improved regional
atmosphere, and is thus all the more unnecessary and
counterproductive. Unilateral actions not only
complicate the functioning of the State, they also have
adverse consequences for those who promote them, as
they further delay the closure of the Office of the High
Representative.

At this point, let me also underline that we firmly
support the High Representative in using the powers
granted to him to lead Bosnia and Herzegovina to a
better future. As such, the challenges to the authority of
the international community and that of the Steering
Board of the Peace Implementation Council are
unacceptable.

Let me conclude by once saying that the past
15 years have clearly shown that Bosnia and
Herzegovina is moving in the right direction. We
support Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is up to Bosnians
to make their country prosper and to undertake the
necessary reforms to bring about a more viable State.
As such, we want to see all parties embrace a common
vision and act accordingly, rather than pursue narrow
ethnic interests. We therefore support the democratic
forces in the country and remain hopeful that the
democratic ideals and aspirations of the peoples of
Bosnia and Herzegovina will eventually overcome the
divisive tendencies.

On the other hand, we believe that the integration
of Bosnia and Herzegovina into Euro-Atlantic
structures will eliminate any feelings of exclusion,
instil confidence in the peoples of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and ensure its future as a strong, stable,
secure and whole European country. Turkey is fully
committed to this objective. We will do everything
possible to assist the peoples of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, without any distinction among them, to
achieve their rightful place in the international
community.

