Mr. Nishida (Japan): At the outset, I would like
to extend my appreciation to Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Mulet, head of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH),
for his informative and comprehensive briefing. I also
would like to express my respect for the men and
women of MINUSTAH and the commitment and
fortitude they have demonstrated in the difficult
situation following the earthquake. I would also like to
state Japan's appreciation for the statement made by
the Representative of Haiti.

In addition, I welcome the appointment of the
Governor-General of Canada, Ms. Michaelle Jean, as
Special Envoy for Haiti for UNESCO, and the fact that
she will start her work in that role soon.

I welcome the report of the Secretary-General on
MINUSTAH issued this month (S/2010/446). As the
report mentions, the most immediate challenge in Haiti
is the organization of the presidential and legislative
elections scheduled to take place on 28 November.
Political stability is an essential component of the
overall stabilization in Haiti, and these elections are a
prerequisite for the achievement of political stability.
In this regard, the elections must be implemented in a
fair, transparent and secure manner and ensure the
broad participation of the Haitian people.

From that point of view, we encourage
MINUSTAH, in collaboration with the international
community, to provide the necessary technical, logistic
and security assistance to the Government of Haiti for
the smooth implementation of the elections. Japan
would also like to cooperate with the Government of
Haiti, MINUSTAH and the other international
organizations towards the success of the elections.

Japan commends MINUSTAH and the troop- and
police-contributing countries on their success in
maintaining relative calm in the security situation in
Haiti. At the same time, we wish to express our
concern regarding the occurrence of sexual violence
and violent forced evictions in camps for internally
displaced persons, the presence of escaped inmates
from collapsed prisons, and the increased incidence of
drug transshipment and kidnappings.

In that connection, we welcome the fact that
cooperation between Dominican and Haitian police has
been improved under the auspices of MINUSTAH.
Haiti cannot be reconstructed in the absence of a stable
security situation. We therefore urge MINUSTAH to
exert every effort to maintain a secure environment and
to provide sufficient capacity-building support for the
Haitian National Police. Japan also takes note of the
ongoing activities for the provision by MINUSTAH of
logistical support and technical expertise to rule of law
institutions of the Haitian Government, in accordance
with resolution 1927 (2010).

We acknowledge as well the opinion of the
Secretary-General that current troop and police levels
should be maintained until the assessment of the
security environment takes place after the installation
of the new Government. The mandate of MINUSTAH
will be considered for renewal in mid-October. Japan
will support the extension of the mandate and will
participate in the Security Council discussion on the
matter in a constructive manner.

The Government of Japan has dispatched
approximately 330 personnel, comprising a Japan
Ground Self-Defence Force (SDF) engineer squadron,
and this SDF contingent has made a contribution to the
reconstruction of Haiti by carrying out tasks such as
removal of debris, dismantling of damaged buildings,
repair of facilities in IDP camps and repair of roads on

the border with the Dominican Republic. In addition,
the Government of Japan has continued to fulfil its
commitment to the people of Haiti through the
provision of temporary housing, implementation of
counter-infection measures, food distribution and the
dispatch of disaster protection experts. The
Government of Japan also recently decided to support
border control capacity in Haiti by providing necessary
equipment to police stations. I strongly believe that
these activities will contribute to accelerating Haiti's
reconstruction process.

More than eight months have passed since the
catastrophe occurred, and we recognize that
reconstruction efforts should be further accelerated,
ensuring continuous provision of necessary
humanitarian support to the Haitian people. There are
high expectations of MINUSTAH in this regard, and we
call on MINUSTAH to continue to utilize its maximum
capacity, within its mandate, for Haiti's reconstruction.

We welcome the fact that the Interim Haiti
Recovery Commission was established in April and
that it has begun its work to play a role in coordinating
the long-term reconstruction efforts. To realize Haiti's
reconstruction, continuous international involvement is
essential. From that point of view, the Government of
Japan, in close cooperation with the Government of
Haiti, the Interim Haiti Recovery Commission,
MINUSTAH and the international community, will
continue to provide support for the reconstruction of
Haiti, drawing on its experience and knowledge as an
earthquake-prone country and placing particular
importance on the fields of education, medical care,
employment and rule of law.

