Mr. Wang Xuexian (China) (interpretation from Chinese): The Chinese delegation would like to offer a
warm welcome to the Ambassador of Angola and other
members of the Permanent Mission of Angola.

The Angolan Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation, which the Angolan people and the
international community have longed to see, has finally
been established. This is yet another important milestone in
the Angolan peace process. China rejoices heartily at this
development and wishes to extend its warm congratulations
to the Angolan people and both parties in Angola. We
appreciate and welcome the political sincerity and positive
attitude the parties concerned have demonstrated towards
peace in Angola, in conformity with the popular will.
China has stated on many occasions that the settlement
of the question of Angola ultimately rests with the Angolan
people themselves. We feel gratified that the two parties in
Angola have, through their efforts, achieved another major
goal set by the Lusaka Protocol. We hope that the two
parties will continue to accomplish other tasks in the peace
process so that the Angolan people will again be able to
enjoy peace and tranquillity and the country will be able to
embark on the road of rehabilitation and development at an
early date.

China has consistently held that the international
community has the responsibility to promote the Angolan
peace process and help bring peace to Angola. At this final
critical juncture of the peace process, it is still necessary for
the international community, including the United Nations,
to give further support. On the basis of this consideration,
the Chinese delegation supports the extension of the
mandate of United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM. III) to 30 June 1997 and will vote in favour of
the draft resolution before us.

At the same time, we support further adjustments to
UNAVEM. III in the light of the gradual development of
the situation in Angola and sincerely hope that the two
parties in Angola will continue to cooperate with
UNAVEM. III to fully implement the Lusaka Protocol with
a View to bringing peace to Angola.

An Angola of reconciliation is finally presented to the
world 30 months after the signing of the Lusaka Protocol.
This is another example of African countries, following
Sierra Leone and Liberia, successfully resolving conflicts
and achieving national reconciliation through political
negotiations. We feel truly delighted that all of southern
Africa has become a land of peace and harmony, that hot
spots have been removed one after another from the
African continent and that more and more African
countries are moving towards peace and development. We
would like to take this opportunity to extend our warm
congratulations and pay high tribute to the African people.

A new page has now been turned in the history of
Angola and a new era of economic recovery and national
reconstruction has arrived. After many years of war,
Angola has to tackle mountains of tasks in every field.
The Angolan Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation is faced with the dual mission of
consolidating peace and reviving the economy. The road
is long, and the task is arduous. The international
community, including the United Nations, should assist
Angola in every possible way to achieve rapid
rehabilitation and development. This is also the
fundamental guarantee for lasting peace in Angola. The
Chinese Government and people are ready to make their
contribution to this end.

