Mrs. Machado (Brazil): Mr. President, I thank

you for your statement and Secretary-General Ban Ki-

moon and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the

Republic of Iraq, Mr. Hoshyar Zebari, for their
statements.

I would also like to commend the United States
for its initiative in convening this meeting during its
presidency, allowing Council members to take stock
and update their assessment of the situation in Iraq. We
are also grateful for the invitation extended to
Brazilian Vice-President Alencar, who was not able to
attend.

In recent years, Iraq has made progress towards
strengthening democracy and the rule of law and
improving security and public order. We commend the
Iraqi Government for successfully holding elections
last March, and we welcome the agreement last month
to form a national partnership Government. It is our
hope that all political leaders will be able to ensure a
broad-based Government of national unity. We
recognize the important role that the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) has had in that
process, and we expect that it will continue to assist the
Government of Iraq, as is foreseen in the Mission's
mandate. Those achievements will help address the
continued fragility of the security situation in Iraq and
counter recurrent attempts to destabilize that multi-
ethnic and religiously diverse country.

Brazil strongly condemns all forms of violence,
including terrorism. Terrorism must be combated in all
its forms. However, terrorism cannot be fought at the
expense of the respect for human rights.

We must recognize the courage and resilience
with which the Iraqi people have faced so much
suffering since 2003. Brazil deplores all human rights
abuses and the thousands of civilian deaths in Iraq.
Nevertheless, we believe in the capacity of Iraqis to
enable their country to emerge as a stable, peaceful and
prosperous nation.

I join other members of this Council in
recognizing the importance of Iraq achieving an
international status equal to that which it held prior to
the adoption of resolution 661 (1990). That view is
consistent with the progress made so far by the country
in several areas, especially in security and
governmental institutions.

It is also consistent with Brazil's long-standing
position that the future of Iraq should be determined by
the Iraqis themselves. We have always affirmed the
need to fully respect the independence, sovereignty,
unity and territorial integrity of Iraq. Brazil profoundly
deplored the 2003 military action, in particular the fact
that it took place without the express authorization of
this Council. After the intervention took place, the
Brazilian Government made clear its View that the
Iraqi people should take full control of their own
affairs at the earliest possible date.

The painful experience of the war in Iraq should
lead the international community to reflect on the
importance of upholding the United Nations Charter
when military action and the resort to Chapter VII
measures are being contemplated.

The time is ripe for bringing a formal end to
Chapter VII measures, such as the oil-for-food
programme and the restrictions on civilian nuclear
activities, thus paving the way for the normalization of
Iraq's relations with the United Nations and its full
reintegration in the family of nations.

Concerning the issue of disarmament, we
welcome Iraq's accession to relevant multilateral
treaties, in particular the Chemical Weapons
Convention, as well as its decision to seek
parliamentary approval for the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty.

The normalization of Iraq's relations with all its
neighbours, in particular Kuwait, is essential. Security
in Iraq is one of the pillars of stability in the Middle
East. Once security is sufficiently improved, we must
also ensure a safe return for Iraqi refugees. According
to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, over 4.7 million Iraqis have been
displaced since March 2003.

We welcome the appointment earlier this year of
the first Iraqi Ambassador to Kuwait since 1990 and
other promising bilateral initiatives. More needs to be
done regarding the repatriation and return of all
Kuwaiti missing persons or their remains. There are
also issues not fully resolved with respect to the
demarcation of the Kuwaiti border, along with other
matters relating to property and compensation. We note
the commitment previously expressed by the Iraqi
Government in that regard and expect the new
Government to act accordingly.

The international community must continue to
support Iraq at this crucial moment for its
independence, sovereignty and stability. Brazil will
soon be the first Latin American country to reopen its
embassy in Baghdad, and we look forward to
strengthening our cooperation with Iraq, which testifies
to our continued commitment to the stability of the
region and to the progress of the country. Brazil
reiterates its confidence in the Iraqi people and
Government and their capacity to build a prosperous,
peaceful and democratic country.

The United Nations can continue to contribute in
facilitating dialogue, defusing tensions and bridging
differences among Iraqi political forces. We reiterate
our full support to UNAMI and Special Representative
Ad Melkert. The Mission, however, will only be able to
play the role expected by the Council if it has the
adequate means and resources at its disposal, including
for its own safety and security. A special account for
UNAMI should be considered.

Iraq has come a long way towards stability and
prosperity. It must regain its rightful place in the
international community. A stable and united Iraq is in
the long-term interest of peace and security in the
region and beyond. Sustaining Iraq's stability can only
be achieved through its social and economic
development. We must all learn the lessons of history
and continue to cooperate with Iraq to ensure that such
common goals are achieved.

I cannot conclude my statement without thanking
you, Mr. President, for recalling the extraordinary
character of my countryman Sergio Vieira de Mello
and his contributions to world peace.

