Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of Austria, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece,
Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
the Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden and the United Kingdom.

The absence of any improvement in the situation
on the ground over the past three months has further
impeded prospects for peace. Significant obstacles
include the lack of trust between Israelis and
Palestinians; Israel's continued occupation of the
West Bank, including East Jerusalem; the ongoing
illegal expansion of settlements; the constant threat of
violence against civilians; the incitement of hatred and
violence; the lack of progress towards intra-Palestinian
reconciliation; and the severe financial crisis faced
by the Palestinian Authority. Those developments are
occurring against a wider political backdrop, including
at the regional level, that threatens the viability of the
two-State solution.

The position of the European Union (EU) remains
unchanged, based on international law and relevant
Security Council resolutions and centred on our firm
commitment to a just and comprehensive resolution to
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict through a negotiated
two-State solution. Our goal is to fulfil the legitimate
aspirations of both parties, including Israeli and
Palestinian security needs and Palestinian aspirations
for statehood and sovereignty.

The parameters for the resolution to the conflict
are well known and recognized internationally and
the EU's position in that regard has been set out in
detail on numerous occasions, such as in the Council
of the European Union's conclusions of July 2014.
They include the need to reach an agreement on the
borders of the two States, based on the June 1967
lines, with equivalent land swaps. They also request
security arrangements that, for Palestinians, respect
their sovereignty and show that the occupation is
over and, for Israelis, protect their security, prevent
the resurgence of terrorism and deal effectively with
security threats, including new threats in the region.
They call for a just, fair, agreed and realistic solution
to the refugee question, and they underline the need
to fulfil the aspirations of both parties with regard to
Jerusalem, for which a way must be found to resolve its
status as the future capital of both States.

We emphasize that direct negotiations are an
important way forward to resolve all permanent-status
issues. The EU will recognize changes to the pre-1967
borders, including with regard to Jerusalem, only when
agreed by the parties. Ultimately, we want to see the
State of Israel and a sovereign, independent, democratic,
contiguous and viable State of Palestine living side by
side in peace and security. That position is based on
respect for international law. It is in the interests of the
parties themselves, not least because it guarantees a
democratic future for Palestinians and Israelis alike. It
is also in the interests of the broader region and in the
European Union's own interests.

Last month, the United States published a set of
economic proposals, entitled "Peace to Prosperity", and
subsequently presented them at a workshop convened
in Manama, together with the Kingdom of Bahrain. We
take note of the acknowledgement by the United States
that the vision outlined in Manama would be embedded
in a political plan. We are ready to work with the United
States and the other Quartet partners, as well as our
partners in the region, with the objective of ensuring
that the implementation of economic projects will
improve the situation on the ground and contribute to
the two-State solution. The EU and its member States
have long been reliable economic and development
partners to the Palestinian Authority and other partners
in the region.

The EU, together with Norway, will continue to use
the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
International Assistance to Palestinians as a relevant
framework, not least because it is one of the rare
international forums with the participation of both
the Israeli Government and the Palestinian Authority.
However, the main obstacle to development in the
occupied Palestinian territory is the lack of a political
solution to the conflict. We are convinced that genuine
and sustainable economic development must accompany
but cannot substitute for a political solution that, among
other things, brings an end to the occupation and takes
into account the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian
and the Israeli peoples alike.

One area of serious ongoing concern is that of
continuous Israeli settlement construction, including
recent announcements of a number of new projects
around Jerusalem's Old City. Our position on settlement
policy is clear and remains unchanged. All Israeli
settlements in the occupied West Bank, including
East Jerusalem, are illegal under international law and
figure among the significant obstacles to peace and
development that erode the viability of the two-State
solution and prospects for lasting peace, as reaffirmed
by resolution 2334 (2016). We also underline that any
form of unilateral annexation, in particular de jure
annexation of already existing settlements, would
represent a further breach of international law and
further undermines the political solution based on the
agreed international parameters.

The demolition and seizure of Palestinian-owned
structures have significantly increased in recent
months, notably in East Jerusalem. Evictions there have
also taken place again, such as in Sheikh Jarrah and,
most recently, in Silwan. Israeli authorities proceeded
yesterdaywith the demolition of 10 Palestinian buildings,
containing some 70 apartments, in Wadi Al-Hummus in
occupied East Jerusalem. The majority of the buildings
are located in Area A and Area B of the West Bank,
where, according to the Oslo Accords, all civil issues
are under the jurisdiction of the Palestinian Authority.
The spokesperson for European Union Foreign Affairs
and Security Policy called the Israeli authorities to
immediately halt those ongoing demolitions, which
are illegal under international law. Such developments
mark a clear change in the current characteristics and
demographic make-up of Jerusalem. Furthermore,
we also remain very attentive to the developments in
the Bedouin village of Khan Al-Ahmar. We remain
strongly opposed to such demolitions; confiscations,
including of EU-funded projects; and forced transfers
and evictions, as well as other actions taken in the
context of Israel's settlement policy.

A further immediate concern relates to the financial
crisis facing the Palestinian Authority. We expect the
economic and fiscal agreements between Israel and
the Palestinian Authority to be implemented in full.
Meanwhile, we call on the Palestinian Authority to
accept the tax transfers on a provisional basis, bearing in
mind the fact that the delivery of health care, education
and security to millions of ordinary Palestinians,
which is indispensable for the full enjoyment of their
human rights, remains in the interest of all sides. In
our view, accepting the transfers on a provisional basis
would not constitute a legal or political endorsement
of the Israeli decision. Continuous revenues would
also ensure that the ongoing work to build the capacity
of a future Palestinian State is not interrupted - an
objective which the EU regards as important for the
two-State solution.

The EU continues to oppose all forms of terror and
firmly rejects and condemns any incitement to Violence
and hatred, which are fundamentally incompatible with
advancing a peaceful two-State solution. We expect
both the Palestinian and the Israeli authorities to take
steps against violence. We are extremely concerned by
the increased settler Violence, and we call upon Israel to
take actions in that regard.

The situation in Gaza remains dire and continues
to fuel extremism and radicalization and to foster
instability. Notwithstanding the ceasefire arrangements,
the EU is deeply alarmed by the sharp escalation of
violence and the loss of human lives in recent months,
resulting in a high number of Palestinians, including
children being killed and injured. We strongly condemn
the repeated firing of rockets by Hamas and Palestinian
Islamic Jihad from Gaza into civilian areas in Israel,
and call upon the Palestinian factions in Gaza to refrain
from any acts of violence.

The EU continues to be concerned by Israel's
use of force against demonstrators, and expects
the Israeli authorities to respect the principles of
necessity and proportionality, while acknowledging
Israel's legitimate right to safeguard the security of
the Israeli people. We repeat our call on all parties
to take urgent steps leading to a fundamental change
in the humanitarian, political, security and economic
situation in Gaza, including through an end to the
closure policy and a sustained opening of the crossing
points, which are important for Gazans' daily lives.
We welcome the fact that, according to recent reports,
Israel has eased entry restrictions on certain materials.
We welcome such efforts and encourage further steps
in that regard and commend the efforts of Egypt, Qatar
and the United Nations Special Coordinator to improve
the humanitarian situation in Gaza.

The lack of intra-Palestinian reconciliation is
one of the significant obstacles to peace and to the
realization of the two-State solution. We therefore
continue to urge Palestinian factions to engage in
good faith in the reconciliation process. We welcome
the renewed efforts of some factions, as facilitated by
Egypt only few weeks ago. We again value Egypt's role
in this process. A single, legitimate and democratic
Palestinian Authority, with full control over the whole
Palestinian territory, including Gaza, is critical to
fulfilling the national aspiration of the Palestinian
people and to achieving a viable Palestinian State. We
encourage the prompt setting of a date for the planned
Palestinian elections in the West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, and the Gaza Strip.

Until a fair, just, agreed and realistic solution to
the Palestinian refugee issue, in accordance with
international law, is found, the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency in the Near East (UNRWA), is best
placed to provide them with the necessary protection and
essential services. The services provided by the Agency
contribute to the viability of the two-State solution and
to the stability and security of the region. It is vitally
important that the Agency receive the financial support
that it needs in order to fulfil its mandate.

We commend the Agency's efforts to overcome
the ongoing financial crisis. We welcome the success
of the pledging conference of 25 June that took
place under the auspices of the United Nations. The
provision of services and food delivery, in particular
to the vulnerable population in the Gaza Strip, are now
guaranteed over the summer months. We encourage
others to also demonstrate their support to the Agency's
work to ensure the continuity of its mission and its
mandate again this year.

Allow me to briefly turn to the situation in Syria.
It is the worst crisis of our times - a conflict that has
displaced half of the Syrian population, threatened the
stability of the entire Middle East and provided fertile
grounds for the rise of the so-called Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant/Da'esh.

The European Union has voiced strong concern
over the violence in north-west Syria. Military strikes
by Syrian regime forces, supported by Russia, have
destroyed internally displaced persons camps, schools
and health facilities, which should be the safest spaces.
Hundreds of civilians have lost their lives, and more
than 330,000 have been displaced, many of them for the
second or third time.

The continued presence and activities of United
Nations-listed terrorist groups in the area contribute to
the suffering of civilians and remain of grave concern.
Yet, fighting terrorist groups cannot justify violations
of international humanitarian law. The EU reminds all
parties, in particular the regime and its allies, of their
obligations under international humanitarian law and
international human rights law. We continue to call
upon Russia and Turkey to restore the ceasefire in Idlib
that they agreed on under the Sochi memorandum. The
EU stresses again the need to establish an effective and
lasting nationwide ceasefire in Syria.

There is no way ahead towards sustainable peace
but by resuming intra-Syrian negotiations in Geneva
and achieving a Syrian-led solution that will lead to
a political solution, in line with unanimously adopted
resolution 2254 (2015). Only an inclusive political
solution can form the basis for national reconciliation
and pave the way towards free and fair elections.
The European Union will therefore maintain its
strong support for the United Nations-led process in
Geneva and continue to support the efforts of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria to revive the
political process and assist in the establishment of a
balanced and inclusive constitutional committee to
pave the way for free and fair elections, in accordance
with resolution 2254 (2015), and to support Syrian
civil society, including women and their equitable and
meaningful engagement in the political process.

We will remain at the forefront of international
efforts to promote accountability and justice and to
combat impunity as part of any future process of
national reconciliation in Syria. We will continue to
support the International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and
Prosecution of Those Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011 and
the assiduous work of the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic.
The EU strongly condemns the practice of arbitrary
detention, the enforced disappearances of civilians
and torture in detention, primarily used by the Syrian
regime as a form of retaliation and retribution, as well
as by terrorist groups.

The EU has strengthened its sanctions against the
Syrian regime this year by adding business individuals
and entities who benefit from supporting the Al-Assad
regime, as well as others responsible for chemical
attacks. The EU will continue to consider further
restrictive measures against Syria as long as the
repression continues. We will also continue our support
and funding for the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons and fully back its efforts to
identify the perpetrators of chemical attacks in Syria
in order to hold them accountable for their crimes. We
reiterate our call to have the situation in Syria referred
to the appropriate justice mechanisms, including the
International Criminal Court.

Finally, the EU continues to support the efforts of
the Global Coalition to Counter Da'esh. To contribute
to the enduring defeat of Da'esh, the EU will continue
to respond with stabilization efforts, while promoting
inclusive, independent and representative local
governance in north-east Syria.

We support the right of Syrian refugees and
internally displaced persons to a safe, voluntary,
dignified and sustainable return. We support the
assessment of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees that those conditions are
not in place yet. For the third consecutive year, the
European Union and the United Nations co-chaired the
Brussels Conference on Supporting the Future of Syria
and the Region, from 12 to 14 March. Pledges made at
the conference have reached a total of €8.3 billion for
2019 and beyond. Two-thirds of the funds were pledged
by the EU and its member States.

The Conference was also an occasion to reiterate
our firm position on reconstruction. EU support for
reconstruction will be possible in Syria only once
a comprehensive, genuine and inclusive political
transition, consistent with resolution 2254 (2015) and
the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex), is firmly
under way. In that respect, I would like to inform the
Council that the European Union intends to host a high-
level event on Syria during the high-level week of the
seventy-fourth session of the General Assembly.

