Mr. Straw (United Kingdom): Like other
colleagues, I would like to express my profound sorrow
at the news early this morning of the aeroplane crash in
this city of New York and to offer the sincere
condolences of the Government of the United Kingdom
to the loved ones of the victims, to the people of New
York and, through you, Secretary Powell, to the
Government and people of the United States. Any such
loss of life happening at any time in any country would
be terrible, but I believe that we all understand that the
news of this disaster, whatever its cause, at this time
was bound to be doubly traumatic for the residents of
New York City and for the people of the United States
as a whole.

Mr. President, may I express my thanks for you to
calling this timely meeting and for your chairmanship
of the meeting.

Yesterday at 11 a.m., 11 November, people in the
United Kingdom stopped doing what they were doing
for two minutes to remember those servicemen and
women who have been killed in the course of duty,
fighting to uphold the values of human dignity, human
rights and freedom that we all hold dear. They do this
every year. In the last 50 years, there has been only one
year when no British citizen has died in this cause.

The United Nations has its roll of honour as
well - alas, too long - of citizens of the world
community who have sacrificed their lives for the
cause of peace and for the principles of this United
Nations.

As we all know, 11 November had a new meaning
this year - exactly two months since thousands of
innocent people lost their lives in the heinous terrorist
attacks on New York and on Washington. We should
never forget that a third of the nations of the world lost
their own nationals in that one single terrorist act.

Terrorism is not new in the world, and, sadly,
very far from new in the United Kingdom, where over
the last 30 years we have lost more than 3,000 of our
people as Victims of terrorist acts. But on 11 September
the world saw terrorism on an unprecedented,
horrifying scale. My Government, the British
Government, has a simple message for terrorists and
those who support terrorism: terrorism, the deliberate
targeting of innocent people for political ends, is
criminal, and there is no political, religious or
ideological cause which can possibly justify the use of
such indiscriminate violence.

I am glad to say that the international resolve is
strong. The declaration which the Security Council will
adopt today sets out the unequivocal condemnation of
all acts of terrorism. Council resolution 1373 (2001)
was an historic event: the first resolution to impose
obligations on all States to respond to the global threat
of terrorism. Its implementation has to be a priority for
every Member of the United Nations in collaboration
with, and assisted by, this Council's Counter-Terrorism
Committee.

I am glad to recall that in the year 2000, when I
had the privilege of being the United Kingdom's Home
Secretary, we were able significantly to strengthen our
anti-terrorism laws, and we are now taking further
measures fully to meet the requirements of resolution
1373 (2001). Some of these new measures are before
the United Kingdom Parliament this week. The overall
aim of these changes is to reinforce the civil liberties
that really matter - like the right to life itself and the
right to live without the fear of the terrorist bomb or
the terrorist bullet. We are also cutting back on the
opportunities for terrorist suspects to abuse or to
exploit the freedoms of the United Kingdom, freedoms
which the same terrorists themselves seek to destroy.

The United Kingdom has ratified the 12 existing
United Nations conventions, and we urge others to
accelerate their work to do so. We will continue to
work to complete the comprehensive convention on
terrorism.

It is the View of the United Kingdom that we have
actively to confront terrorism, the financing of
terrorism, the drugs trade of terrorists and the States
which harbour terrorists. The message that must go
from here is that we are all united in our resolve and
our actions to defeat terrorism. In that regard, the news
from the north of Afghanistan of military advances is
welcome. It can only be the first step, if an essential
one, to the overall liberation of Afghanistan, to the
establishment there of a broad-based, representative
and multi-ethnic Government, and to our goal of a

world free from the twin scourges of terrorism and of
war.

