Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America): First,
I would like to welcome the presence of the Secretary-
General. I take this as another indication of his resolve
to work for the resolution of the crisis in Darfur.

The United States is pleased that the Security
Council has mandated a United Nations/African Union
hybrid peacekeeping operation for the Darfur region of
the Sudan. This force, known as UNAMID, will have a
strong mandate to protect civilians and to support the
implementation of the Darfur Peace Agreement.
UNAMID is the largest operation ever deployed by the
United Nations. This peacekeeping force of nearly
26,000 military personnel and police promises to play a
critical role in ending the suffering of the people of
Darfur.

The human toll in Darfur has been staggering.
More than 200,000 people have died from conflict, and
more than 2 million people have been forced from their
homes and Villages into camps both inside and outside
the country. These displaced people are highly
vulnerable to attack, malnutrition and disease, and they
need our immediate help.

The brutal treatment of innocent civilians in
Darfur is unacceptable to the United States. Since
2005, the American people have given more than
$2 billion towards humanitarian relief and
development.

The hybrid operation represents a new and unique
form of cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union, and the adoption of this resolution
is the culmination of intense efforts by many in the
international community over the past several months.
It must now be implemented without delay.

In its initial phase, the hybrid operation will draw
most of its forces from the existing African Union

Mission in the Sudan (AMIS) and from the United
Nations light and heavy support packages of assistance
to AMIS. The transfer of authority from AMIS to the
hybrid operation must occur as soon as possible. The
transition is imperative, because it will combine the
resources of the United Nations and of the African
Union under a unified command and control. It will
also allow additional hybrid forces to rapidly deploy
and supplement the troops on the ground. The transfer
could take place before the end of 2007, and we call on
the United Nations and the African Union to expedite
that transition.

In adopting this resolution, the Council is
entrusting UNAMID, its force commander and its
personnel with carrying out its mandate using the full
range of its authorities. UNAMID has the authority
under Chapter VII to use force to prevent armed
attacks, to protect civilians and to prevent any
disruption of the implementation of the Darfur Peace
Agreement.

It is imperative that the Government of the Sudan
and other signatories comply fully with the Darfur
Peace Agreement. The Agreement, among other things,
prohibits attacks on civilians and protects them from
being harassed, abducted, intimidated or injured. The
Agreement also prohibits obstructing the delivery of
humanitarian aid, restricting the free movement of
people and goods, issuing hostile propaganda and
inciting military action.

The parties must also comply with the
requirements of the present resolution, which in turn
demands compliance with relevant agreements. We call
on the Government of the Sudan and all other parties to
the conflict in Darfur to cooperate fully with the
implementation of this resolution and all other relevant
resolutions, to cease attacks against civilians
immediately, to permit full and unhindered access for
humanitarian assistance and to engage fully in the
political process led by the United Nations and the
African Union to promote peace.

The United States will continue its efforts to
promote a broadly supported and inclusive political
settlement, which is the only long-term solution to the
crisis in Darfur. We call, in particular, on President
Al-Bashir to provide maximum cooperation with the
deployment of the new peacekeeping force. We hope
that his acceptance of the force marks a new chapter in
his cooperation with the international community. If

the Sudan does not comply with the Darfur Agreement,
and if the Sudan does not comply with this resolution,
the United States will move for the swift adoption of
unilateral and multilateral measures.

On 29 May, President Bush made a promise to
the people of Darfur. He said, "The United States will
not avert our eyes from a crisis that challenges the
conscience of the world". Today, the Council has acted
and taken a significant step towards ending that crisis
by mandating the deployment of a peacekeeping force
in Darfur. Now the Sudan faces a choice: the Sudan
can choose the path of cooperation or defiance. Just as
all eyes are on the Council to help protect the civilians
of Darfur, so too are all eyes upon the Sudan, and we
look to its Government to do the right thing and pursue
the path of peace.

