Mrs. Taj (United Republic of Tanzania): We
thank Assistant Secretary-General Angela Kane for her
update on the situation in the Middle East.

Like other delegations, we are deeply troubled by
the recent developments in Israel and the occupied
Palestinian territory. The upsurge of violence in the
past three days, sparked by the abduction of an Israeli
soldier by the military wing of Hamas, is deeply
regrettable. It is clear that the Israeli incursion into
Gaza over the kidnapping of the soldier is aimed at
persuading the Palestinians to give him up. Israel has a
right to defend its people, but instead of engaging in
such a broad military action, it should have given
dialogue a chance. The outcome of the incursion in
search of the kidnapped solider is hurting the
Palestinian civilian population disproportionately.

As a result of the Israeli action, a large of part of
overpopulated Gaza is without water, electricity and
fuel - a situation likely to lead to a humanitarian
disaster of unimaginable proportions. That is above and
beyond the difficulties that the Palestinians are already
experiencing on account of unpaid salaries and the
refusal to transfer funds to pay for basic social
services.

We call for the immediate cessation of hostilities
and for dialogue to replace military action. In that
regard, we welcome the efforts of President Hosni
Mubarak of Egypt to try to find a solution to the
current crisis.

In this very complicated political and military
situation, we urge both sides to exercise maximum
restraint. The use of force cannot provide a solution to
this problem; on the contrary, it will aggravate it. To
de-escalate the tension, Hamas should release the
Israeli soldier. For its part, Israel should realize that
military pressure only ends in counter-violence from
the Palestinian side. It should therefore observe
international law, exercise caution and avoid
strengthening the resolve of the Hamas military wing
and other military groups to continue fighting.
The arrests that Israel has made of the Hamas
leadership are unjustified and can only serve to
increase hostilities. We believe that their release will
help to reduce tension.

Meanwhile, we appeal for international efforts to
calm the situation and for action to avert a
humanitarian crisis in the area.

