Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): France
thanks you, Sir, for presiding personally over this
meeting. We also thank Mauritius for having taken the
initiative of convening this public debate on Africa, a
continent central to the Security Council's concerns
and commitment. I welcome the presence of our friend
Mr. Amara Essy, Secretary General of the Organization
of African Unity (OAU), who embodies the hopes for
the African Union. I would like to express our gratitude
to the ministers who have done us the honour of
joining us at this table and to Ambassador Ivan
Simonovic', President of the Economic and Social
Council.

Later in the debate, Mr. Javier Solana, whom I
welcome, will deliver a speech on behalf of the
European Union, with which France fully aligns itself.

Africa has made indisputable progress over the
past few years in regard to both entrenching democracy
and economic development. However, numerous
conflicts, domestic and inter-State, are slowing and
eclipsing the gains. That is why, at the request of
African leaders, the Security Council has progressively
agreed to become engaged there in a partnership for
peace and security. It is a partnership that requires all
the instruments of intervention available to the
Council.

First of all, there is conflict prevention. In the
interests of discretion, it is usually the Secretary-
General who commits the authority of his office,
calling on the parties concerned to seek a peaceful
solution. When it believes the moment to be ripe,
however, our Council does not hesitate to act. It did so,
for example, in May 2000 by going to Addis Ababa
and Asmara to try to prevent war between Ethiopia and
Eritrea and to plead for the implementation of the OAU
Framework Agreement approved in Algiers. It was in
that spirit, too, that our Council issued yesterday an
important statement on Madagascar, as was done by the
OAU previously.
The Council, of course, fully supports the
initiatives of the OAU and subregional organizations to
prevent conflicts. I am thinking in particular of the
early warning observatories of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development. I have
in mind, too, the moratorium on small arms in West
Africa and, to cite something more immediate, the
proposed meeting of the three heads of State of the
Mano River Union.

More often, however, our Council is invited to act
in conflict resolution in support of efforts begun by the
Africans themselves under the auspices of the OAU
and subregional organizations. Today, it is important to
welcome the success of the peace operation led by the
United Nations, in conjunction with ECOWAS, in
Sierra Leone. With more than 17,000 soldiers
deployed, the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
is currently the largest Blue Helmet operation. As a
result, 43,000 combatants have been disarmed and
demobilized. On the strength of this achievement, we
can organize elections which will put a final end to 10
years of conflict. There has been too much talk of the
United Nations failures not to focus now on this
promising development. We are all determined to
conduct this operation to complete success.

In the Horn of Africa, 4,000 United Nations
soldiers are supervising the Peace Agreement between
Ethiopia and Eritrea. Our Council will soon be sending
an important mission there to help resolve outstanding
problems. It will prepare the way, we hope, for the
unfaultable implementation by the two countries of the
Boundary Commission's decisions on the demarcation
of the border.

We must turn our attention again to Somalia. The
country has been abandoned by everyone for too long.
The hopes born of the Arta process have unfortunately
not been realized, and the Council must now throw its
full weight behind the initiative taken by the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
heads of State at their recent meeting in Khartoum. As
soon as circumstances permit, arrangements must be
made for the United Nations to return to Mogadishu.

In Burundi, the Council supported the initiatives
of Presidents Nyerere and Mandela. France welcomes
the assistance of South African troops in the
implementation of the Arusha Accord. It supports the
regional initiative and calls on the rebel movements to
return without delay to the peace process. Next week,
the Council will have the opportunity to make a
detailed and particularly timely review of this question
with President Buyoya.

But it is perhaps in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo that the Council has invested most, and
rightly so. In three years, the conflict there, in which
seven neighbouring States are involved, has claimed
2.5 million Congolese lives. Through a series of
meetings, a trusting partnership has been established
between the Council and all the signatories of the
Lusaka Accord. We are determined to continue our
action until peace is achieved. We shall be unflagging
in our resolve. As I said before Minister She Okitundu
this morning, the time has surely come to consider,
with our African partners, the objectives of a new
Council mission that could go to the Great Lakes
region in the spring.

Altogether, peacekeeping operations in Africa
involve more than half the total number of Blue
Helmets deployed throughout the world, at a cost of
more than $1.5 billion. This shows the extent to which
Africa is an absolute priority for the Council.

As a complement to diplomatic efforts and the
deployment of peacekeeping troops, the Council has
made better use of the instrument of sanctions. They
were imposed on UNITA and the Revolutionary United
Front (RUF), and proved effective because they were
carefully targeted and associated with clear-cut
political objectives. Most of the sanctions now have
time limits, and their implementation is regularly
evaluated and monitored by panels of independent
experts. This is how the Council brought to light the
key role played by the trafficking in arms and highly
valuable natural resources in the perpetuation of
conflicts in Africa, from Sierra Leone to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and from Liberia
and Angola. We must further increase our pressure to
halt instances of such trafficking, which are inter-
related. From this perspective, France is proposing the
creation of a permanent follow-up mechanism on the
application of Security Council embargoes. A unit of
independent experts could be established under the
supervision of the Security Council and sanctions
committees. France will submit a text on this subject to
its partners in the next few days.

The promising partnership between the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) and the Security
Council has been steadily expanded to other
institutions. In the face of complex conflicts, the
Council has elaborated exit strategies that include a
military component, certainly, but also the necessary
reconstruction of the State, the economy and the
society of the countries concerned. To implement these
coherent strategies, we have learned to work with the
World Bank and the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP). This is the case in Sierra Leone.
It should also be the case in Burundi and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. All donors can
make a decisive contribution to the success of these
two peace processes by making an immediate
commitment. It is essential that the ravaged peoples of
these two countries receive now the dividends of the
peace to come. Only these global strategies will make
possible the lasting progress of good governance and
human rights.

It is in this context that a proposal has been made
to create a working group on Africa. The idea seems
interesting to us, and it will be necessary for Council
members to consider the particular mandate that might
be conferred on this group.

France is resolutely committed to all of these
matters. The ties formed by history account for our
position, but there is another reason behind it. For
France, Africa is a matter of the heart. That is why,
more than 40 years after the wave of independence,
France remains the leading donor of bilateral aid to the
African continent, providing it with $4.5 billion in
2000. In addition, it has cancelled debt on a huge scale,
amounting to more than $8 billion.

France is also determined to continue its efforts to
promote peace, together with the OAU and the Security
Council. It has 5,800 troops on the African continent
today, in Chad, Cote d'Ivoire, Djibouti, Gabon and
Senegal, at the request of those countries. But France
now wishes to help the Africans themselves handle
security problems. Our Reinforcement of African
Peacekeeping Capacities programme (RECAMP) is
helping to train and equip African units that can be
placed under United Nations command. That is the
case, for example, with the Senegalese contingents that
today serve with the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

More generally, France welcomes the
determination of African heads of State to take in hand
the development of their continent. We have already
expressed our support for the African initiative, the
New Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD).
On 8 February in Paris, President Chirac will convene
a meeting of about a dozen African heads of State and
Government and the President of the OAU in order to
review the work done within the framework of
NEPAD, with a view to the G-8 Summit in Kananaskis.

There is no doubt that France, with the OAU
today, the African Union tomorrow, and the Security
Council, is and will remain by the side of the African
countries that wish to move forward towards peace and
development.

