Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to align myself with previous
speakers in extending my condolences to the victims
of the horrible attack in Pakistan. To the people and
the Government of Pakistan, we emphasize the need
for solidarity between the international community
and Pakistan in confronting this horrible crime and
bringing those who planned and carried it out to justice.

I also thank you, Mr. President, for holding this
important debate. I welcome you to New York, Sir.
I also express my deep gratitude to the Secretary-
General, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and to the
African Union High Representative for Mali and the
Sahel, His Excellency Mr. Pierre Buyoya, and I thank
them for their briefings.

The multiplicity of challenges and conflicts
confronting our world today and additional burdens
carried by United Nations peacekeeping activities
confirm the need to put in place updated and
comprehensive strategies and to seek innovative
solutions and methods to deal effectively with these
challenges. That means giving a greater role to
regional and subregional organizations and consulting
with them when it comes to defining the mandates
of peacekeeping operations, on the one hand, and to
improving the mechanisms for dealing with emerging
conflicts in those regions, on the other hand.

Jordan welcomes the strengthening of effective
strategic partnerships between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in the field of
peacekeeping, especially with organizations in regions
where there are conflicts, such as the African Union,
the European Unio, the League of Arab States and other
organizations. We also encourage taking advantage of
the geographic, political and cultural advantages of
these organizations in order to enhance the effectiveness
of the implementation of peacekeeping mandates and
in dealing with conflicts. Such organizations have
a particular ability to understand the root causes
and peculiarities of conflict, which allows them to
participate effectively in conflict resolution, whether
through political efforts or in the protection of civilians.

Jordan welcomes the role of the African Union in
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, especially through
joint mechanisms with the United Nations such as the
close collaboration between the Peace and Security
Department of the African Union Commission and the
United Nations Office to the African Union.

We also appreciate the African Union's role in
ensuring a smooth transition of tasks from the African
Union to United Nations forces on behalf of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan, the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central African
Republic and the United Nations Operation in Somalia.
Cooperation with that important regional organization
is particularly critical, considering the multiple
challenges confronting the African continent and the
many States suffering due to long-term challenges and
conflicts.

We therefore reaffirm the need to support the
African Union and provide the necessary expertise
and resources to maintain its capacities in managing
conflicts and maintaining international peace and
security, especially in Africa, in order to achieve its
desired call to spread peace throughout the African
continent.

The synergy of efforts on the part of the
African Union and other organizations helps in
maintaining collective security and mediation and
confidence-building efforts among parties to any
conflict. African Union forces also have a constructive
role to play in setting the stage for United Nations
peacekeeping operations and determining the nature of
the activities needed to deal with emerging conflicts in
Africa.

We also emphasize the need for continued
coordination between the two organizations and
complementarity in their tasks in relation to post-
conflict stages. That is embodied in preserving and
reinforcing the ability of the African Union in the
maintenance of peace and security as carried out by
international peacekeeping operations and building
upon that through effective integration and engagement
in political activities among the parties to the conflict
focused on promoting human rights and rule of law
and developing the electoral and party system; because
each of those tasks represents an important pillar in
the maintenance of peace and security on the African
continent.

Moreover, Jordan reaffirms the need to preserve the
central role of the United Nations throughout all stages
of support for regional and subregional organizations.
Also important is keeping the Charter of the United
Nations, especially Chapter VIII, as a guide, when
considering cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union.

Through those effective partnerships, the United
Nations can provide support to the efforts of African
States to assist them in shouldering their responsibilities
to overcome the challenges before them with greater
effectiveness, in addition to providing assistance to those
States in developing and implementing programmes in
development and capacity-building in Africa, in line
with United Nations development programmes.

Jordan welcomes the comprehensive review of
peacekeeping operations over the past 15 years, which
will be further developed in 2015. We also consider
it very important that the initiative should include an
assessment of the activities and participation of regional
and subregional organizations in peacekeeping.

Jordan looks forward to the recommendations to be
provided by the Secretary-General in the first quarter
of the next year regarding progress in consultation
and cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations in peacekeeping operations, on
the basis of which we would then be able to study the
effectiveness of the partnerships and ways to improve
them and to restructure peacekeeping operations on a
case-by-case basis.

