The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has reviewed the issue of
demining in the context of United Nations peace-
keeping and has given careful consideration to the
views expressed in the open debate under the item
'Demining in the context of United Nations peace-
keeping' in its 3689th meeting on 15 August 1996.

"The Security Council, bearing in mind its
responsibilities with regard to United Nations peace-
keeping, notes that the widespread indiscriminate use
of anti-personnel mines in areas of United Nations
peace-keeping operations poses serious impediments
to such operations and to the safety of United Nations
and other international personnel. Against this
background, the Council states the following:

"1. Operational demining should be, wherever
appropriate, an important element and an integral part
of peace-keeping mandates. This will facilitate the
implementation of those mandates and better enable
the Secretary-General to allocate appropriate resources
towards achieving their objectives.

"2. The early deployment of mine-clearance
units will often be important to the effectiveness of a
peace-keeping operation. The Council encourages the
Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations to
examine options for achieving such early deployment.
It also encourages Member States to examine whether
and in what form they might be able to help in this
respect.

"3. The tasks of, on the one hand, operational
mine clearance during peace-keeping operations,
 

which is the responsibility of the Department of
Peace-keeping Operations, and, on the other hand,
longer-term humanitarian mine-clearance activities,
which fall under the responsibility of the Department
of Humanitarian Affairs, are different. The Council
is, however, aware of linkages and
complementarities between different elements of
conflict resolution as well as of the need to ensure
a smooth transition from demining as a peace-
keeping requirement to demining as part of peace-
building in a follow-up phase.

"The Security Council, thus, is of the opinion
that coordination and a clear delineation of
responsibilities between the two Departments as well
as with regard to other United Nations agencies
dealing with demining could be further improved so
as to avoid duplication of effort and to guarantee a
coherent and integrated approach towards the whole
range of short and long-term demining needs. With
particular reference to paragraph 51 of the report of
the Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations
of 7 May 1996 (A/S l/ 130), the Council requests the
Secretary-General to intensify his efforts aiming in
this direction.

"The Security Council emphasizes the
importance of coordination by the United Nations of
activities related to mine clearance in the context of
United Nations peace-keeping, including those by
Regional Organizations, in particular in the areas of
information and training.

"4. The primary responsibility for demining in
the context of United Nations peace-keeping lies
with parties responsible for the laying of mines.
Parties to a conflict must desist from further mine
laying once a peace-keeping operation is established.
They are also obliged to facilitate humanitarian and
military demining efforts by providing detailed maps
and other relevant information on those mines that
have already been laid by them and by contributing
financially or otherwise to their removal.

"5. The international community should
intensify, multilaterally or bilaterally, its efforts in
assisting those parties to a conflict which have
shown their readiness to cooperate with mine
clearance, mine awareness and training programmes
in the context of United Nations peace-keeping
operations. In this connection, the Council welcomes
the establishment by the Secretary-General of a

 
United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund for Demining as
a necessary and timely mechanism to channel funding
to humanitarian demining operations.

"The Security Council appeals to all States to
contribute to this Fund as well as to other voluntary
funds set up by the Secretary-General for certain
peace-keeping operations which contain demining
elements.

"6. Demining activities should, as much as
possible, make use of the appropriate modern mine-
clearance technologies and specialized equipment and
focus on the creation and strengthening of local
demining capabilities; training programmes should
attach particular importance to this aspect. Where this
would be of benefit to the operational effectiveness of
a peace-keeping operation, consideration should also
be given to including provision for the training of a
local demining capability in mandates of peace-
keeping operations.

 

"The Security Council encourages the Special
Committee on Peace-keeping Operations, given its
responsibility for a comprehensive review of the
whole question of peace-keeping operations, to
continue and intensify its considerations of the
operational demining aspects of peace-keeping
operations. These considerations might include an
analysis of mine-clearance experience in previous
peace-keeping operations.

"The Security Council is of the view that the
elements outlined in this statement are not
exhaustive. The Council will thus keep this issue
under review in the context of the establishment of
peace-keeping operations and the consideration of
specific mandates."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1996/37.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The meeting rose at 12 noon.
