Prince Zeid Ra'ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan): In
the debate held in the Security Council under this item
last year, my delegation described in some detail the
law applicable to the occupied Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem, as confirmed previously by
the decisions of the Council and by the 2004 advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice.

We wish to summarize our principal point briefly
again today: the applicable law in respect of the
exercise by Israel of military control over the occupied
Palestinian territories is not Israeli law, nor whatever
domestic law Israel sees fit to impose there, but
international humanitarian law applicable to all high
contracting parties, as well as obligations that are erga
omnes. Israel's administrative and military regulations,
insofar as the West Bank is concerned, can be lawful
only if they are utterly consistent with the Fourth
Geneva Convention and its control guided strictly by
its obligations as the occupying Power.

The position of the International Court of Justice
on this very last point is unambiguous. It maintained,
in paragraph 78 of its 2004 opinion on the Legal
Consequences of the construction of a wall in the
occupied Palestinian territory, that:

"The territories situated between the Green
Line and the former eastern boundary of
Palestine under the Mandate were occupied by
Israel in 1967 during the armed conflict between
Israel and Jordan. Under customary international
law, these were therefore occupied territories in
which Israel had the status of occupying Power.
Subsequent events in these territories have
done nothing to alter this situation. All these
territories (including East Jerusalem) remain
occupied territories and Israel has continued to
have the status of occupying Power." (see A/ES-10/273)

It is also merits noting that there are no territorial
exceptions to that finding: all the territory of the West
Bank, as described by the Court, is considered
"occupied". A closer reading of Security Council
resolution 242 (1967) also bears this point out, as we
explained before the International Court of Justice on
24 February 2004. In his oral submission, the late Sir
Arthur Watts, Q.C, Counsel for Jordan, noted how
resolution 242 (1967)

"affirmed, unanimously, the principle of Israel's
withdrawal of its armed forces 'from territories
occupied in the recent conflict' - and that meant,
and could only mean, territories on the
non-Israeli side of the Green Line. Thus the
Green Line is the starting line from which is
measured the extent of Israel's occupation of
non-Israeli territory; originating in 1949 as an
armistice line, it became in 1967 the line to the
Israeli side of which Israel had to withdraw its
forces, and on the non-Israeli side of which
territory was 'occupied' by Israel." (International Court ofJustice document CR 2004/3)

It is also perhaps worth our recalling how, in
negotiating the draft for what became resolution 242
(1967), the understanding reached between the
principal interlocutors was for a withdrawal from all
non-Israeli territory, with only minor reciprocal border
rectifications.

For decades Israel has been settling on territory
which does not belong to it, against the wishes of the
Palestinian people, to whom the territory does belong
and for whom freedom from military occupation is
long overdue. Is it right that their suffering - as
highlighted again in the most recent report of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
focusing on the humanitarian impact of the settlements
policy - draws from us, the international community,
year after year, only the thinnest response, best
encapsulated by the word "noted"?

It is deeply regrettable how in recent years the
Security Council has proved itself unable to adopt a
position on the issue of settlements. The transfer by the
occupying Power of parts of its own population into
the territory it occupies represents a clear and
continuing serious violation of the laws and customs
applicable in international armed conflict as codified
by article 49 of the Fourth Geneva Convention and
which is defined as a criminal act in article
8(2)(b)(viii) of the Rome Statute.

After all, the Council is obliged, under the terms
of Articles 24, paragraph 2, and Article 1, paragraph 1,
of the United Nations Charter - articles which
necessarily go together - to act in accordance with the
purposes of the Charter, and one of those purposes is
"the principles of justice and international law".

How can the exercise of the veto by a permanent
member on the basis of Article 27, paragraph 3, of the

Charter, in respect of the Israeli settlements being built
in the occupied Palestinian territories, fit in with the
two other Articles of the Charter I just mentioned:
Article 24, paragraph 2, and Article 1, paragraph 1?
Are we comfortable with the fact that some of the
permanent members can, by their actions, make the
Council seemingly bypass the principles of justice and
international law? The argument is, of course,
applicable not just to transfer and settlement-building,
but also to other serious violations of international law
and international criminal law, and not just restricted to
the consideration of Israeli conduct, but also to the
conduct of others in our immediate neighbourhood
within the Middle East. Can the veto be used or
threatened like this, so unrestrictedly, when the
violations are so serious? And why should, in any case,
Article 27, paragraph 3, eclipse in importance Article
24, paragraph 2, and Article 1, paragraph 1?

All of this is lamentable, I am afraid. It is small
wonder that, when I served with the United Nations in
the Balkans in the early 19905, the Council and its
actions seemed on many occasions to us to be so
distant from the bloody events unfolding before us
there.

The actions of the Israeli settler movement in the
occupied Palestinian territories must, for obvious
reasons, now stop, and the deep suffering of the
Palestinian people must be brought to an end through
the establishment of their own State on the basis of the
4 June 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
living side by side with Israel in peace and security.

The Israelis will on occasion say to us that
resolving the conflict is less a matter of law than of
psychology, and, given the rhythms and the very real,
catastrophic traumas of Jewish historical experience,
they are cautious about placing their trust in anybody,
let alone, they say, in us, the Arabs. And perhaps, we
must concede, we could have done more to better
understand that point, done more to develop greater
trust by, inter alia, better explaining the terms of the
Arab Peace Initiative to the Israeli public. On the other
hand, the actions of States must also be guided by
customary international law, which the Council itself
must uphold and not undermine. Moreover, our deep
opposition to the policy of settlement-building and our
repeated condemnation of it, which we reiterate today,
is not founded on some form of genetically based
enmity or bigotry towards the Jewish people, and any
assertion of that is thoroughly distasteful to us, for it is
simply not true.

What it is built on is a continuing, three-decade-
long violation of international humanitarian law,
confirmed by the International Court of Justice in its
advisory opinion of 2004 and understood as such by
the vast majority of States existing in the world today.

Finally, the exploratory talks currently under way
in Jordan are not inconsistent with the law; far from it.
The key, as most of us know, to the resolution of the
settlements issue politically relies on the formulation
of an early agreement on the border rectifications, on
the basis of the interpretation just mentioned in my
statement. We hope that there will be a positive
outcome in this regard soon, opening the way for the
much-needed final status negotiations, which will
ultimately lead to freedom, security and peace.

