Mr. Mohammad Kamal (Malaysia): My delegation
would like to express its appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for convening this open briefing today on
the report of the Independent Inquiry into the actions of
the United Nations during the 1994 genocide in Rwanda.
The formal consideration of this first-of-its-kind document
is overdue. For too long, the Organization has shied away
from acknowledging a serious flaw in judgement in its
handling of the situation in Rwanda. The 1994 slaughter
of the 800,000 people still reverberates today, and in
order for us to exorcise this ghastly failure, we must
muster the courage to accept and recognize, in all
humility, our shortcomings. More importantly, we must
learn from the tragedy and not allow a repetition of
Rwanda in any part of the world.

In this regard, we would also like to express our
appreciation to the former Prime Minister of Sweden,
Mr. Ingvar Carlsson, for introducing a sobering, critical
report that has catalogued in painful detail how the United
Nations ignored abundant warnings of impending carnage
and withdrew most of its peacekeeping force as the
massacres began.

We also wish to commend Secretary-General Kofi
Annan for his decision in commissioning the report and
for his courage in making a public expression of his
profound regret and acknowledgement of responsibility.
Malaysia believes that it is for the good of the
Organization that the truth be made known. We must
restore the credibility of this Organization and, more
importantly, contribute to the healing and reconciliation
process of the Rwandan people.

 

Aside from its account of what actually happened, the
report of the Independent Inquiry is also noteworthy for the
timing of its release. Its issuance, on 16 December 1999,
came on the heels of an equally critical internal report
detailing how, in July 1995, the United Nations allowed the
Bosnian Muslim safe area of Srebrenica to be overrun by
Bosnian Serbs. Together, these inquiries have established an
admirable new standard of candour at the United Nations.
They could point the way towards more effective
international action if similar situations were to arise in the
future.

We can succeed only if we are honest with ourselves
and have a clear idea of what has been wrong up to now.
We must strive for a clear set of criteria and guidelines on
how, in future, to better implement and coordinate the
whole range of United Nations activities in the area of
peace and security.

The report has clearly assigned responsibility for the
limitations of the original mandate given to the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR) where
it belongs. It is clear that an inadequate and flawed analysis
underpinned the recommendations to the Council, which
accepted the recommendation that the Mission be composed
of fewer troops than the field mission had considered
necessary. UNAMIR's mandate was cautious from its
inception; it was to become equally cautious in its
application on the ground. The mandate was applied in a
manner which would preserve a neutral role for UNAMIR
under a traditional peacekeeping mandate - one that was
grossly inadequate to halt the genocide. This was the scope
of the action that was perceived to have support in the
Security Council. Despite a deteriorating security situation
which should have prompted a more robust and preventive
role for the United Nations, no steps were taken to adjust
the mandate to the realities of the situation on the ground.

Council members must also share the responsibility -
obviously, some more than others. There was no will to
deploy a more substantial force or to use "all necessary
means" to protect civilians at risk. It is clear from the
report that an adequate number of properly trained,
equipped and supported troops could have averted the
horrific tragedy.

It has often been said that UNAMIR was an operation
which was established in the shadow of Somalia. In
particular, the tragic deaths of United Nations peacekeepers
in Somalia in 1993 had a deep effect on the attitude
towards the conduct of peacekeeping operations. The
experience of Somalia appears to have had a constraining
effect on the Secretariat, in particular with regard to the
risks that could be assumed during peacekeeping
operations and in respect of the interpretation of
mandates. Nevertheless, while criticism can be levelled at
the mistakes and limitations of the capacity of
UNAMIR's troops, responsibility should also be shared
by the great majority of United Nations Member States,
which were not prepared to send any troops or materiel
to Rwanda.

My delegation welcomes the commissioning, release
and discussion of the report. It throws much light on the
circumstances surrounding the tragedy that engulfed
Rwanda, which is extremely useful to States Members of
this Organization. However, many questions that should
have been addressed by the Independent Inquiry were
kept in abeyance. Such questions revolve around the
identity of perpetrators and possible accomplices in the
murderous attack that claimed the lives of the heads of
State of Rwanda and of Burundi. That attack, as pointed
out in many parts of the report, served as a catalyst for
the Rwandan genocide. We note that the report is based
on evidence collected from only one side in the conflict,
that is, the Rwandese Patriotic Front (RPF) and its
collaborators. Similar interviews with other personalities
in exile could have proved useful. Such exiles include
members of the two successive transition Governments
before the assassination of President Habyarimana, as
well as members of the first RPF Government who had
to flee the country.

We think it would perhaps have been useful for the
Independent Inquiry to have included in its
recommendations the setting up of a more comprehensive
and detailed commission of inquiry on the Rwandan
genocide. We believe that Rwandans mourn not only the
Tutsis and moderate Hutus who were massacred in 1994,
but also other Hutus and Tutsis who were massacred
before and after that period by extremists from all sides.
Such an inquiry, while painful, would serve to bring this
great tragedy to closure, thereby contributing to the
necessary process of reconciliation between the two ethnic
groups, which is important for the future peace and
tranquillity of the region.

We note the Organization's admission, in the
aftermath of the 1994 tragedy, that it had, indeed, learned
some lessons from Rwanda. It had failed to respond to
several warnings of the impending genocide. Six months
before the massacre, for example, a report by the United
Nations Commission on Human Rights in Geneva
signalled what was to come, but the report never made it

 

to the desks of senior peacekeeping officials in the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, who might have
acted on it. The failure of communication within the
Secretariat and with the Security Council is less likely now.
However, better internal communication is not the whole
answer. The ability of the United Nations to respond to
crises can be only as strong as the will of its leading
members to provide the necessary resources. It is
regrettable that the Council's failure to prevent the slaughter
in Rwanda has led many to question its perceived
selectivity when deciding to intervene in conflict situations.

The United Nations may not be able to meet all of the
world's many humanitarian challenges. But this report from
the Independent Inquiry, coming on the eve of the new
millennium, should be a turning point for this Organization.
The Organization must make a difference to populations at
risk whenever necessary, wherever they happen to be. The
shame of the Srebrenica massacre was that the United
Nations had stationed a token peacekeeping force in the
town, large enough for it to claim that it cared about the
fate of Bosnian Muslims, but too small to actually help
them. The shame of Rwanda, likewise, is that the United
Nations did send a token force to the region but then stood
by as the horror unfolded. We must learn from the lessons
of this tragedy and come to terms with our acts of
omission. In this regard, it is imperative that we give
serious consideration to the 14 recommendations of the
report, which, if adhered to, would ensure non-repetition of
the tragic blunder made in respect of Rwanda. We must
thank the authors of the report for speaking out without fear
or favour.

