Mr. Lauber (Switzerland) (spoke in French): For
more than 15 years and in many partner countries,
Switzerland has supported and assisted transitional
justice and other efforts to deal with the past, by which
societies are trying to cope with atrocities they have
experienced. Switzerland is convinced that dealing
with the past can, in the right circumstances, contribute
to reconciliation. Echoing several delegations in their
statements from this morning, we remain convinced
of the critical importance of national and international
criminal justice in reconciliation and lasting peace. I
would like to highlight three issues in that regard.
First, a process-based approach is crucial ifwe are to
help transform relationships, which is a central element
of reconciliation. Efforts to deal with the past must be
holistic and properly sequenced. Too often, scattered
initiatives, sometimes imposed from the outside, have
deepened the rifts in societies rather than repaired
them. Ongoing coordination and concerted action
within the United Nations, including in the Security
Council, with national authorities and other relevant
stakeholders is needed. We also join those members of
the Council members who highlighted the key role of
the Peacebuilding Commission in this regard.

Secondly, experience shows that efforts undertaken
at the local level stand a good chance of succeeding.
Local approaches result in concrete initiatives and
skills that can be of great use at other levels of the State
structure. The United Nations, including the Security
Council, should serve as a catalyst for these positive
dynamics and help to enhance them. The United Nations
has the important responsibility of raising stakeholder
awareness when such initiatives may violate human
rights or other peremptory norms of international law.

Thirdly, inclusion is key. While national authorities
and, where appropriate, the international community,
must assume the primary responsibility for working
towards reconciliation, dialogue among political elites
alone cannot ensure lasting peace. Other leaders and
representatives of political and social groups, including
women, young people and minority representatives,
need to be part of the process. Religious leaders, for
example, play a crucial role as providers of social
services and spiritual and moral guidance. They often
influence the values and narratives shaping a country's
political culture.

The United Nations can do better in engaging
with more diverse interlocutors. For its part, the
Council must recognize civil society's essential role
in reconciliation and peacebuilding, as proven by the
many civil society briefers who have come before the
Council. The Council must also take a clear stance in
the relevant items on its agenda on the need to protect
human right defenders.

