Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): As this is the first time you are presiding
over a meeting in the Chamber, Mr. President, allow
me to sincerely congratulate you. Equatorial Guinea
remains firmly committed to cooperating with you as
you conduct your challenging work.

I welcome Vice-Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Regional Integration of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, His Excellency
Mr. Leonard She Okitundu. His continued attendance
at Security Council briefings concerning his country
demonstrates his Government's commitment to taking
part in the Council's debates on the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Equatorial Guinea also thanks Ms. Leila Zerrougui
for her efforts at the helm of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We congratulate and thank her
for briefing to the Council on the Secretary-General's
report (S/2018/174) so soon after her appointment. It has
helped to us to better understand the current situation
in the country.
Equatorial Guinea continues to closely follow,
as it must, the developments in the sisterly country
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I reiterate
my country's commitment to peace there. Stability in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo is essential to
the political process. Equatorial Guinea welcomes the
initiatives adopted to improve the political environment
and approve the electoral calendar on 5 November 2017
and other measures to ensure the successful holding
of elections on 23 December. We urge the Congolese
Government, the Independent National Electoral
Commission, national and international partners and
all political actors to take all the measures necessary
to guarantee a clean, fair and transparent process that
respects the current Constitution and the comprehensive
and inclusive Political Agreement of 31 December
2016. Equatorial Guinea believes that the international
community and all main actors involved in the conflict
should provide all of the required logistical support
to the Independent National Electoral Commission to
ensure that elections are held as scheduled, with every
possible guarantee.

It is essential to highlight the fact that, in order
to resolve the problems in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the international community must fully
respect the Government's leadership and authority. The
solutions developed by the international community
will be more effective if they are complemented by
Government action. In that regard, as Ms. Zerrougui
just highlighted in her briefing, the commitment of the
Government to take measures to ensure the holding
elections in December must be acknowledged.

The security and humanitarian situation continues
to be of concern. Clashes persist in the east of the
country, thereby preventing the normalization of the
situation and, by extension, causing a humanitarian
crisis that, according to United Nations reports, has
reached alarming levels. The illegal exploitation
of natural resources on the part of militias and
other armed groups still active in the area must end
immediately. We reiterate our call upon all parties to
refrain from perpetrating acts that could worsen the
already dire situation. The international community
must redouble its efforts to provide an urgent response
to the humanitarian needs of the country.

Equatorial Guinea believes that a political solution
achieved through frank, direct and inclusive dialogue
among Congolese is the only way to achieve peace in
the largest country in Central and Southern Africa. All

groups active in the country must participate in the
political dialogue with a positive attitude.
Finally, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea reiterates
its full support for the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and for its tremendous humanitarian
efforts and willingness to promote peace, security and
stability in that country. Similarly, Equatorial Guinea
congratulates and thanks regional organizations,
such as the African Union, the European Union, the
Southern African Development Community and the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,
for their efforts to bring about peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

