Ms. Mac Loughlin (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to congratulate you, Sir, for having proposed
this open debate on a particularly topical subject, namely,
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
made by the representative of Spain on behalf of the
Group of Friends of resolution 1540 (2004).

I would like to say how pleased we are to see a
brotherly country chairining the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), given our region's unwavering commitment to
non-proliferation. Latin America and the Caribbean
were pioneers in establishing a zone free of weapons
of mass destruction. Likewise, we welcome the
adoption of the declaration of the States members of
the Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in
Latin America and the Caribbean (OPANAL) on the
fiftieth anniversary of the conclusion of the Treaty for
the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America
and the Caribbean.

There are many highly distressing cases in which
international terrorism has shown ample proof of
its destructive capacity. The use of weapons of mass
destruction by non-State actors in recent years has
ceased to be an abstract or theoretical problem and
has served to highlight the need for Member States to
redouble their efforts to prevent terrorist groups from
gaining access to weapons of mass destruction, their
related materials and means of delivery.

For Argentina, by its scope and nature, resolution
1540 (2004) represents the clearest response by the
United Nations to the problem of weapons of mass
destruction and their access by non-State actors. Since
its adoption, 13 years ago, Argentina has addressed the
resolution by striving to preserve the balance between
its traditional commitment to non-proliferation and
a reaffirmation of the sovereign right to the peaceful
use and development of advanced technologies such
as nuclear, chemical, biological, pharmaceutical and
nanotechnology. Both principles are enshrined in the
text of resolution 1540 (2004) as well as in resolution
2325 (2016), co-sponsored by our country and adopted
only six months ago. In that context, on 26 October
2004, the Republic of Argentina submitted its first
national report, together with successive updates,
thereby demonstrating its unwavering commitment to
the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and becoming an active member of the five
non-proliferation regimes, as well as the Proliferation
Security Initiative.

Member States should redouble efforts to strengthen
and update our national export control systems, which
we believe should be based on four fundamental pillars:
a transparent and standardized national licensing
system; effective compliance with current legislation
applicable to export controls, including brokering and
trans-shipment aspects; increased corporate awareness
of the importance of such systems for industrial
development and for the security of international trade;
and close regional cooperation.

With regard to regional cooperation, I wish to
emphasize that Argentina provides assistance under
resolution 1540 (2004) and has developed training
activities on identifying sensitive items at subregional
and regional levels, as well as through South-South
cooperation with African countries.

Argentina considers it essential to ensure that
dual-use chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear
materials are properly protected, and out of the hands
of those who would not hesitate to use them to terrorize
others and sow panic and destruction. It is illusory to
believe that we live in security while there are such
materials lacking the proper protection, and without
the implementation of international regulations at the
global level.

In particular, for Argentina, the Amendment to
the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear
Material has been in force for more than a year. Last
April in Buenos Aires, together with the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and the

National Institute of Industrial Technology, we
organized the second Regional Course on Chemical
Safety and Security Management in Laboratories.

Argentina is convinced that, beyond the protection
of materials that we can guarantee at the national
level, we must work constructively to foster dialogue
between nuclear- and non-nuclear-weapon countries,
with the understanding that the only guarantee that
such weapons or related materials will not be acquired
by non-State actors would be their total elimination.

Lastly, Argentina reiterates its call for the
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula and calls
upon the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to
abandon its nuclear military programmes in a complete,
verifiable and irreversible manner, in accordance
with the resolutions of the Security Council. Those
programmes represent a threat to international peace
and security.

The Argentine delegation would also like to
say that the call for the complete elimination of
chemical weapons is a key element of its position on
non-proliferation and disarmament. In that context,
Argentina firmly reiterates its absolute condemnation
ofthe use of chemical weapons and the use of chemicals
as weapons by any actor and under any circumstance.
