Mr. Ele Ela (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish):
We salute Mr. Jean Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, and Mr. Parfait
Onanga-Anyanga, the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for the Horn of Africa, whose presence we
especially welcome as he assumes his new functions.

Equatorial Guinea reiterates its appreciation for
the stabilizing role that the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) plays in the Abyei
Area through its consistent efforts to communicate
and mediate between the Ngok Dinka and Misseriya
communities, which demonstrate its commitment to
the welfare of the people of the Abyei Area and the
border zones. The joint peace committee meetings
between these communities should be regularly held
for all the communities living in the Abyei Area with
a view to bringing the conflict to an end. However, we
are concerned about the increasing problems with law
and order in the Area. In that regard, we encourage the
Sudan and South Sudan, the two countries concerned,
to continue their joint planning for establishing the
Abyei police service by granting visas to increase
UNISFA police personnel.

We cannot ignore the most recent developments in
the Sudan in the context of the issues of Abyei, UNISFA
and the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism. The state of affairs is still uncertain and
we should monitor events on the ground closely. We
believe that this is not the time to make new decisions
with regard to the Sudan, and we must give the new
authorities some time to reveal their intentions on
a wide range of relevant issues, clearly including the
issue of Abyei and the Sudan's relationship with South
Sudan. At this time, the Security Council's demands on
the Government in Khartoum should focus on ensuring
stability throughout its territory and remaining fully
committed to its existing agreements, including those
relating to a settlement of the conflict in Abyei. In
that regard, we believe that UNISFA's involvement
is essential to maintaining stability in these times of
great uncertainty, including its contribution to the Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism. In
that context, the approval of the extension of UNISFA's
mandate for six months is more than timely. For the
same reason, we do not think that the number of
UNISFA troops should be reduced, indeed we advocate
rather the opposite, in order to maintain and preserve
the achievements that have been made.

The 2011 Agreements remain the only way to
achieve lasting stability in the region and the border
between Sudan and South Sudan. All the parties must
clearly reconfirm their commitment to them and make
the necessary efforts to take steps to achieve peace and
stability as soon as possible.

In conclusion, we thank all those who have made
the progress in the Abyei Area possible - the African
Union, the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism and the Ethiopian troops. They have shown
commendable determination in the search for peace and
security in the border area. We urge them to maintain
the momentum and spirit of compromise required for
the implementation of the signed agreements.

We also urge the Government in Khartoum to
engage as soon as possible in talks with South Sudan
and with regional, African and international partners,
in particular UNISFA, in order to address the challenges
facing the country with regard to Abyei in particular
and its relations with South Sudan in general.

