The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Cuba, Egypt, Israel, Jordan,
Lebanon, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Slovenia and the
Syrian Arab Republic, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Cohen
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table; the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side ofthe Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter dated
21 January 2008 from the Permanent Observer of
Palestine to the United Nations, which will be issued as
document 5/2008/32 and which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council being held
on Tuesday, 22 January 2008, regarding the
situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
2
participate in the meeting in accordance with the rules
of procedure and previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mansour
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.


The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Lynn Pascoe,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Pascoe to take a seat at the Council
table.

I should also like to inform the Council that I
have received a letter dated 22 January 2008 from the
representative of the Libyan Arab J amahiriya, in which
he requests that an invitation be extended, pursuant to
rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure,
to His Excellency Mr. Yahya Mahmassani, Permanent
Observer of the League of Arab States to the United
Nations, to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. Unless I hear any objection, I
shall take it that the Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Yahya Mahmassani.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Mahmassani to take the seat reserved
for him at the side of the Council chamber.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2008/3l, which contains a letter dated 21
January 2008 from the Charge d'affaires a.i. of the
Permanent Mission of Saudi Arabia to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs. I now give the floor to Mr. Pascoe.


