Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): We thank Special
Envoy de Mistura for his comprehensive and very
informative briefing today. My country acknowledges
and greatly values his unfailing commitment to seeking
a peaceful solution and progress for Syria.

Kazakhstan therefore welcomes the memorandum
signed on 17 September in Sochi by the Defence
Ministers of Russia and Turkey on stabilizing the
situation in the de-escalation zone in Idlib in Syria.
We call on all the parties in Syria to cooperate in
implementing the agreement and ensuring safe and
unimpeded humanitarian access to all areas through
the most direct routes. We stress the need to forge a
durable political solution in line with resolution 2254
(2015).

We hope that the agreements reached in Sochi
are expeditiously implemented, with full respect for
international humanitarian law and the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of Syria,
based on the preference for continued dialogue. This
option is timely for preserving and consolidating what
has been achieved, and we are convinced that the
agreement has created an opportunity to jump-start
political talks.

Thanks to recent positive developments, we
estimate that across much of the country the situation
is now calmer than it was before. But we agree that
humanitarian needs remain substantial and call
on Member States to come forward to mitigate the
situation. We commend the Special Envoy's attempts
to involve different States of the Middle East, the Gulf
region and Europe in this process. In the current phase,
the coordination of regional and international efforts
should take advantage of the momentum in this regard,
in order to promote the innovative regional paradigm
that is needed to support both the Geneva and Astana
processes. We must take all necessary measures to
uphold the ceasefire and promote the peace process.

Kazakhstan underlines the importance of achieving
a political solution in Syria, especially through the
formation of a genuinely credible and inclusive
constitutional committee as a major step towards
reaching a political settlement to the crisis. Astana fully
supports the Special Envoy's efforts aimed at achieving
a comprehensive settlement, especially in the crucial
months ahead, and looks forward to achieving tangible
results. We wholeheartedly wish the Special Envoy a
fruitful visit to Damascus next week.

We also emphasize that it is the Syrians themselves
who should begin to shape the future political system
of the Syrian State, with the necessary legislative
reforms, a territorial and administrative structure,
and presidential and parliamentary elections. Only
a politico-diplomatic approach, confidence-building
measures and political goodwill - in the spirit the
Charter of the United Nations and Security Council
documents on preventive diplomacy and sustaining
peace - can bring proper and full results.

There is therefore a strong need to continue
supporting the aims of the Astana talks and additional
Geneva negotiations in order to see positive outcomes.
We believe that the Syrian people are capable of
determining their own future. However, fulfilling their
aspirations for democracy, reconstruction and stability
is impossible without genuine international support.

Finally, based on its analysis of recent events,
Astana believes that the evolution of the situation in
Syria has laid the foundation for a qualitative change
for the better - the final elimination of terrorists on
the country's territory, the beginning of a real political
process, the revival of economic activity and the return
of refugees to their homeland.

