Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic ofVenezuela
has the honour to speak on behalf of the 120 States
members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

The Movement takes this opportunity to reaffirm
its solidarity with the Palestinian people and their
inalienable rights and just cause at a time when the
situation on the ground in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, is at a critical and
unsustainable juncture.

The Security Council has the responsibility of
ensuring the maintenance of international peace and
security. The organ must uphold its obligations, as
established in the Charter of the United Nations, and
take action to implement its own resolutions, which
constitute the basis for a peaceful, just and lasting
solution to the conflict and are legally binding for all
Member States. That is why we are concerned about the
fact that the Security Council has been unable to fulfil
its own mandate owing to the use of the veto by one of
its permanent members.

The Movement continues to believe that resolution
2334 (2016) offers the only viable path to peace , by
establishing the requirements for a just settlement on
the basis of the two-State solution , and while respecting
the terms of reference historically endorsed by the
international community, in accordance with United
Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles , including
the land for peace principle, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the Quartet road map. That should ensure that the
Palestinian people enjoy their inalienable rights. We
therefore call for the implementation of the resolution
and for it to be respected by the occupying Power.
We insist on respect for and the implementation of
all relevant United Nations resolutions. It is imperative
that immediate action be taken to remedy the current
situation on the ground, reduce tensions and foster an
environment conducive to the quest for peace. We must
avoid the adoption of unilateral, provocative or arbitrary
measures, which serve only to embolden Israel to
continue its illegal policies and practices in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem.

The Movement continues to be concerned about
the situation in the Gaza Strip, which is especially
grave on the humanitarian front and continues to
deteriorate day by day. We therefore call for the Israeli
blockade to be completely lifted, which continues to
inflict unspeakable humanitarian, social and economic
suffering on more than 2 million Palestinian children,
women and men in Gaza.

That crisis must be addressed comprehensively
and in accordance with international law, including
international humanitarian law and human rights law
and all relevant United Nations resolutions, in the
context of Israel's continued illegitimate and hostile
foreign occupation of Palestinian territory, since 1967,
and of all of the calls for an end to an occupation that
has lasted for more than half a century.

Given that Israel has renounced its obligations as an
occupying Power under the Fourth Geneva Convention
to protect Palestinian civilians, the Movement calls on
the international community to ensure the protection of
Palestinian civilians in the Gaza Strip and the rest ofthe
occupied territories, in order to alleviate the occupied
population's critical situation of insecurity and prevent
further losses of innocent lives. Failure to do so could
further aggravate the situation and lead to the tragic
loss of more civilian lives.

The Movement expresses its indignation at Israel's
impunity for all the violations it has committed, many of
which could be considered war crimes. The absence of
justice leads to new crimes being committed and further
destabilizes the situation on the ground, which in turn
diminishes the prospects for peace, as indicated in the
report (A/HRC/40/74) of the independent commission
of inquiry established by the Human Rights Council
to investigate the 2018 Gaza protests. That is why we
call for international action, especially by the Security
Council, to put an end to the occupying Power's
systematic violations against the occupied Palestinian
civilians and hold it accountable for its crimes. Israel
must abide by its obligations and responsibilities under
international law.
With regard to the occupied Syrian Golan, the
Movement reaffirms that any measures or actions
that the occupying Power Israel may take or has
taken - such as the illegal decision of 14 December
1981, aimed at altering the legal status, physical
character, demographic composition and institutional
structure of the occupied Syrian Golan, as well as
Israel's measures to implement its jurisdiction and
administration in this area, including attempting to
exercise sovereignty over it by calling local elections
in four Syrian localities - are null and void and have
no legal effect.

Accordingly, and in line with our principled
position, we once again demand that Israel comply
with resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw completely
from the occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of June
1967, in accordance with resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973). We also condemn the unilateral proclamation
of the United States on recognizing the Golan Heights
as part of Israel and we call on the Security Council to
reject that provocative act.

With regard to Lebanon, we reaffirm the need
for Israel to withdraw from all Lebanese territories,
including the areas of the Shaba'a farmlands, the
Kfar Shuba hills and the Lebanese part of Al-Ghajar
village up to the Blue Line. We also urge Israel to
cease its violations of Lebanon's territorial integrity
and sovereignty, in accordance with international
resolutions, particularly resolution 1701 (2006).

To conclude, we call on the international
community to uphold international law and the
Palestinian cause in a coordinated effort with the aim
of ending that injustice. We reaffirm our commitment
to a just, lasting, comprehensive and peaceful solution
to the Palestinian question, including the suffering
of Palestinian refugees. We also express our support
for the heroic Palestinian people in their struggle to
enjoy their inalienable rights and legitimate national
aspirations, including the rights to self-determination,
freedom and independence in their State of Palestine,
with East Jerusalem as its capital.

