Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I
welcome the unanimous vote to adopt resolution 1770
(2007) and the statement made by the Secretary-
General.

Success in Iraq will depend on a collective effort
by the entire international community. It will be Iraqi-
led, with our support, primarily through the
International Compact with Iraq. We heard a candid
and comprehensive assessment of progress on the
Compact from Deputy Prime Minister Saleh on
20 July. The United Kingdom, for its part, will
continue to stand by Iraq as its close friend and, as the
United Kingdom Prime Minister actually termed it in
the United Nations last week, we will continue to
discharge fully our responsibilities.

Within that context, the United Nations has
played a significant and valuable role, offering
consistent support to Iraq's transition since the fall of
the former regime in 2003. In its work, it has gone
through dark and difficult times, notably the horrific
attack on the Canal Hotel in August 2003, which
resulted in the loss of Sergio Vieira de Mello and 21
United Nations personnel. As we approach the fourth
anniversary of that tragic event, we offer once more
our condolences to the families of those dedicated
officers and express our gratitude to the United Nations
for its steadfast commitment to its mission in Iraq and
to all those others who work in the field, day in, day
out, for the United Nations.

The original role of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq was described in resolution
1546 (2004). The Mission has made progress on much
of it, supporting the Iraqi Government and people, but
it is clear that, while some tasks set out in that mandate
remain necessary, others have been completed. And
there are still other tasks that the United Nations
should be doing but which are not in fact provided for.
Of those new tasks now set out in today's resolution,
the United Kingdom would highlight a supporting role
for the United Nations in furthering reconciliation and
dialogue and, in due course, reintegration programmes;
in helping Iraqis tackle the remaining challenges which
come under the rubric of the constitutional review and
the implementation of constitutional provisions; and in
facilitating dialogue between Iraq, its neighbours and
States in the region.
In addition to those political roles, there are
humanitarian challenges with which the United Nations
can assist both inside and outside Iraq. The United
Nations will continue to have a significant role in
assisting the process of economic reform, capacity-
building, reconstruction and service delivery, and in
helping to coordinate the donor effort. It will also play
its part in promoting the protection of human rights and
in helping to take forward judicial and legal reform.

The United Kingdom fully understands and
shares the sense of importance that the United Nations
attaches to the security of its personnel within Iraq. It
respects the duty of care to deployed personnel, and
therefore supports the Secretary-General's plans to
build an integrated secure facility within Baghdad from
which the United Nations can deliver on its
commitments on a long-term basis. We also hope that
the United Nations will soon be able to redeploy a
contingent to Basra, where its expertise would be
helpful in delivering capacity-building in Iraq's South-
East.

In all its tasks, it is vital that the United Nations
role be coherent and coordinated both internally and
with others' efforts. I emphasize once more that a
democratic and stable Iraq at peace with itself and with
its neighbours can be delivered only through a
collective effort by all, and the burden of delivering
that must be a shared one.

May I thank you personally, Sir, for the kind
words which you addressed to me on this, my last
appearance in the Chamber. With your permission, I
should like to say a few words to the Council.

It has been an honour and a privilege for me to
represent the United Kingdom for more than four years
in the United Nations in order to defend the positions
of my Government and to put forward the thinking of
the United Kingdom. It has been a rewarding task.
Under the Charter, this Council has the specific
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. That encompasses crises, internal
and regional conflicts, the scourge of terrorism, the
protection of civilians, tackling the risks posed by
proliferation, and so on. There are countless tasks.

The Council cannot and does not shirk its
responsibilities, even though those tasks are difficult.
For the United Kingdom's part, we seek to apply
ourselves assiduously, working for the best solutions
and outcomes. Consensus among all Council members
is a very desirable outcome. It can only strengthen the
impact of our decisions, but - and I say this also to
the Secretary-General - adopting resolutions and
statements is not enough. We must always work for
implementation on the ground and for a real impact on
people's lives to deliver security and peace, but
remembering, too, that that requires parallel progress
on the political and the economic tracks.

Cooperation among colleagues and between
States is crucial, as are good relations between the
Council and the other organs of the United Nations. So
may I thank my colleagues and their missions for their
cooperation and their friendship over these years. I
should also like to thank the Council's secretariat,
which supports us in our work, including the unseen
translators and interpreters for all they do, and more
generally the Secretary-General and the Secretariat for
the work that they do, day in, day out, and particularly
outside New York.

Lastly, I break with custom, but my particular
thanks go to my team in the United Kingdom mission
for all their support and their endeavours.

