Mr. Roselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, the Uruguyan delegation would like
warmly to welcome the initiative taken by your
07-28766

delegation and your country in deciding to convene a
debate on this topic so as to hear the opinions of
Member States and particularly of the troop-
contributing countries, which can bring to this
discussion their experiences with the work of regional
organizations in the field.

Since the mid-1990s, various observers of the
development of peacekeeping missions, including the
Secretary-General, have been suggesting that regional
organizations should take on greater responsibility in
military operations. Those commenting on the situation
have felt that highly developed capabilities, such as
those of NATO, for instance, might not be necessary in
all cases, but that, however, it might be possible to take
a few modest steps at the regional level, which could
bring about substantial improvement in the capabilities
of multinational forces. A very timid attempt was made
towards that end, in resolutions 1125 (1997), 1155
(1998) and 1159 (1998), with respect to the situation in
the Central African Republic.

What, then, would be the main arguments in
favour of greater regionalization of peacekeeping
operations?

First, it is within the region itself that the
consequences of conflict are felt most immediately.
Every day we witness situations that start by affecting
one particular State and then spread to the region
immediately surrounding it.

Secondly, the States of a region have a better
grasp of a conflict situation and its cultural backdrop
than do other nations. From a strictly operational point
of View, therefore, the States of the region would have
greater capacity in the area of information and,
eventually, more direct supply lines.

While we certainly believe that it is necessary to
continue discussing in various forums, including in the
Committee of 34, this new trend towards greater
participation by regional organizations in collective
peace and security, it is necessary to consider possible
points of contention in the context of the
implementation of a tangible mechanism aimed at
making regional organizations the main protagonists in
the conflicts that arise in each region. In order to take
decisions on the expansion of those competencies,
certain principles relating to peacekeeping
operations - and most important, certain provisions of
the United Nations Charter - must be strictly adhered
to.
3
First of all we must highlight the different ways
the Charter applies to the subject, depending on
whether it is Chapters VI and VII or Chapter VIII that
is being implemented. In our View, under Chapter VII
of the Charter, it is very difficult to maintain forces
made up solely of regional contingents. In principle,
we must recall that peacekeeping operations are an
effective way for the Organization to achieve its
fundamental purpose: the maintenance of international
peace and security through the adoption of effective
collective measures to achieve that objective. That
purpose is set out in the Preamble of the Charter, which
states clearly the decision to "unite our strength to
maintain international peace and security".

Paragraph 5 of Article 2 of the Charter establishes
the obligation of all Members to provide every
assistance in any action taken in accordance with the
Charter. The action is collective, and thus, all share the
obligation, under equal conditions. That framework for
action will ensure that the rule is applied properly and,
ultimately, that the action is legitimate.

Another point that must be discussed is the
impartiality of such a force. If Chapter VII were
applied solely through regional forces, that might
infringe the principle of equitable geographical
representation. Along with the requirement that United
Nations forces be as representative as possible, one of
the traditional principles of peacekeeping is that States
involved in resolving a conflict should not have
tangible interests or private agendas in the process.

Participation under Chapter VII, with military
forces made up solely of regional protagonists, might
also distort the financial dimensions of an operation. In
addition, there could be increasing problems with
equipping and training contingents, as not all regional
organizations have similar economic or technological
capabilities. Moreover, there is a need for special
coordination between the various levels of authority of
the United Nations and of the regional organizations -
which may vary depending on their sphere of action:
military, development, cooperation or assistance. While
there is a correct application of the Chapter VIII
machinery, especially as set out in Articles 53 and 54
of the Charter, we could envisage implementation of
collective security operations through regional
organizations alone. Without prejudice to this, it will
always be necessary to assess the true capacity of the
various regional organizations with respect to peace
and security in conflicts in the area in question.
There is an example of participation by regional
countries that is close to the Group of Latin American
and Caribbean States: our sister Republic of Haiti.
Within the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH), we have a large contingent from
regional countries alongside contingents from other
friendly countries from other regions. We think that
interaction between the various participants does not
detract from the importance of the presence of regional
States. The region's international organizations -
notably the Organization of American States and the
Inter-American Development Bank - have contributed
valuable experience in peace and security operations
and post-conflict reconstruction, along with their active
participation in development projects.

We believe that this experience is highly relevant
and can serve as a guide for further discussions within
the Security Council on the eventual implementation of
practical participation by regional organizations in
tasks related to the maintenance of international peace
and security.

