Mrs. Puerschel (Germany): Let me take this
opportunity to join others in bidding farewell to our
colleague, Ambassador Ma Zhaoxu and thanking him
for his work on the Security Council. We wish him all
the best and every success in his future endeavours.
(spoke in French)

I would also like, on behalf of the entire Permanent
Mission of Germany to the United Nations, to warmly
welcome our new colleague, French Ambassador
Nicolas de Riviere, as our neighbour on the Security
Council. We are truly gratified to be able to continue
our very close collaboration with him and the entire
French team here in New York.

(spoke in English)

We commend the Peruvian presidency for
keeping this important topic on the agenda of the
Council and its subsidiary bodies. We thank all the
briefers for sharing their insights with us today, with
special thanks to Ms. Tamara Makarenko for her
eye-opening contribution.

We share the notion that the linkages between
terrorism and organized crime need to be studied and
monitored by the competent authorities - first, at the
level ofMember States; secondly, at the level ofregional
organizations; and thirdly, here at the United Nations.
On all three levels, it is critical that our political
decisions be based on facts. The global phenomenon
of terrorism threatens the livelihoods and well-being of
civilians worldwide.

However, terrorists do this in very different ways
and modi operandi. The threat is very different among
different countries and regions. Looking, for example,
at Europe in past decades, we saw very different forms
of terrorism. Separatists in Northern Ireland or the
Basque country had little in common with radical
pseudo-communist armed groups like the Red Army
Faction in Germany, Action directe in France, the
Brigate Rosse in Italy or, if we look at more recent
examples, right-wing terrorism.

When we look at Europe today, terrorist activities
are not characterized by strong organized crime
involvement. With the so-called Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant, we saw a State-like terrorist group
use methods usually employed by organized crime
syndicates, including trafficking in persons. Some
members of the Taliban in Afghanistan are connected
to cross-border drug smuggling. But those examples
might be too particular to call it a trend. They could
very well be a singular phenomenon when we look at the
specific organization and the vast territory controlled
by these groups. But we need to be careful not to lose
sight of the specificities of each case. This topic does
not lend itself to generalizations.

Against this background, the role of the United
Nations should be that of a facilitator of information
and an amplifier of scientific findings developed
foremost by Member States, regional organizations and
civil society actors. In the fight against terrorism and
organized crime, the work of INTERPOL, EUROPOL
and State law enforcement are key. Some member States
may cooperate; sometimes only one member State will
take the lead. Again, generalizations are not helpful.

We are committed to relentlessly pursuing terrorists,
just as we are committed to preventing radicalization
and violent extremism. That requires comprehensive
efforts following a whole-of-society approach. And
it requires strong international cooperation. Within
the United Nations, three principles are of particular
importance to us.

First, I would like to recall the special attention
that women and children need and deserve as victims
of trafficking in persons. Regardless of who the
perpetrators are, the victims should be our focus.
They need our protection and our efforts to bring the
perpetrators to justice.

Secondly, I would like to recall that Germany
has been at the forefront of fostering a discussion
on the unintended effects of counter-terrorism
measures on impartial and neutral - in short,
principled - humanitarian action. That is a very
important topic for us. We strongly advocate the use
of the language in recently adopted resolution 2462
(2019) as a benchmark in that regard. We have been
advocating the use only of targeted sanctions for a long
time. We will continue to do so during the ongoing
negotiations on a Security Council draft resolution
regarding today's topic.

Thirdly, Germany is active within the group of
friends on targeted sanctions. We are convinced that
we need to respect international standards of due
process and human rights when countering terrorism.
It is only with fairness and transparency that we will
we be able to prevent people from falling into the
trap of extremists and their terrorist propaganda. For
Governments, behaving within the law is paramount.
It is not only our moral duty, it is the most effective
way to counter the lies of terrorists. They try to
depict democratic Governments as the enemy and as
illegitimate and inhumane. We need to show that we
are the contrary - fair and just - but also determined
to stop terrorists and to hunt down those who have
committed acts of terrorism.

Let me conclude by thanking you again,
Mr. President, for convening today's debate.

