Ms. King (Australia): We thank Special
Representative Zarif for his briefing and for his
leadership of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We also thank Prime
Minister Dacie and Prime Minister Thaci for providing
their valuable perspectives on developments in Kosovo
over the past three months.

Australia applauds the substantial progress achieved
at the political level by the two Prime Ministers at their
recent meetings on the implementation of the 19 April
Agreement on normalizing relations. We also recognize
and commend the ongoing mediation efforts of European
Union High Representative Ashton. We commend the
efforts of both Serbia and Kosovo in implementing
key aspects of the 19 April Agreement, including the
significant progress made in the integration of Serbian
Interior Ministry personnel into the Kosovo police. That
is a delicate task that, when completed, will strengthen
security and stability in Kosovo.

We also welcome the holding, during November
and December last year, of mayoral and municipal
assembly elections. In accordance with the 19 April
Agreement, those elections were the first under a single
legislative framework and included, crucially, the four
northern Kosovo municipalities. While marred by some
security incidents, the elections are a testament to the
resolve of the Kosovo authorities to build a democratic,
multi-ethnic future for their nation.

We urge the peaceful, fair conduct of elections for
the mayor of northern Mitrovica, scheduled to take
place later this month.

The efforts made to normalize relations have
allowed Serbia and Kosovo to move forward on their
respective paths towards closer European integration.
For Serbia, the inaugural round of accession talks
with the European Union in January and, in parallel,
the European Commission signalling its intention to
conclude negotiations for a stabilization and association
agreement with Kosovo during 2014 are both historic
decisions that recognize the efforts made by Prime
Minister Dacie and Prime Minister Thaci towards
reconciliation between Serbia and Kosovo and stability
and prosperity within Kosovo itself.

While commending the progress made to date, we
note that further work remains to implement several key
aspects of the 19 April Agreement. It will be important,
for example, to reach agreement on the statute and
establishment of the community/association of Serb
municipalities. More work also remains to be done in
northern Kosovo to establish a functional system of
courts. We hope that both Prime Ministers will be able
to make progress on this issue when they meet later this
week in Brussels.

Australia is encouraged by the fact that the overall
security situation remained generally calm in Kosovo
over the reporting period, particularly the fact that
the number of reported incidents affecting minority
communities decreased when compared with the
previous reporting period. We condemn the shooting
of Dimitrije Janicijevic, a newly elected Serb assembly
member, in Mitrovica on 16 January. We welcome the
Kosovo authorities' pledge to investigate his murder
and create a safe environment in northern Mitrovica.

We remain concerned at the fact that the rate of
voluntary returns continues to be relatively low, and we
encourage Kosovo's authorities to continue to address
discrimination and work towards better education and
employment opportunities, especially for minority
groups and returnees. In this context, we also urge
Kosovo to take concrete steps to protect the cultural
and religious heritage sites recently listed by Kosovo's
Ministry of Culture, Youth and Sport.

The year 2013 was undoubtedly a positive year for
relations between Serbia and Kosovo. We encourage both
Prime Ministers to continue to engage constructively in
the year ahead in the EU-mediated dialogue and with
UNMIK to tackle any further challenges to achieve full
normalization of relations. With 2014 an election year
in both Serbia and Kosovo, we hope that both parties
will maintain the same pace of political dialogue and
continue to strengthen the stability and prosperity of
Kosovo.

