Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting at a time when
the situation in the Middle East, especially in Israel
and Palestine, is on a dangerous course. The recent
cycle of violence arose across the occupied Palestinian
territories and Israel, particularly Jerusalem, reminds
both the Israelis and Palestinians of the fact that mutual
provocations and unilateral actions will not resolve the
Israeli-Palestinian issue. That simple and powerful truth
has been echoing within this Chamber for decades.

The Republic of Korea once again urges all parties
to put an end to violence and return to the negotiating
table to work out a viable framework to resolve the
conflict, with the two-State solution at its core.
Preserving the historic status quo for the holy sites in
Jerusalem and stopping the expansion of settlements in
the occupied territory should be the first step towards
that goal. The leaders of both Israel and Palestine
must not forget that today's violence and hatred not
only destroy their present lives but also deprive their
children of any hope for a peaceful future. The past
several decades of violence and intolerance are proof
of that grim reality, and today's dangerous threats of
violent extremism further increase the likelihood of
that bleak future. We call upon both sides to have more
courage and take more responsibility.

The Republic of Korea appreciates the timely and
urgent efforts by the Secretary-General, especially his
recent visit to the region, in order to prevent escalation
and restore a long-term political horizon of peace. We
also look forward to recharged mediation efforts by
the Quartet. Every possible avenue should be explored
to create a more favourable environment for dialogue
between Israel and Palestine for a sustainable peace.

On Syria, the Republic of Korea remains deeply
concerned about the heavy toll on civilians as the
conflict enters its fifth year. The key stakeholders should
immediately sit down together to discuss the common
denominator with which to start. In this regard, the
Republic of Korea fully supports the ongoing efforts
of Special Envoy De Mistura in seeking a political
solution, which is the only viable option.

We also strongly urge all relevant parties to prevent
and minimize civilian casualties and humanitarian
crises. It has been reported that an additional nearly
50,000 Syrian people have been displaced following
military offensives around Aleppo. The international
community must pay closer attention to the
unprecedented humanitarian crisis involving refugees
and displaced persons and urgently take all necessary
measures to address the related human tragedies.
We oppose any actions by any party that hinder the
delivery of humanitarian assistance and urge all parties
to fully cooperate with the international community's
humanitarian efforts.

We also believe that seeking legitimate accountability
is part of a sustainable solution. The use of barrel
bombs is an explicit violation of resolution 2139 (2014).
We welcome the establishment of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism, and urge that all parties
responsible for the use of chlorine as a weapon be held
accountable.

Turning to Yemen, the Republic of Korea welcomes
the Yemeni Government's statement on 18 October in
which it expressed its willingness to participate in peace
talks with the Houthi rebels. We further call on all the
parties to make maximum use of this opportunity to
forge a sustainable peace and defend the territory of
Yemen from the terrorist threat of the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant.

We are witnessing the increasing vulnerability of
the Middle East as the region faces the multifaceted
challenges of violent extremism, terrorism and the
vicious cycle of violence and intolerance. This has
serious negative impacts on the stability of other
regions as well as the entire world. This is also warrants
an enhanced role for the Security Council to maintain
peace and security in the region. The Republic of
Korea will continue to support the Security Council in
fulfilling its mandate.

