Ms. Amos: I thank you very much, Mr. President,
for the opportunity to brief the Council on the situation
in the Central African Republic following my recent
visit with the Executive Director of the Joint United
Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS, Mr. Michel Sidibe;
Assistant Secretary-General for Safety and Security,
Ms. Mbaranga Gasarabwe; and the African Union
Political Affairs Commissioner, Ms. Aisha Abdullahi.

The situation in the Central African Republic
remains extremely grave and urgent action by all,
including by the Council, is required to prevent further
bloodshed. The violence has led to the total breakdown
of the State locally and nationally. State institutions,
which were weak, have now totally collapsed in Bangui
and across the country. The State cannot deliver basic
services and the salaries of civil society servants have
not been paid for months. There is no national army,
and the police and the gendarmerie are ill-equipped
to address the challenges the country is facing.
Mr. Ladsous referred to that.

Mr. Guterres will speak to the regional implications
of the crisis, which are now profound. The Central
African Republic is experiencing unacceptable
sectarian brutality, persistent insecurity and fear with
tragic humanitarian consequences.

More than 650,000 people are still internally
displaced across the country, with more than 232,000
in Bangui alone. There are 70,000 people still living at
the airport site for internally displaced persons (IDPs),
in appalling conditions that are set to deteriorate
dramatically with the onset of the rainy season. More
than 288,000 people have fled to neighbouring countries
and thousands more are desperately trying to leave,
seeing it as their last and only option. Humanitarian
workers are now facing the difficult dilemma of
either responding positively to their requests to leave
and thereby appearing to contribute to changing the
demography of communities, or of not facilitating their
exit and leaving them at risk of being killed.

Unless the current trajectory is urgently reversed,
the demographic and social changes taking place in
the Central African Republic will have severe and
lasting consequences for the country, the region and the
continent. Trust between communities that have lived
side by side for years has eroded. While people - at all
levels - told us that the conflict is not about religion,
but about the pursuit of power and economic advantage,
it is being played out through religious and ethnic
conflict. Communities and people's fear is being
exploited for political gain.

Today, those seeking personal gain at the expense
of the people are gaining ground. We are witnessing
armed groups attacking communities, the exploitation
and manipulation of widespread fear and, increasingly,
retaliatory attacks by and against ordinary people. The
longer that goes on the more difficult it will be for the
Central African Republic to recover.

Humanitarian assistance alone cannot resolve the
situation in the Central African Republic. Security
and stability must be urgently restored, and while the
forces of France and the African-led International
Support Mission in the Central African Republic have
provided security and saved lives where and when they
have been deployed, they do not have the substantial
resources required to provide security throughout the
country. More troops are desperately needed and they
are needed now. The Central Africans need to feel
safe in their own country. It is the first vital step for
recovery.

As we speak, people are living in fear of
being attacked and the international community
appears paralysed. Attempts to establish areas of
temporary protection for people under threat in their
neighbourhoods and to facilitate the voluntary return
of IDPs have not yet achieved the desired results due
to the inability to provide the necessary security. For
example, one site, called PKS, where we have tried to
establish a safe environment, was attacked a few days
before our visit.

Improved security will also allow humanitarian
workers to save more lives and make a real difference
through their relief operations. The international
humanitarian community, given the scale of the crisis
in Bangui, declared it one of our highest priority
crises, and at a meeting yesterday we reconfirmed our
commitment to doing all we can to secure additional
capacity and resources to support the people of the
Central African Republic.

But to do that security must be improved. For
example, the insecurity on the road from Douala to
Bangui, which is central to commercial activity in
the country and for humanitarian supply, prevents the
regular transportation of goods and relief items into
the country by road. The alternative - airlifting of
relief goods - forces us to divert our already limited
resources from feeding and supporting people to
paying for the transport of their food. Almost eight
times more expensive than moving goods by road, air
transport from Douala is unsustainable in the longer
term. As the Secretary-General outlines in his report
to the Security Council (S/2014/142), a comprehensive
and multidimensional response is required to meet the
vast needs ofa country that has been ignored for years.

The restoration of services is also urgently needed,
and all efforts to support the authorities in that
endeavour must be made. While in Bangui, we spoke
with the Head of State of the Transition, Ms. Samba-
Panza. She has a difficult and challenging task and
needs to demonstrate as soon as possible the benefits
of political transition. She told us that people point to
their stomachs when they see her and that if she is not
able to give people the means to feed themselves soon
she will lose their trust. She outlined her priorities as
security, institution-building, the restoration of basic
services, justice, the rule oflaw and reconciliation. She
made it clear that she required the support of the whole
international community to make progress in all those
areas.

As further evidence that the conflict is not simply
about religion, religious and community leaders have
come together and shown great courage and leadership
as they stand up to extremist elements. We were
impressed by their tireless work and resolve to intervene
to try to stop the Violence and promote reconciliation.
Again, we must do everything we can to support their
mediation and reconciliation efforts at the national and
local levels and demonstrate that, despite the horrors of
the conflict, communities can still live together.

One of the recommendations from our visit is
a proposal for a coordinated operational focus on
four geographic areas - Bossangoa, Bria, N'Dele and
Bambari - where both communities are still living
together and where a combination of international,
national and local efforts can make an immediate
difference. We want to see the international community's
resources targeted to stabilizing the security situation
in those areas, restoring State authority and the rule of
law, ensuring the delivery of humanitarian assistance
and basic services and promoting reconciliation efforts.
It is important to demonstrate that communities can
continue to live side by side in peace and stability.

As highlighted by the Secretary-General in his
six-point proposal, the humanitarian response in the
Central African Republic is severely underfunded,
further limiting our reach to people in need - and time
is not our side. A food crisis is looming, and with the
rainy season upon us, millions ofpeople could be at risk
of communicable diseases. The movement for Central
Africans, troops and humanitarian workers within the
country will be severely restricted as the already poorly
maintained roads become impossible to use. While
increased logistics capacity will be required once the
rains set in, financial support is urgently needed now
to provide seeds and tools so that people can plant, to
support the pre-positioning of stocks and voluntary
returns where possible and to improve conditions in
sites where internally displaced persons are located.

The humanitarian strategic response plan for 2014
requests $551 million for humanitarian interventions in
the Central African Republic, which is modest given
the scale ofthe need, but it is only funded at 16 per cent.
Many pledges made at the January Brussels conference,
which I co-chaired with European Union Commissioner
Georgieva, have yet to translate into funds. I ask
Member States and international organizations that
made pledges to honour them as soon as possible. As
the United Nations and operational partners extend
humanitarian operations outside Bangui, continued
financial support by the international community is
crucial to support our efforts.

The humanitarian situation in the Central African
Republic is dire, and more must be done to ensure that
the work of the Transition Government, humanitarian
workers, Operation Sangaris and MISCA troops is
sustained. We must provide the people of the Central
African Republic with the security that they need and
the services and assistance they require so that peace
and reconciliation efforts have some chance of success.

