The President (spoke in Russian): I will now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.

We would like to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Alexander Zouev for his substantive briefing. We
believe it is very important to be kept regularly informed
by the Secretary-General about the United Nations
bodies specializing in mine action, in accordance
with resolution 2365 (2017), and we see his report on
a comprehensive approach to such action (S/2018/623)
as one of the steps being taken to implement the
disarmament agenda. We note his efforts to maintain a
neutral, impartial and balanced approach in the report
that uses the facts to reflect the major measures taken
under United Nations auspices in 2017 in the area of
demining and clearing land of anti-personnel mines,
explosive remnants of war and improvised explosive
devices (IEDs).

However, among the report's significant trends,
there is a notable overemphasis on the humanitarian
risks associated with the threat of mines in Syria and
eastern Ukraine. We were also sorry to see that there
was no reflection in the report of Russia's mine action
efforts. As one of the most active participants in the
Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons, Russia
makes a significant contribution to international efforts
to reduce the threat of anti-personnel mines, explosive
remnants of war and IEDs based on implementing
resolution 2365 (2017), on which we present annual
national reports. In 2016 and 2017 a mine-clearance
unit from the Russian Armed Forces' International
Mine Action Centre conducted four humanitarian
demining operations in Syria, two in Palmyra's historic
architectural complex and in the residential part of
the city, and two in Aleppo and Deir ez-Zor, clearing
a total of 6,500 hectares of land, 1,500 kilometres of
roads and more than 17,000 buildings. They detected
and rendered harmless 105,000 explosive remnants of
war, including more than 30,000 homemade explosive
devices. The Russian Armed Forces' systematic efforts
to eliminate the threat of IEDs in Syria represents
our practical contribution to implementing the related
General Assembly resolution 72/36.

Russia actively promotes technical, consultative
and operational capacity-building for mine clearance.
At our International Mine Action Centre, we train
specialists in the areas of mine clearance, the detection
and neutralization of IEDs, the operation of mobile
robotic complexes, and mine detection services.
The Centre is also open to exchanging professional
experience with all interested parties. In 2017, for
instance, it trained 207 Russian officers and 36 foreign
military personnel. The opening at the end of 2016 of
a branch of the Centre in Aleppo was an important
step that has already put more than 1,000 demining
specialists for the Syrian Armed Forces through sapper
school. I would like to point out that the Syrian sappers
trained at the Russian Centre have been supplied with
modern technical detection and protective equipment
for explosive objects and are already taking part in
demining parts of eastern Ghouta, the southern suburbs
of Damascus, eastern Qalamoun and Horns.

The Russian Federation's efforts are crucial to
restoring the infrastructure necessary for returning
refugees and temporarily displaced persons to their
homes. Notably, that approach is recognized in the
Secretary-General's report. However, while where the
situations in Darfur and Iraq are concerned it describes
on the specific work being done, the report on Syria
is limited to mentioning the task to be done and then
moves immediately to the difficulty of access. Russia's
mine action efforts show clearly that the problems have
nothing to do with access. In our View, the involvement
of the United Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS)
in the efforts in Syria has been unjustifiably long
drawn out. And the problem is not just to do with an
unresolved issue with the Damascus Office and the
Head of UNMAS, but also with something we are all
too familiar with, the politicization of humanitarian
issues by potential donors who do not want to contribute
to normalizing life in Syria.

In conclusion, I would like to note that the Russian
Federation gives significant attention to the development
of international cooperation on mine clearance. In
October 2017 and May 2018, engineers from the Russian
Armed Forces held two international conferences on
humanitarian demining in which delegations from
24 countries took part. We are continuing our close
interaction with the Geneva International Centre
for Humanitarian Demining. Russian experts took
part in efforts organized by the United Nations Mine
Action Service to prepare international standards for
countering IEDs.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to Mr. Zouev.

