Mr. Braun (Germany) (spoke in French): I speak on
behalf of France and Germany, following the statement
made by my French colleague.

Germany and France have consistently supported a
reform of the Security Council with a view to making
it more efficient and more in tune with the current
global political realities. A revision of its working
methods is a significant way to achieve that end. We
thank those who contribute daily to the implementation
of its procedures and who assist delegations, namely,
the Security Council Affairs Division, under the very
competent leadership of Director Movses Abelian.

We also underscore the importance of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions on the topic and its efforts towards
codification, as was illustrated in the annex of concept
note S/2010/507, adopted under the efficient leadership
of the Permanent Mission of Japan to the United
Nations. We pay tribute to the Japanese delegation
and congratulate them on their recent election to the
Council.

The President's concept note emphasizes the need
for transparency and inclusiveness as well as the crucial
role of the Secretary-General. Germany and France
support a more transparent and inclusive process for
selecting the Secretary-General. Our work needs to
be guided by the consensus achieved through General
Assembly resolution 69/321, adopted of 11 September,
on revitalizing the General Assembly. It is now crucial
to implement the clear provisions of the text on which
all Member States have agreed. That is particularly
important for the joint letter by the President of the
General Assembly and the President of the Security
Council on the issue of nominations for the post of
Secretary-General. The resolution invites Member
States to consider women candidates for the position,
given the fact that to date all the Secretaries-General
have been men. We firmly support that call.

We also support all efforts that will enable us to
improve the transparency of the Security Council, by
including non-member States through Arria Formula
meetings and monthly wrap-up sessions. We will
also support the efforts to promote more interactive
discussions, and we would like to encourage future
members ofthe Security Council, whom we congratulate
on their recent election, to follow that path.

Finally, it is crucial to improve the working methods
of the Council, but that cannot replace the urgent need
for structural reforms. Germany and France would
like to recall their support for the consensus decision
by the General Assembly of 14 September 2015 on the
issue of equitable representation and expansion of the
Security Council. It is now important to enter into a
phase of negotiations on the text during the next stage
of intergovernmental negotiations.

If the Charter of the United Nations has withstood
changing times, that is because it enshrines the most
fundamental rules to help us navigate the fog of peace,
to quote the title of a recent book by our friend Jean-
Marie Guehenno. I would like to conclude by saying
that the text of the Charter has contributed to forging
a friendship and lasting partnership between France
and Germany within the European Union. It is that
phenomenon that we would like to illustrate for the
Council today by making this joint statement.

