The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Indonesia.

The Indonesian delegation voted in favour of the draft
resolution before the Council today since it embodies
principles that we have consistently espoused, including
commitment to the search for a comprehensive negotiated
settlement of the conflicts in the former Yugoslavia, the
need to respect international humanitarian law and the
inviolability of all United Nations personnel, as well as the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States of the
former Yugoslavia.

My delegation has followed the recent developments
in Croatia with deep concern, especially in view of their
effects on the civilian population and the inherent risk of
escalation of the violence, which could engulf the entire
region. The Indonesian delegation appeals to all parties
concerned to immediately cease their hostilities and seek
to prevent any further widening of the conflict. In this
regard, we should like to place particular emphasis on the
need for the parties concerned to exercise the utmost
restraint in and around Sector East. This conflict can
never be solved by resorting to war - an option that will
simply lead to greater human suffering, casualties and
injustice. We underline the need to leave no stone
unturned in the search for a comprehensive, lasting and
just settlement to the conflict, not only in Croatia but also
in the territories of the former Yugoslavia as a whole.

Further, my delegation welcomes the agreement that
has been reached between the Republic of Croatia and the
United Nations peace forces to fully respect the rights of
the local Serb population, allow access to them by
international humanitarian organizations and create
conditions conducive to the return of those who have left
their homes. My delegation is confident that the
Government of Croatia fully appreciates the importance
that the international community attaches to its
compliance with the letter and spirit of this agreement.

Finally, my delegation would like to express its
appreciation to the authors of the resolution and to extend
its gratitude to all those United Nations personnel who
have risked their lives and made the ultimate sacrifice in
the service of peace. In this regard, I should like to take
this opportunity to express my delegation's deep
condolences to the people and Governments of Denmark
and the Czech Republic, and the families concerned, on
the untimely and tragic deaths of their personnel, who
served valiantly as members of the United Nations peace-
keeping forces.

I now resume my function as President of the
Council.

There are no further speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage of
its consideration of the item on the agenda.
 

The Secu|ily Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 5.30 p.m.
