Mr. Alsaidi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me, Mr. President, on behalf of the Arab Group, to
express my congratulations on the way in which you
have guided the work of the Council for the month of
August. Our Group is fully confident in the work of the
Council under your wise and skilful guidance. I would
also like to express our appreciation to the Permanent
Representative of China for assuming the presidency in
July with skill and efficiency. We also express our
appreciation to Mr. Michael Williams, Special
Coordinator for the Peace Process in the Middle East,

for his briefing on the current situation in our region. I
thank him on behalf of the Arab Group for the
constructive role he has played and to wish him every
success in his future endeavours in London. I hope that
he will remain in touch with us and remain involved
with the Palestinian question.

The Security Council has before it today the issue
of the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question. This is one of the most important
items on the Council's agenda, as it has been for more
that five decades. As the Council is aware, this issue,
with all its ramifications, is at the core of the Arab-
Israeli conflict. The events of recent years have
confirmed the rightness of the international
community's conviction that solving this question is
indeed at the heart of a comprehensive and just
solution to the conflict.

Since the Council debated the situation in the
Middle East last month, the occupied territories have
been a theatre for the pernicious escalation of acts of
violence by the Israeli occupation authorities.

At a time when the Islamic world is
commemorating the setting ablaze of the Al-Aqsa
Mosque, Israel is continuing its irresponsible actions.
Chief among those are its demolition and excavation
work within the area surrounding the Holy Al-Aqsa
Mosque itself, in flagrant violation of its sanctity,
threatening its structural integrity, and attempting to
obliterate the character and religious symbols of the
Mosque. We resolutely condemn such hostile Israeli
actions, which undermine the third most Holy Place,
and the first Qiblah of the Islamic faith.

We therefore call upon the Security Council, the
body primarily responsible for the maintenance of
international peace and security, to assume its
responsibilities and intervene immediately to compel
Israel to respect resolutions of international legality
and halt its actions. Those actions are threatening the
religious and cultural identity of Jerusalem. Moreover,
they constitute an act of provocation, an affront to the
feelings of Muslims and a violation of the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949.

Those irresponsible practices are also flagrant
violations of 16 relevant Council resolutions,
especially resolution 465 (1980), which emphasized
that all measures, and legislative and administrative
actions, taken by the Israeli occupying Power to
change the legal character, demographic composition,
institutional structure or status of occupied Jerusalem
had no legal validity. That is in addition to the fact that
Israel's actions are in flagrant violation of the 1949
Fourth Geneva Convention, which applies to all
territories occupied by Israel in 1967, including
Jerusalem. Those measures are also in violation of the
Hague Convention of 1954, which stipulates that no
measures or acts of hostility should be undertaken
against religious sites, which are the special heritage of
peoples.

In addition to continuing its acts of demolition
and excavation around the Al-Aqsa Mosque, Israel is
also continuing its military incursions and repeated
acts of aggression in territory under the control of the
Palestinian Authority, namely, Gaza and the West
Bank. It is also continuing its economic blockade and
the illegal construction of its racist expansionist wall.
It is establishing a cordon of roads intended to strangle
Palestinian villages and towns, rendering all movement
and communication between them extremely difficult.
Israel is continuing to build and expand settlements.

All of those are illegal actions that flagrantly
violate international law, United Nations resolutions
and the Quartet Road Map, which the Council adopted
in resolution 1515 (2003). They not only have serious
consequences for the security and stability of the
region and the world, but they also undermine
international efforts to relaunch the Quartet peace
process, as well as any just and lasting comprehensive
solution to the Israeli-Arab conflict, at the very heart of
which is the Palestinian question.

Such a solution will not be attainable so long as
Israel continues its unilateral measures to establish a
fait accompli and influence the results of final status
negotiations. A lasting solution will be possible only if
we put an end to the Israeli occupation of Palestinian,
Syrian and Lebanese territories in accordance with
internationally binding resolutions, as well as with the
terms of reference of the Madrid Peace Conference, the
principle of land for peace, the requirements of the
Road Map and the Arab Peace Initiative, ensuring that
the Palestinian people can fully regain their legitimate
political rights. At last they could thus achieve the
establishment of an independent State of their own on
their territory, with Jerusalem as its capital.

The Arab Group asserts its full solidarity with
Syria and demands that Israel fully withdraw from the
occupied Syrian Arab Golan to the 4 June 1967
borders.

We are also in full solidarity with Lebanon, its
Government and its people in the implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006), especially as regards the return
of Lebanese territory still under Israeli occupation -
including the northern area of the Ghajar region, the
Shab'aa Farms and the Kafr Shuba hills. We also
support the efforts of the Government of Lebanon to
extend its authority over all of its territories.

The Arab Group urges the Council to shoulder its
responsibilities, compel Israel to cease its daily
violations of Lebanese air, ground and maritime
borders and to provide Lebanon with a map of the
landmines it has laid in the country. Israel must also
provide full information about the cluster and
fragmentation bombs dropped on Lebanese territory,
which pose a threat to the safety and security and
livelihood of civilians.

The Arab Group believes that it is also time to
release Lebanese prisoners who have languished in
Israeli jails for many years, in violation of
humanitarian and legal principles.

In conclusion, we reserve the right to once again
raise before the Council the issue of the deterioration
of the situation in the occupied Arab territories. We
hope that the Council will compel Israel to abide by the
resolutions pertaining to this conflict. The Council
should also assume its responsibilities and compel
Israel to become seriously involved in the peace
process and to respond to Arab initiatives, in particular
the Peace Initiative endorsed by the Beirut Summit in
2002 and reaffirmed at the recent Riyadh Summit.

