Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): At the outset, I would
like to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Ghassan Salame' and Ms. Rida Al Tubuly for
their very comprehensive and clear briefings. I would
also like to welcome to the Council His Excellency
Mr. Mohamed Siala, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Libya.

Indonesia would like to join others in expressing
our deep concern at the current situation in Libya. To
that end, allow me to focus on the following points.

First, we reiterate our call for the immediate
cessation of hostilities in Libya. We call for all parties
to cease military actions, de-escalate tensions on the
ground and return to political negotiations. They must
adhere to international law, including international
humanitarian law and the Council's resolutions on the
arms embargo. Foreign intervention should stop further
exacerbating the conflict.

We welcome the efforts made by the United
Nations and other partners to find peace and to bring
all parties in Libya to return to political negotiations.
We reiterate our full support to Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Ghassan Salame and the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya. We continue
to reiterate our support for the Special Representative's
three-step proposal that he presented in July (see S/PV.8588). We also welcome and appreciate the plan
to hold the Berlin summit, including the preparatory
meetings that are under way. We hope that the summit
will facilitate a Libyan-led and Libyan-owned political
process and the attainment of lasting peace in Libya.

Secondly, Indonesia reiterates the need to protect
civilians and calls for humanitarian assistance to be
provided to Libyans. It is concerning that the latest
report shows that, since the outbreak of fighting in
April, more than 100,000 people, half of whom are
children, have fled their homes,\; that more than
800,000 people are in need of humanitarian assistance;
that the situation has aggravated humanitarian needs
and forced displacement, thereby hindering access
to food, health care, and other basic services; and
that the fighting has resulted in at least 395 civilian
causalities. Despite all those dreadful figures, the 2019
humanitarian response plan for Libya received less
than 47 per cent of requested funding.

Furthermore, attacks on civilians, including
migrants, and on health-care and civilian facilities
persist, not to mention today's attack mentioned by the
Special Representative. There have been 58 attacks on
health-care facilities in 2019, resulting in the deaths of
13 health-care workers, and the shelling of residential
areas and vital civilian infrastructure, including the
Mitiga airport, continues. This must stop and must
stop now.

Finally, the Security Council must be united in our
efforts with regard to Libya. The statement delivered
by Ms. Al Tubuly is a true wake-up call for us sitting
here at United Nations Headquarters. We need to spare
no effort in assisting the people and the Government of
Libya to achieve peace. The unity of the Council would
send a strong message that the world wants peace in
Libya. What we do here will have repercussions for
those are on the ground. We are here to do one particular
job and that is to save lives.

