Mr. Klimkin (Ukraine): Thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today's briefing and for your personal
dedication to countering Russia's aggression against
my country. My appreciation also goes to the briefers
for their important presentations. And needless to
say, I want to thank other delegations for their strong
expressions of solidarity and their united condemnation
of the Kremlin's revanchist policies.

As the Russian representative began his statement,
I thought he might have come to understand some
important points, but as he started to reproduce Russian
television's standard narrative, I realized that normal
service had been resumed. I can therefore now continue
with my statement, because we know all too well how
everything started - with the Russian invasion of
Ukraine. We do not need to repeat those facts.

We all know that it is not only my compatriots

whom the Russian troops on our territory are shooting
and killing. Last week, Russia's role in the downing of
Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-l7 was clearly exposed by
the investigators ofthe Joint Investigation Team. As we
all knew, but for which we now have full proof, a Russian
BUK missile system was brought from a military base
near Kursk. It shot down a passenger airliner and then
returned to Russia. I would like to thank the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands for his important
statement in that regard. As it happens, Russia's reaction
to the Joint Investigation Team's announcement did
not surprise me at all. We have seen the same attitude
where the chemical attacks in Syria and Salisbury are
concerned. First Russia denies everything and spreads
dozens of versions that have nothing to do with reality.
Once caught red-handed, it refuses to recognize the
conclusions of investigative bodies under the pretext
that it is not part of the investigations. It also complains
about the fact that none of its weird versions of events
are taken into consideration. Essentially, none of this is
new, and that is a very sad thing.

We have no doubt that the downing of Malaysia
Airlines Flight MH-17 was a terrorist act. By 12 June,
Ukraine will have submitted a memorandum to the
International Court of Justice with additional evidence
of Russia's violations of the International Convention
for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism. The
perpetrators of this and other crimes will be brought to
account and justice will be assured.

As we speak here today in this Chamber, violence
continues to ravage Donbas. The conflict has left
4.4 million people in a very dire humanitarian situation,
and the humanitarian cost continues to mount.
People lack access to all basic services and goods.
Everything ~ critical water, electricity and transport
infrastructure - has been destroyed. The same goes for
health facilities and services. Retired people are unable
to receive their pensions, because the Government
of Ukraine cannot reach them directly. They have to
cross into Government-controlled areas of Ukraine to
receive the money they are owed. Daily shellings and
armed hostilities are a reality for more than 600,000
Ukrainians living on both sides of the contact line.

The area, according to the United Nations, has
already become the most mine-contaminated stretch
of land in the world. One of the starkest reminders of
the cost of Russia's aggression came two weeks ago.
On 18 May, the Russian occupation forces used 152mm
calibre artillery to shell residential areas in the village
of Troitske in the Luhansk region. Two civilians, one of
whom was a child, lost their lives.

With regard to all the ramifications of the Russians'

claim that they are not in Ukraine, I have a very simple
illustration for the Security Council, a picture of Darya
Kazemirova. Three days ago she turned 15, and just
yesterday she was killed in the backyard ofher house by
a 122 mm shell, prohibited under the Minsk agreements
and shot by Russian proxies. I would therefore like to
ask the Russian representative if the shell is from the
so-called latest humanitarian convoy, if the Russian
proxies bought heavy ammunition and weaponry at
the local supermarket, of if they have been able to
manufacture reproductions of all the weaponry coming
into Ukraine. Unfortunately, I am making a rhetorical
point and do not need an answer, especially from the
Russian Federation. That requires feeling some kind
of responsibility.

Ukraine continues to be fully committed to peace
and the Minsk agreements, and we urge the Russian
Federation to do the same and to cease its persistent
denials of its responsibility as a party to the conflict.
We have just heard the Russian Federation's usual
narrative, which really does have a devastating impact
on the situation on the ground. The Russian shelling has
resulted in many losses among military personnel and
the civilian population. We are talking about hundreds of
tanks, howitzers, and multiple rocket-launched grenades
brought by Russia into the territory of Ukraine. And I
do mean hundreds, most of which remain unaccounted
for. They are often found camouflaged and hidden, kept
ready for further violence.
The activities of the Russian occupation authorities
are already causing an ecological disaster in Donbas.
The shootings carried out by Russia in the vicinity of
the Donetsk water-filtration station have rendered this
critical infrastructure facility totally inoperable. The
occupation administration's plans to shut off the pumps
at the Yunkom mine, a site of Soviet nuclear tests in
1979, risk radioactive contamination of drinking
water. Russia has even failed to provide the security
guarantees necessary for repairing and maintaining
critical civilian infrastructure along the line of contact.

The Special Monitoring Mission of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
is dealing with severe restrictions on its freedom of
movement by Russia's military forces and their proxies.
The intimidation of observers is now totally normal and
takes place on an almost daily basis with no reaction
either from Moscow or its occupation administration.
In a nutshell, we can see that Russia and its ongoing
military activity in the occupied territories remain a
fundamental obstacle to any sort of peaceful option.

As soon as Moscow decides to stop the
violence - and so far there has been no such
decision - the conflict will end. I urge Russia to take
that decision. One ofthe most important steps it can take
is supporting the deployment of a full-fledged United
Nations-mandated peacekeeping force throughout the
occupied territory of Donetsk and Luhansk. We are
confident that such an operation could contribute a great
deal to establishing security, creating the conditions
necessary for real progress on the implementation of
the Minsk agreements, taking over responsibility on
the ground and saving people's lives. That will open the
way for progress in implementing further steps under
the Minsk agreement, and of course in organizing and
holding local elections, which we definitely need. We
have sent this message before, loudly and clearly, and
I would like to reinforce it today, on the International
Day of United Nations Peacekeepers, which was in fact
introduced at the initiative of Ukraine.

We stand for the full integration of the entirety
of our Donbas, and we will welcome our compatriots
back. In December 2017, my Government approved
the State programme for post-conflict recovery in the
country's eastern regions for the next three years. It
focuses on boosting social and economic development
in the conflict-affected areas, improving well-being
and restoring normal life for the people who have
suffered under the Russian occupation for the past four
years. Naturally, in all this Ukraine is very grateful for
the humanitarian assistance provided by agencies of the
United Nations and bilateral partners. The 2018 United
Nations humanitarian response plan will be even more
instrumental in effectively addressing the needs of
millions of those affected by the conflict in Donbas.
If fully funded, it would help to make a substantial
difference for at least 2.3 million people.

In addition to highlighting the situation in the
occupied territories of Donbas, it is really important
that we maintain a special focus on Russia's occupation
of Crimea. The Russian Federation's actions there
constitute the most flagrant breaches of the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations since the Second
World War. They challenge the norms and rules of
international law and create an atmosphere of fear and
hatred. The occupation has resulted in the accelerated
militarization of Crimea. Russia has more than doubled
the strength of its military there and continues to prepare
the Crimean military infrastructure for the deployment
of nuclear weapons, including by refurbishing Soviet-
era nuclear-warhead storage facilities. Today, in fact,
Crimea is a huge military base that is often used for
Russian interventions in distant lands, including Syria.
The Syrian regime has returned the favour by sending
a delegation to Crimea and by recognizing Georgian
Abkhazia and South Ossetia, occupied by Russia, as
independent republics.

The occupation continues to be characterized by
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law, the total suppression of any opposition
and the systematic persecution of Crimean Tatars
and Ukrainians - anyone who is against the
occupation, basically - along with killings and forced
disappearances, intimidation and attacks on Crimean
Tatars and on Ukrainian identity and culture. Political
prisoners are now a sad reality in Russian-occupied
Crimea, as well as in Russia itself, as a matter of fact.
My courageous compatriots are now fighting for their
lives as well as for freedom and justice. On 14 May,
Oleg Sentsov, a famous film director who has been
thrown behind bars in Russia for opposing the illegal
annexation of Crimea, addressed these very simple
words to the people of Ukraine.

"I, Oleg Sentsov, citizen of Ukraine, illegally
sentenced by a Russian court and currently in
prison in the city of Labytnangi, am declaring an
indefinite hunger strike as of 14 Mary 2018. The
only condition for its termination is the liberation
of all Ukrainian political prisoners in the territory
of the Russian Federation."
He added that he is ready to die for the freedom ofthose
of his compatriots who have been illegally detained
and sentenced in Russia. Vladimir Balukh, a political
prisoner in Russian-occupied Crimea, has been on an
indefinite hunger strike since 19 March in protest of
his sentence on fake charges. The real reason for his
prosecution is simply his pro-Ukrainian stance and the
Ukrainian flag he flew in his private yard.

Emir Usein Kuku, Nariman Memediminov, Seyran
Mustafayev, Edem Semedlyaev, Yassir Arbelaev and
many other Crimean Tatars have become special targets
for repression by the occupying authorities. They now
need the support of all those who value freedom and
human rights. I would like to take advantage of this
important opportunity to urge Council members and
the wider United Nations community to join our call
to Russia to free them. Russia continues to ignore the
order that the International Court of Justice issued one
year ago requiring it, among other things, to refrain
from maintaining or imposing limitations on the
ability of the Crimean Tatar community to preserve
its representative institutions, including the Mejlis, as
well as to ensure the availability of education in the
Ukrainian language. Despite the order's very clear
wording, an entire year has passed in which Russia has
continued its ban on the Mejlis and its disregard for
all of the provisions of the relevant General Assembly
resolutions on Crimea.

This is all about denying access for international
human rights monitoring missions, showing the utmost
contempt for its obligations under international law as
the occupying Power and continuing the practice of
compelling Crimean residents to serve in the armed
forces of the Russian Federation. These are examples
of Russia's response to the demands of international
community. And the list of violations is practically
endless. Just two weeks ago, on 15 May, Russia opened
a bridge across the Kerch Strait. We strongly condemn
its action and consider it yet another violation of our
sovereignty. Ukraine is grateful to the countries that
have already denounced this attempt to cement the
illegal occupation of Crimea. We urge all other States
and organizations, including the United Nations, to
support that position.

Russia is also trying to change the demographics
of the peninsula. Since the occupation began the
occupying Power has intentionally brought in a huge
number of settlers. It has introduced settlers from a
number of different regions and created intolerable
conditions for the local population in an attempt to force
them to leave. I want to remind the Russian delegation
that this practice is a clear violation of the 1949 Geneva
Convention. Time and again we have urged the Russian
Federation to reverse its illegal occupation of Crimea
and to stop its aggression, including by withdrawing
its armed formations from the temporarily occupied
territories of Ukraine and fully implementing its
commitments under the Minsk agreements. Until that
is done, the issue of Russian aggression should remain
a high priority on the Council's agenda.

In conclusion, I would like to once again express my
gratitude for the messages of solidarity with Ukraine
expressed during this debate.

There is one more item that I should mention and

that the Russian delegate has also brought up. We have
just received tragic news from Kyiv. Arkady Babchenko,
a Russian journalist and a well-known opponent of the
Russian regime, has been killed near his apartment in
Kyiv. Before arriving in Ukraine, he was compelled
to leave Russia following attacks and threats against
him and his family. He went to Prague and after that
to Kyiv. He continued to struggle for a democratic
Russia from Ukraine. Of course, Moscow has always
considered him to be an enemy. Our police have already
begun an investigation. It is too early to say who is
behind the attack, but with our knowledge of similar
cases, we have strong reason to believe that Russia is
willing to employ this and other tactics to destabilize
Ukraine through acts of terrorism, subversion and
political assassination.

I would like to thank everyone once again for
their support and solidarity with Ukraine. It pains me
to speak of this issue, which is such a matter of life
and death for many of my fellow Ukrainians. There is
nothing I would have wanted more than to be able to tell
the Council that we reached a resolution to the conflict.
But since an end is unfortunately nowhere near in sight,
we will spare no effort to ensure that justice is served
and that the Russian State bears full responsibility
for its aggression and withdraws from all occupied
territory, both in Donbas and Crimea.

