Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Ms. Reena Ghelani for her briefing.

We are pleased with the steadily declining
violence in Syria. Despite the continuing trend towards
stabilization, however, there are still some hotbeds of
tension in the Syrian Arab Republic, including in Idlib
governorate and east of the Euphrates. The situation in
north-western Syria is fragile and cannot be artificially
maintained for an extended period of time. The threat
posed by militants from the Al-Nusra Front alliance
with the Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, who have taken almost
complete control of these territories, will not disappear
on its own. Calls for freezing the situation only
encourage the terrorists. In that regard, together with
our Turkish and Iranian partners, we are continuing our
efforts to develop a formula that will make it possible
to combat the terrorist threat without harming the
civilian population. The high-level meeting in Sochi on
14 February confirmed that the Astana troika remains
united in its quest for ways to stabilize the situation
on the ground in Idlib and the north-east as soon
as possible.

We support the view ofthe importance ofincreasing
the humanitarian assistance to Syria. The Syrians are
indeed in need ofa great deal. But while the assistance
entering the country is much needed, it must be
comprehensive and depoliticized. We know that some
countries have been pressured in an effort to dissuade
them from helping people living in territories controlled
by Damascus. That is absolutely unacceptable. The
use of unilateral sanctions, Whose greatest impact is
on ordinary Syrians, is equally shameful. Instead of
causing suffering to Syrians with the idea that it will
do damage to the authorities in Damascus, the focus
should be on the most effective way of improving the
humanitarian situation in Syria, which is by helping to
restore its ruined civilian infrastructure and national
economy. We want to stress that if the representatives of
the Syrian Government are not invited to the upcoming
Brussels Conference, it will not carry its full weight.

The number of refugees returning to Syria from
neighbouring States is steadily increasing. I want to
emphasize that no one is forcing refugees to return.
It is estimated that just under 2 million Syrians, in 10
countries, have expressed the wish to return home. Since
30 September 2015 some 370,000 overall have returned
from foreign countries. With the help of the Russian
Centre for the Reconciliation of Opposing Sides in the
Syrian Arab Republic, 12 entry checkpoints have been
set up, including one at an airport and one at a seaport.

The Syrian authorities are taking steps aimed
at making the process of Syrian refugees' return
sustainable. In 412 towns and villages that have suffered
the least from military action, centres have been set up
for welcoming and housing up to 1.5 million people.
In the Aleppo, Damascus and Hama governorates,
a State programme is being implemented to rebuild
towns that have been liberated from the militants,
including with the provision of water and electric
infrastructure, targeted aid and assistance for people
in returning to their permanent homes. The amnesty
process is continuing for those who evaded military
service, including refugees and former members of
illegal armed groups. More than 55,000 have been
amnestied so far. We hope that those who truly care
about the fate of ordinary Syrians will take a close look
at the situation, considering the realities on the ground,
and join in the efforts to overcome the destruction and
restore normalcy to people's lives.

We want to draw special attention to two issues.
First, we are concerned about the situation in the Al-Hol
camp for internally displaced persons (IDPs), which is
located in north-eastern Hasakah governorate. There
are almost 50,000 refugees there, the majority of them
women and children. All of them had fled Hajin, which
the coalition headed by the United States, together with
its protege forces on the ground, has razed to the ground,
leaving many civilian victims, incidentally. As far as
we remember, no one called for an end to the bombing
at the time. The camp is now taking in people from
Baghouz, which the coalition is also flattening. People
may say that the air strikes are all high precision, but
the same was said about Raqqa, where bodies are still
being pulled out from under the rubble.

It is time that everyone, including United Nations
bodies, dropped their double standards and looked at
things objectively. The problem in Rukban, where from
6 to 14 February the United Nations and the Syrian
Arab Red Crescent conducted an operation to deliver
and distribute humanitarian assistance, is not related
to a lack of desire on the part of the IDPs to move to
Damascus-controlled territory. On the contrary, a
United Nations survey of the camp showed that 95 per
cent want to leave Rukban, and 80 per cent want to return
to areas under the control of the Syrian authorities. The
problem in Rukban is the illegal occupation by the
United States of part of sovereign Syrian territory in
the area of Al-Tanf, where militants from the Maghawir
Al-Thawra armed group, who have been tarnished by
their ties to terrorists, are nurtured. As far as we can
tell, there is no access to or exit from the area, and
thanks to overcrowding, unsanitary conditions and
inadequate food and medicine, dozens of people have
already died. According to some reports, the camp has
seen its first case of leprosy. In accordance with the
Geneva Convention, the United States, as the occupying
Power, bears full responsibility for the situation of
Rukban's inhabitants. Article 55 of the Fourth Geneva
Convention states that

"[t]o the fullest extent of the means available
to it, the Occupying Power has the duty of ensuring
the food and medical supplies of the population;
it should, in particular, bring in the necessary
foodstuffs, medical stores and other articles if the
resources of the occupied territory are inadequate."

Article 56 states that

"the Occupying Power has the duty of ensuring
and maintaining the medical and hospital
establishments and services, public health and
hygiene in the occupied territory, with particular
reference to the prophylactic and preventive
measures necessary to combat the spread of
contagious diseases".

The Convention emphasizes that external humanitarian
assistance does not relieve the occupying Power
of its responsibility. As a result, the international
humanitarian community, the United Nations and
specialized agencies, donors and partners, are doing
What the United States should be doing in accordance
with international law. We have a proposal for a
way out of the situation and a lasting solution to the
problem of Rukban, which is to evacuate all who want
to leave the camp and go where they choose. "All who
want" are the key words, of course. We must get on
with implementing that idea instead of wasting time
in planning new convoys, which only emphasize the
disregard for international humanitarian law in that
part of Syria.

That is the point of the Russian initiative which on
19 February opened two corridors to enable civilians to
leave the camp, under the humanitarian guarantees of
the Syrian Arab Red Crescent. And people are ready to
leave. We simply need to stop blocking their way.

