Ms. Eckels-Currie (United States of America):
Every time the Security Council attempts to address
the humanitarian crisis in Syria, we take a small leap of
faith. I say "we" in reference to the Security Council.
I speak of faith because all Council members and most
States Members of the United Nations still genuinely
try to uphold the responsibilities under the Charter
of the United Nations, including abiding by and fully
implementing Security Council resolutions. Despite
the grim updates we heard today, we must maintain the
hope that we can help the Syrian people. If we do not
have that hope, we are wasting our time here.

Just four days ago, the Security Council took
another leap of faith. We adopted resolution 2401
(2018), demanding a 30-day ceasefire for all of Syria,
unimpeded and sustained humanitarian access to
deliver desperately needed food and medical supplies,
and immediate and unconditional medical evacuations
based on need and emergency. Our goal was clear and
simple. The Al-Assad regime and its supporters have
been pummelling eastern Ghouta, where 400,000
people live under siege and constant bombardment.
Resolution 2401 (2018) demanded that the assault stop.
That was the Council speaking in one, clear voice. The
opposition groups operating in eastern Ghouta have
made clear their commitment to the ceasefire. The Free
Syrian Army, Jaysh al-Islam, the Al-Rahman Legion
and Ahrar al-Sham all committed to implementing
resolution 2401 (2018).

Against all odds, we hoped that Mr. Al-Assad
might respect the resolution, cease hostilities and allow
unfettered humanitarian access to all those who need
it. Against all odds, we hoped that Russia would use
its influence to ensure Mr. Al-Assad's commitment to
resolution 2401 (2018). Once again, that hope has been
crushed because so far, for the people of eastern Ghouta,
nothing has changed. Despite the unanimous call for
a ceasefire, the regime's attacks continue unabated.
Hundreds of Syrians have been killed or injured since
we adopted the resolution on Saturday. What is worse is
that less than 24 hours after we demanded the ceasefire,
there were reports that the Al-Assad regime again used
chlorine gas as a weapon. Such attacks demonstrate
Syria's complete and utter contempt for the Council and
the United Nations.

On Monday one human rights organization
reported 18 attacks that defied the Council's demands.
On Tuesday another organization reported at least 23
air strikes and four barrel bombs in eastern Ghouta.
Syrians on the ground are reporting that Tuesday was
worse than Monday with regard to strikes from the
regime. How can that be? On the humanitarian front, as
Mark Lowcock stated, the Al-Assad regime has allowed
no deliveries of assistance into eastern Ghouta - not
one. Opposition groups in the area have expressed
their commitment to allowing aid in, but the Al-Assad
regime still says no.

Since we adopted resolution 2401 (2018), Russia
has announced a daily five-hour humanitarian pause
in the aerial bombing of civilians in eastern Ghouta,
which is cynical, callous and in flagrant defiance of
the demands ofresolution 2401 (2018). The cessation of
hostilities is for at least 30 days 4 every day, all day.
Russia does not get to unilaterally rewrite the terms of
the resolution. It negotiated it and voted for it. Russia,
Iran and the Al-Assad regime are not even trying to
hide their intentions. They are asking civilians to leave
eastern Ghouta on the false premise that they can then
attack anyone left in the area as much as they would
like. Let us call the actions what they are. Mr. Al-Assad
and his allies want the civilians of eastern Ghouta to
walk into the arms of a regime that has been attacking
and starving them for the past seven years. That is not
a humanitarian gesture. They do not care ifthe 400,000
people of eastern Ghouta suffer, as long as they can
continue to pursue their military and political objectives.

We know what Iran, Syria and the Al-Assad regime
are doing because they have done the same thing in the
past. It is the same playbook they used for Aleppo in
2016. Once again, we, including Russia, demanded in
the Security Council Chamber that Mr. Al-Assad stop
the bombing, and yet Russia, Iran and Mr. Al-Assad
continue their attacks, defying the wishes of the
Council and of the international community. Because
we have been through this before, we know what Russia
will say today. It will say that there are terrorists in
eastern Ghouta so that the Al-Assad regime can bomb
as ferociously and indiscriminately as it wants and kill
as many civilians as it wants. That defies the principles
governing the laws of war. The Al-Assad regime should
not be allowed to bomb and starve its own people into
submission under the guise of counter-terrorism. That
Russian argument makes a mockery of the Council and
of international law.

Russia also accuses the United States of somehow
being responsible for humanitarian crises in Syria,
but such accusations are ludicrous. The United States
does not block humanitarian aid in any area. In fact,
the United States has provided more than $7 billion
in humanitarian aid in response to the crisis. The
Council must not fall for Russia's misdirections. When
the ceasefire was adopted unanimously on Saturday,
including by the Russians, Ambassador Haley stated
that our resolve to stand by our demands in the
resolution would be tested. It has come to pass. Despite
everything that has happened since Saturday, we are not
casting aside the ceasefire in Syria; just the opposite.
We would like to redouble our efforts in the Security
Council to implement it, but the only way to change the
situation on the ground is for all of us - every single
one of us - around the table and each State Member
of the United Nations to speak the truth about what
is happening.

The past four days should show us that when it
comes to demanding a ceasefire, it is not enough to say

that all parties should show restraint or commit to the
ceasefire because in eastern Ghouta there is only one
party dropping barrel bombs, gassing the Syrian people
and denying deliveries of food and medical assistance.
It is the Al-Assad regime, operating with the full
support of Russia and Iran.

On Saturday we stated that the only way to restore
the credibility of the Council was to make the ceasefire
a reality. Russia, Iran and the Al-Assad regime have
not complied with the Council's demands and have not
silenced their guns. Unless we take action, they will
stop at nothing to destroy eastern Ghouta and we will
again fail to help the Syrian people.

