We thank Mr. Francois Lounceny Fall, Special Representative of the Secretary- General, for his assessment of the situation in the Central African region. The Russian Federation consistently supports the work of the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) as an important tool of preventive diplomacy. We believe that the good offices of Special Representative Fall are in high demand in the subregion. I would also like to express our condolences to our Burundian friends with regard to the death of President Pierre Nkurunziza. We are all deeply saddened by that loss. Central African countries face complex challenges. In recent months, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has been added to the list. In that regard, we note with satisfaction the information, contained in the Secretary-General's latest report (S/2020/463), that timely measures have been taken to stop the spread of COVID-19. It is clear that much remains to be done, but we see movement in the right direction. We also consider it extremely important that the countries and organizations of the region play a key role when it comes to crisis prevention and conflict resolution. We welcome commitment of the Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS) to finalizing its institutional reform, which is aimed at strengthening the organization's potential. We are closely following the developments in the Central African Republic. We support the efforts of the country's leadership, primarily President Touadera, aimed at stabilizing the situation, which is of particular importance in the context of the upcoming elections. The Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic of 6 February 2019 has already played a positive role and remains the basis for further steps towards resolving the situation in the country. Russia will continue to closely support the process of national reconciliation and coordinate efforts with those who are involved in searching for ways to normalize the situation. We are closely following the developments in Cameroon. The issue of the Anglophone provinces did not arise yesterday. It has deep historical roots. A solution to the accumulated problems can be found only at the negotiating table and through upholding human rights and ensuring the rule of law. We urge all Cameroonian parties to exercise maximum restraint and abandon all use of violence. We hope that the agreed initiatives will be implemented in full soon. In conclusion, we would recall that the challenges and threats that Central Africa is encountering are closely interconnected and that the States of the subregion are interdependent. Destabilization of the situation in one country may reduce the security in the States neighbouring that country. It is therefore extremely important the line between prevention and interference in internal affairs not be crossed.
