Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I wish to thank both Special
Envoy Staffan de Mistura and Director Ging for their
comprehensive briefings.

We all agree that only a comprehensive intra-Syrian
dialogue facilitated by the United Nations, pursuant to
resolution 2254 (2015), can end the Syrian crisis. In
that regard, we reiterate our support for the continued
endeavours of the Special Envoy to meaningfully
relaunch the Geneva process, with particular emphasis
on the formation of a constitutional committee based
on the final statement of the Syrian National Dialogue
Congress in Sochi. We commend the Special Envoy for
conducting a series of consultations with all States and
parties concerned. He has indeed been indefatigable in
carrying out his work, and we are encouraged that there
has been some positive movement with regard to the
establishment of the constitutional committee. We took
note of the very significant series of meetings he held
on 19, 22 and 25 June. In that connection, we welcome
the fact that the Syrian Government has submitted to
the Special Envoy a list of 50 names to be included
among the members of the committee. We acknowledge
that the Special Envoy has continued consultations
so that the opposition can also submit its list. That is
very critical because it is imperative to ensure that
the committee be fully inclusive and representative
of the Syrian people. As the Special Envoy said, it is
also indispensable that the constitutional committee be
credible and enjoy international legitimacy.
The post-conflict need for support forreconstruction
makes the issue of legitimacy critical. As the Special
Envoy also stressed, it is important that it be Syrian-
owned, which was also underscored in resolution 2254
(2015). That is also undeniably a principle enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations.

While the Special Envoy has been working
tirelessly to create common ground with regard to the
political track, there have been serious and worrying
developments on the ground. As the Secretary-
General conveyed in press statements issued on the
10 and 22 June (SG/SM/19080 and SG/SM/l9099, respectively) military escalations in south-west Syria
and Idlib are a source of deep concern. As both involve
the de-escalation zones, we call on all parties to respect
the ceasefire arrangements and exercise restraint. We
encourage all guarantors to work together and end
current military escalations, which cause suffering
and displacement among civilians and pose a threat to
regional security. As the Secretary-General stated in
his report of 20 June,

"[t]he creation of a calm, safe and neutral
environment across the Syrian Arab Republic
that will enable all Syrians to express confidence
in a political process is paramount." (S/2018/619, para. 45)

In order to protect civilians and civilian facilities,
as well as to create a supportive environment for the
political process, we stress that de-escalation must be a
top priority. De-escalation is obviously also needed to
ensure the quality of humanitarian access for the United
Nations and its humanitarian partners. In that regard,
while the drop in the number of people in besieged
and hard-to-reach areas is a positive development, we
remain concerned about the lack of safe, sustained and
sufficient humanitarian access to all Syrians, based on
the assessment of their humanitarian needs. According
to the latest Secretary-General report, this year has seen

"a collapse in the ability of the United Nations
and its humanitarian partners to reach people
across conflict lines from within the Syrian Arab
Republic." (ibid., para. 42)

That is why we believe that as long as the humanitarian
needs remain staggering, all parties should facilitate
safe, rapid and unimpeded humanitarian access so that
aid can reach those in the greatest need. In addition,
all pledges should be disbursed in order to sustain the
humanitarian programmes. We have taken note of what
Mr. Ging had to say about that, as it is definitely a
source of concern for us as well.

We thank the Secretary-General for his report
on the review of the United Nations cross-border
operations (S/2018/617), based on resolution 2393
(2017), which notes that cross-border aid delivery
remains critical to ensuring that humanitarian
assistance reaches those in need through the most direct
route. While we acknowledge that fact, we encourage
the United Nations and its partners to implement the
recommendations in the report, particularly those that
could further strengthen coordination, transparency
and effectiveness, so that aid goes only to those who
really need it.

Finally, we reiterate our firm position that there can
be no military solution to the protracted Syrian conflict,
and that all Syrian actors should meaningfully engage
with the Special Envoy as he continues his diplomatic
work to relaunch the Geneva intra-Syrian talks. The
Council should also support the Special Envoy's efforts
at this critical juncture.

