Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We thank Ms. Bensouda
for her written report in accordance with resolution
1970 (2011), as well as for her briefing.

The continued violation of human rights committed
in Libya by all parties remains a source of concern.
The cycle of Violence has resulted in the death and
the injury of civilians, as well as the destruction of
civilian facilities. Abduction, torture, killing and
arbitrary detention continue unabated and with a
sense of impunity. In addition, illegal armed groups
and human trafficking persist, While criminal gangs
continue to commit crimes, exploiting and further
exacerbating the general climate of lawlessness, as
well as the weakness of judicial institutions. Terrorist
groups, including elements of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham, continue their attacks. This climate of
violence and insecurity is hampering the ability of
Victims to seek protection and justice. We condemn
any violence against civilians or civilian facilities,
including the recent terrorist attack on the High
National Elections Commission.

We take this opportunity to express our solidarity
and sympathy with the people and the Government of
Libya. Its civilians, particularly the most vulnerable
groups, such as women, children, migrants and
refugees, bear the brunt of the Violence and suffer
enormously. The agony of Libyans must stop. The sense
of continued impunity should end. It is important that
the international community work together to support
Libyans to end the current state of fear and uncertainty.
All actors who commit human rights violations and
attacks must be held accountable and brought to justice.
We also believe that it is vital to end the prevailing
sense of impunity through appropriate mechanisms
that respect the sovereignty and the territorial integrity
of Libya. All Libyan parties should be reminded that
the protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure is
their responsibility.

While it is the primary responsibility ofthe Libyans
themselves to take all appropriate action to restore
peace and security, the international community has an
important role to play in supporting their endeavours.
In that regard, it is indispensable to continue capacity-
building and technical assistance for the State
institutions of Libya, particularly judiciary and law
enforcement bodies, with the objective of ensuring the
rule of law. The international community should also
provide comprehensive support anchored in a long-term
strategy for the building of State institutions that could
foster an environment of peace, security and stability.

It is our conviction that the continued and
widespread Violation of human rights cannot be stopped
sustainably until all Libyan political actors find a
lasting political solution for the prolonged transition.
In that regard, we reiterate our support for continued
diplomatic efforts by the Special Representative and
Head of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya,
Mr. Ghassan Salame. We believe it is critical to intensify
coordinated and complimentary international efforts to
fully implement the United Nations action plan. The
reconciliation process should also be further promoted
to reinforce the political process, as well as to address
community grievances in a manner that could rebuild
the social fabric and trust.

Allow me to conclude by underlining that only
a comprehensive political process can address the
multifaceted crisis in Libya and ensure the rule of law.
In that regard, we encourage all Libyans to continue to
work together in a spirit of compromise and to continue
to engage in the conclusive political process set out in
the action plan to bring about concrete results that could
facilitate its full implementation. The international
community, particularly the Council, should also send
a strong and unified message to pressure all parties to
stop violence and engage in an inclusive and sustained
political dialogue.

