Mr. Pressman (United States of America): The
United States supports the Security Council's adoption
of resolution 2296 (2016), renewing the mandate of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) for another year. The United
States welcomes the Government of the Sudan's recent
declaration of a unilateral cessation of hostilities in
Southern Kordofan and the Blue Nile. We would like
to see that declaration extended to the Darfur region
as, unfortunately, fighting by the Government and its
proxies continues in Darfur.

An end to military offences and fighting in all of
those areas would bring much-needed relief to thousands
of Sudanese and create an improved environment for
dialogue, leading to a political solution. Lasting peace
will come only from a negotiated solution that addresses
the key political and security drivers of conflict in
all areas of the Sudan. Civilians continue to suffer in
Darfur with, according to the United Nations, at least
80,000 newly displaced in 2016 alone and more than
2 million internally displaced persons who are in need
of aid and cannot return to their homes.

In the absence of a comprehensive political
agreement and in the face of those pressing needs,
UNAMID plays a critical role in protecting civilians
and facilitating the delivery of humanitarian assistance
in Darfur. Any calls for the mission to leave the Sudan
are woefully premature. We urge the Government of the
Sudan to allow the mission to carry out the mandate the
Security Council has given it, including by not placing
restrictions on its freedom of movement or its needed
food and supplies. We understand that as of 23 June, all
UNAMID food-ration shipments that had been held at
Port Sudan by the Government of the Sudan had been
cleared for release. We welcome that development and
call on the Government of the Sudan to urgently release
of the nearly 300 remaining containers of much-needed
equipment, in compliance with its obligations under its
status-of-forces agreement with the United Nations.

I would like to briefly address the report of the
Joint Working Group, which has been raised by some
colleagues. The United States certainly welcomes and
encourages cooperation among the Government of the
Sudan, the United Nations and the African Union to
efficiently and effectively implement the UNAMID
mandate. But we must be clear that the Security Council,
in order to conduct its business, will continue to rely
primarily on the analysis and advice of the Secretary-
General about the situation in countries on our agenda.
We believe that the Joint Working Group's report
downplays the scale of fighting in Darfur and is
inconsistent with the special report of the Secretary-
General and the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission (S/2016/510). For example, the Joint
Working Group assesses that there were "no more rebel
movements in four states", but the special report finds
that the Sudanese military claimed victories in South
Darfur earlier this year, conducted bombings in Central
Darfur and pursued rebels in North Darfur in January.

Moreover, we know from the past 10 years that the
rebel movements are constantly mobile, and that any
single snapshot in time is not necessarily indicative ofa
larger trend. Also, how do we square the Joint Working
Group's conclusions that "access is granted for most
patrols" with the conclusion of the special report
that UNAMID continued "to face severe restrictions
on its access and freedom of movement in Darfur"
(S/2016/510, para. 48)?

Lastly, the Joint Working Group emphasizes the
beginning of voluntary returns and early recovery
assistance that has been provided to the people of
Darfur, but ignores the surge of displacements that
occurred earlier this year in Jebel Marra, where tens
of thousands of new internally displaced persons are in
need of urgent humanitarian assistance.

Finally, we reiterate that any exit strategy for
UNAMID is pretty clear. It is one linked to the
achievement of the agreed benchmarks on an inclusive
political process, the protection of civilians and the
prevention of violence. We look forward to progress on
achieving those benchmarks.

