Mr. Inguanez (Malta): First and foremost, I would
like to join others in thanking the Swedish presidency
of the Council for organizing today's open debate and
placing a spotlight on this issue. The protection of
children must remain one of our top priorities if we
want to have lasting peace and achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals. I also thank Ms. Virginia Gamba,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Henrietta Fore,
Executive Director ofUNICEF, and Ms. Yenny Londono
for sharing their insights today. We particularly
welcome the Special Representative's persistent efforts
and invaluable work in this field.

Malta aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union.

This year's report by the Secretary-General on
children and armed conflict (S/2018/465) confirms that
children continue to be disproportionately affected by
such conflict. It is disheartening and shameful that in
this day and age, children in various parts of the world
continue to suffer the consequences of armed conflict.
We cannot realistically expect a peaceful tomorrow
if schools are being bombed today. It is completely
unacceptable that in certain parts of the world, children
have to deal with abductions, rape, sexual Violence and
killings as if they were a normal part of daily life.

Action at the international level is crucial if we are
to ensure that children get the future they truly deserve,
regardless of the country or region they happen to be
born in. In doing so, due attention must also be given
to all who have already suffered grave violations.
Those victims must not be forgotten, and we have a
responsibility to offer them all the help they need to cope
with their traumatic experience and become agents of
change. Ms. Londofio's experience is testament to that.

Malta remains particularly concerned about the
alarming scale and severity of the effects of violence
on children in war zones and their increasing exposure
to it. Violence breeds violence. It is deplorable that
hospitals and schools are bombed to destruction and
that the life-saving work of humanitarian aid workers
is impeded. International humanitarian law must be
respected by all the parties to a conflict at all times.
Furthermore, places where the State is fragile or absent
can easily become breeding grounds for terrorist
groups who abuse and exploit children. Here too we
must strive to ensure that children do not grow up
in an environment where the only opportunities are
offered by a military life and a war economy. Synergies
are needed so that Member States and regional and
subregional organizations can work in partnership and
complement United Nations efforts. We must continue
investing in peace in order to ensure that children can
grow up in an environment that allows them to reach
their full potential.

