Mr. Ikouebe (Congo) (spoke in French): Madam
President, your counterpart, Minister Rodolphe Adada,
was getting ready to take part in today's debate, but he
has been detained elsewhere for a meeting the contents
of which concern our debate because it is a summit
meeting of the African Union's Peace and Security
Council on Darfur. Therefore, he has asked me to
deliver the following statement:

"Madam President, Greece has assumed the
presidency of the Security Council for this month
with great skill and dexterity, and we see proof of
this in the organization of the current meeting to
which you have invited the African Union (AU).

"I am especially grateful that you have
proposed for discussion at this meeting a very
significant theme for Africa in particular - that
is, challenges of cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations and other
intergovernmental bodies in maintaining
international peace and security.

"My country has assumed the
responsibilities of Chairman of the African Union
and, therefore, we are increasingly aware of the
need and the importance of such cooperation,
which, in some cases, takes the form of a true
partnership, such as in Darfur or in Cote d'Ivoire.

"I would like to thank the Secretary-General
for the excellent report he has just submitted to
us. We strongly support the content of this report.

"This debate fits into the approach that was
outlined in the Outcome Document of the 2005
World Summit and stresses the importance of
strengthening relationships between the United
Nations and regional and subregional
organizations, as indicated in Chapter VIII of the
Charter.

"There is a need, then, to integrate these
new tools of cooperation with a view to greater
effectiveness and proximity in order to meet real
needs in the area of peace, security and
development.

"In this respect, the relevance of Security
Council resolution 1631 (2005), the first of its
kind, adopted on 17 October 2005, is abundantly
clear. It advocates regular meetings with regional
and subregional organizations in order to
strengthen cooperation with these organizations
in maintaining international peace and security,
ensuring if possible that such meetings coincide
with high-level meetings held with the heads of
regional and other intergovernmental
organizations. We are pleased to see that this
intention is again taking shape today.
"Therefore, we have the heavy
responsibility of designing a world order that
must respond to a common vision and use
complementarities and comparative advantages in
a clear division of labour. We agree with the
Secretary-General when he says that
implementing such a vision will not be easy. In
fact, if we refer to Chapter VIII of the United
Nations Charter as a basis for operational
cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations, we have to recognize the
important role that regional organizations can
play in the area of conflict prevention,
peacemaking, peacekeeping, peacebuilding,
disarmament, non-proliferation, the protection of
civilians and natural disasters.

"I will now mention a few of these areas.
First of all, with respect to conflict prevention,
even though it is basically the prerogative of
Member States, we are pleased to note that the
African Union, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and the European Union,
for example, all have a conflict prevention centre
with an early warning system. Likewise, thanks
to the help of the United Nations, Central Africa
has a subregional centre for human rights and
democracy in Yaounde, Cameroon, which helps
to promote respect for human rights, mitigate
injustices and prevent conflicts in the region. This
mechanism fits perfectly into the framework
defined by the United Nations Standing Advisory
Committee on Security Questions in Central
Africa.

"We agree with the Secretary-General that
regional and subregional organizations could do
more in this area, but, unfortunately, they have to
face logistical, financial and human-resource
difficulties and therefore must continue to rely
also on international cooperation.

"When it comes to peacemaking, we have
also acknowledged that regional and subregional
organizations have an important role to play.
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union in this area manifested itself
through, for example, the dispatch of mediators,
envoys and special representatives with respect to
Burundi, the inter-Congolese dialogue, the
international conference on the Great Lakes
region and the talks on Darfur.

"As regards peacekeeping, the African
Union has set up collective mechanisms, such as
the Council for Peace and Security, which is
meeting at the present time. Subregional
organizations, such as the Economic Community
of West African States could also benefit from the
fulfilling experience. We would like to reaffirm
our commitment to a strengthened partnership
between the United Nations and the African
Union for the management of the crisis in Darfur.
Africa believes that the transition to a United
Nations force fits perfectly into the logic that has
prevailed in this type of situation until now. We
will not say any more at this stage. We will await
the conclusions of the meeting that is under way.

"Furthermore, we must point out that, in
order to strengthen its capacity for intervention
through standby arrangements, the African Union
has called for the establishment of five brigades
of 3,500 to 5,000 men by the year 2010. The
international community should support that
initiative, which would set an example for other
theatres of operation.

"Peacebuilding has a very clear regional
dimension. We are convinced that regional and
subregional organizations that are partners of the
United Nations, as well as financial institutions,
can play a major role in establishing an integrated
and coordinated approach in that area. That is one
of the missions that has been entrusted to the
recently established Peacebuilding Commission
and in which Africa places great hope.

"The challenges we must address in today's
debate involve defining the role and determining
the nature of the United Nations partner
organizations that intervene in the maintenance of
international peace and security. In that respect,
we share the views of the Secretary-General, who
proposes that the Security Council study the
question of the scope of cooperation between the
United Nations and regional and other
intergovernmental organizations and assess the
extent to which they choose to identify
themselves either as regional organizations acting
under Chapter VIII of the Charter or as
intergovernmental organizations acting under
other provisions.

"After determining their nature and capacity
for action, it would be possible to define their
operational scope of action, whereby we would
determine the role of each organization. Thus, in
order to avoid confusion in this area, we must ask
international, regional and subregional
organizations that would wish to contribute to
strengthening cooperation with the United
Nations to conclude a formal agreement with the
Secretary-General in response to the appeal
launched by the heads of State at the 2005
summit.

"In conclusion, with respect once again to
Africa, we warmly welcome resolution 1625
(2005) on strengthening the effectiveness of the
Council's role in conflict prevention, in particular
in Africa. As current Chairman of the Security
Council's Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa, Congo fully
appreciates the importance of such an instrument.

"Lastly, my delegation fully supports the
draft presidential statement patiently negotiated
and submitted by the President's delegation."

