The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Algeria, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President,
Mr. Benmehidi(Algeria) took a seat at the Council
table.

The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council condemns in the
strongest terms the terrorist suicide-attack that
occurred in Issers, Algeria, on 19 August 2008,
causing numerous deaths and injuries at a
gendarmerie training academy. It expresses its
deep sympathy and condolences to the victims of
this heinous act of terrorism and to their families,
and to the people and Government of Algeria.
the

"The Security Council underlines the need
to bring perpetrators, organizers, financiers and
sponsors of This reprehensible act of terrorism to
justice, and urges all States, in accordance with
their obligations under international law and
resolution 1373 (2001) and consistent with
resolution 1624 (2005), to cooperate actively with
the Algerian authorities in this regard.

"The Security Council reaffirms that
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations
constitutes one of the most serious threats to
international peace and security, and that any acts
of terrorism are criminal and unjustifiable,
regardless of their motivation, wherever,
whenever and by whomsoever committed.

"The Security Council further reaffirms the
need to combat by all means, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations, threats to
international peace and security caused by
terrorist acts. The Council reminds States that
they must ensure that any measures taken to
combat terrorism comply with all their
obligations under international law, in particular
international human rights, refugee and
humanitarian law.

"The Security Council reiterates its
determination to combat all forms of terrorism, in
accordance with its responsibilities under the
Charter of the United Nations."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2008/3 l.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.35 p.m.
08-46667

