Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): First of all, my delegation wishes to thank both
the Russian Federation and Bolivia forjoining us in the
convening of this urgent meeting.

At the very outset, I have a question for the Under-
Secretary General, who said that the Syrian Government
described the attack as "an aggression", but he did not
give us description according to the Charter of the
United Nations. At 3.42 this morning, 7 April, the
United States, using a number of missiles, committed a
flagrant and barbaric act of aggression against a Syrian
Arab Air Force base in the central area of our country,
which led to a number of people being martyred and
many injured, including women and children, as well
as wide-ranging material damage.

This treacherous act of aggression constitutes a
grave violation of the Charter of the United Nations as
well of as all international norms and laws. The United
States attempted to justify it with empty pretexts and
fabricated arguments that claimed that the Syrian Arab
Army had used chemical weapons in Khan Shaykhun,
without genuine knowledge of what had happened
or identifying who was responsible. Those are the
very same pretexts used by terrorist organizations
and their handlers - in Washington, DC, Ankara,
Riyadh, Doha, Tel Aviv, London and Paris - as well as
their media outlets.

The Syrian Arab Republic has stressed that the
Syrian Arab Army does not have chemical weapons in
the first place; that it would never use such weapons
in any of its operations against armed terrorist groups;
and that it condemns the use of such weapons as being
unjustified under any conditions. In this regard, we
would like to note that it has become well known that
those weapons have been used and stockpiled in many
parts of Syria by armed terrorist groups in cooperation
with - or, rather, with a wink and a nod from - certain
ruling regimes in the region and outside it, including
Turkey, Saudi Arabia, Qatar and some European States,
which completely ignored all the facts and documented
information on the use of chemical weapons on many
occasions by terrorists in many parts of the Syrian
Arab Republic.

This act ofaggression will send erroneous messages
to terrorist groups, emboldening them them to use
chemical weapons in future and to continue perpetrating
terrorist acts against Syrian civilians. Following this
aggression, Jabhat Al-Nusra and the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), both of which are terrorist
organizations, and their affiliates waged many attacks
on many parts of Syria. However, the Syrian Arab
Army and its allies in the war against terrorism are
confronting them, despite desperate attempts by others
to support them. The American aggression falls under
that umbrella.

This condemnable aggression is a grave continuation
of the same erroneous American strategy that began six
years ago to provide all types of assistance to what the
United States calls the "moderate armed opposition".
This strategy harms counter-terrorism efforts by the
Syrian Arab Army and its partners. It makes the United
States of America a partner of ISIL, Jabhat Al-Nusra and
other terrorist groups, which from day one of the unjust
war against Syria have attacked Syrian army positions
and military bases, as well as our infrastructure and
civilians.

Let me recall here in the Security Council that the
United States of America leads a purported alliance
against ISIL. However, the real achievements of that
coalition are killing civilians and striking infrastructure
in Syria. Its real goal is to weaken the Syrian Arab
Army and its allies as they confront terrorist groups.

It is in that context that we also see the air strikes
by this illegal coalition against the Syrian Arab Army
in Jebal Thardeh, around the city of Deir ez-Zor, on
17 September 2016, in an attempt to secure a safe
corridor for ISIL elements between Syrian and Iraqi
territories.

Today's aggression was aimed at saving Jabhat
Al-Nusra terrorists following the grave damage
inflicted upon them by the Syrian Arab Army and its
allies in the centre of the country after they attacked
peaceful villages and cities in the area. In that regard, I
note that, according to media reports, the United States
Congress recently entacted a law allowing the United
States Administration to send man-portable air-defence
systems to armed terrorist groups in Syria.

Just two days ago here in the Security Council (see S/PV.7893), we warned that three colonialist permanent
Member States in the Council had a renewed appetite
to repeat the lies and stories spread by the United
States and the United Kingdom 14 years ago here in
the Chamber to justify the destruction and occupation
of Iraq by way of the major lie about weapons of mass
destruction. Perhaps diplomatic history has come full
circle now in a regrettable, farcical scene in which
Colin Powell, the then Secretary of State of the United
States, tried to delude the international community
and the United Nations in order to justify his country's
aggression against Iraq by talking about highly credible
information. Today the United States of America
pursues its misleading policy to justify its aggression
against Syria by relying on fabricated information
provided by the Jabhat Al-Nusra terrorists.

This aggression incontrovertibly proves that Syria
has always been correct that successive American
Administrations will not change their fruitless policies
of targeting States and subjugating people to their will
and to impose hegemony around the world.

International public opinion and the people of the
free world have no doubt that successive United States,
United Kingdom and French Administrations have for
decades cared neither for democracy or freedom nor for
human rights -indeed, let alone the well-being ofpeople
or their security and stability. These are just pretexts
to wage war and occupy other States, divide them and
control their wealth and energy resources. What is truly
disgusting today is that these Governments that have
supported Wahhabi thinking - the extremist terrorist
ideology of the Al-Saud entity since its creation - are
today orchestrating and investing in terrorism without
any concern for people's lives, including their own,
after terrorism arrived at their doorstep, because of
these misguided, hypocritical policies.

I assure Council members that if the United States
Administration is still delusional that it has succeeded
in that blatant aggression in supporting the terrorist
gangs and organizations on the ground, the response of
the Syrian Arab Republic and its allies will be greater
determination to maintain their patriotic duty to defend
the Syrian people and to crush terrorism wherever it
may be in order to restore security and safety to the
territories of the Syrian Arab Republic.

The Syrian Arab Republic strongly condemns this
act of aggression by the United States of America,
which runs counter to the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations, especially given
the status of the United States as a permanent member
of the Security Council, which is responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security - let
alone the fact that such acts of aggression hold the
potential to sow total chaos in many parts of the world
and will make the law of the jungle the only way to deal
with regional and economic crises, with no heed paid to
the Charter of the United Nations and international law.

I ask those who talk about the respect of the
Charter: Did this colonial trio respect the Charter
when they killed millions of innocent people, starting
in South Asia and all the way through Latin America?
The representative of France spoke about exceptions.
They are the ones who should not be the exception and
should be held accountable for the July 2016 slaughter
of more than 200 civilians by their warplanes in
Toukhan Al-Kubra, in Rural Aleppo. They and their
allies in what is called the "international coalition"
should be held accountable for the killing of more than
800 civilians in Syria from late July 2016 to 22 March
2017. They must be held accountable for their support
of armed terrorist groups and for providing them with
political cover so as to continue their acts of terrorism

against my own country.

The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic,
based on its belief that every effort must be mobilized
to combat terrorism, and out of respect for the rules
of international law and the Charter of the United
Nations, calls on the Security Council to shoulder
its responsibilities in accordance with the Charter,
condemn this act of aggression and ensure that it will
not be repeated. It is an act that threatens peace and
security in the region and around the world.

