Mr. Amorim (Brazil): Sir, let me first congratulate
your country, Gambia, on its assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council. Your presence - the presence of
a Minister - illustrates the importance your Government
attributes to the United Nations. I also want to second your
words about the excellent presidency of Ambassador
Dangue Rewaka of Gabon during the past month.

Less than a fortnight ago, as the crisis over Iraq's
non-compliance with its obligations developed at full speed,
the Middle East and the Gulf stood on the brink of a
conflict that, as Secretary-General Kofi Annan correctly
stated, could have had unpredictable consequences.

Around the world there was a mood of sombre
apprehension as we contemplated the multiple scenarios that
could have developed and the effects that some of the
options could have entailed: the further deterioration of the
critical humanitarian situation in Iraq itself; a wave of
political and social unrest in the region; and, as the direct
result of a conflict, the withdrawal of United Nations
Special Commission (UNSCOM) and of United Nations
humanitarian personnel from that country.

These developments, depending on the circumstances,
might have placed a multilateral system that is still learning
to cope with the challenges of the post-cold-war era under
a heavy strain.

In view of such dire prospects, the Security Council,
once again faced with the challenge of enforcing its own
resolutions, wisely encouraged the Secretary-General to
undertake a personal mission of good offices to Baghdad.

Brazil had already sent such encouragement in the
form of a letter addressed by Foreign Minister Luiz Felipe
Lampreia to the Secretary-General. At the informal
consultations of the members of the Security Council, we
advised the Secretary-General - and in his mind he had
already decided to act in this way - to be firm in
substance and flexible in form. We quoted in that
connection the Latin adage, "Suaviter in modnm, fortiter in

re.

The Brazilian authorities also signalled directly to the
Government of Iraq, in clear terms, that it should do
whatever was required to provide guarantees of compliance
with Security Council resolutions and thus ensure the
success of the Secretary-General's mission.

Thanks to the admirable mix of firmness, patience and
courage that is characteristic of his personality, Mr. Kofi
Annan succeeded in a mission that sceptics had
considered doomed from the start.

The Memorandum of Understanding of 23 February
was negotiated with the Government of Iraq, including, at
the most critical moment of the talks, its Head of State.
It is a legally binding agreement that, among other
elements that were essential to the diplomatic solution of
the crisis, formally reconfirms the acceptance by Iraq of
all pertinent resolutions of the Security Council; reiterates
Iraq's undertaking to fully cooperate with UNSCOM. and
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and
grants to UNSCOM, its new special group and the IAEA,
immediate, unconditional and unrestricted access to all
sites in Iraq, including, in accordance with specific
procedures now being developed, the eight presidential
s1tes.

Upon receiving notice of the Memorandum, the
Government of Brazil expressed the hope that a peaceful
and lasting solution for the crisis between Iraq and the
Security Council would now be feasible. On their part,
the States members of the Southern Cone Common
Market (MERCOSUR) - Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay
and Uruguay - along with Bolivia and Chile announced
in a joint statement their expectation that the solution to
the crisis will ensure a durable and stable peace in the
region. The President of Brazil had the opportunity to
express personally to the Secretary-General our
recognition of what was achieved in Baghdad.

Of course, the hard task of implementing the
Memorandum and verifying the elimination of Iraq's
programmes for weapons of mass destruction still lies
ahead. But it is our conviction that the mission of the
Secretary-General, together with his determination -
today reaffirmed - to keep this matter under his close
personal supervision from now on, provides the Security
Council with a fair chance to put the problem of the
relations between Iraq and the United Nations on a more
stable foundation.

We believe that, on the basis of future Iraqi
compliance with the Memorandum, the conditions will
established so that the cyclic pattern of crisis in relation
to Iraq can be left behind. The Government of Brazil
considers that the Memorandum provides the basis for a
decision by the Security Council to ensure that Iraq
strictly complies with its resolutions, in accordance with
international law and the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter. The draft resolution that the
Council will be adopting today does just that.

 

Let us be clear here: since 1990-91, faced with the
situation that originated from the invasion of Kuwait by
Iraq, the United Nations, and the Security Council on its
behalf, have taken the responsibility to determine the
measures necessary to maintain and restore international
peace and security, under Chapter VII of the Charter.
Accordingly, at the end of the Gulf War, in which an
enforcement action took place under the authority of
resolution 678 (1990), the Security Council did not limit
itself to taking note of a ceasefire. Rather, in paragraph 33
of resolution 687 (1991), the Security Council declared that

"upon official notification by Iraq of its acceptance
of the [relevant] provisions, a formal ceasefire is
effective".

Not only a cessation of hostilities, but - the difference is
crucial - a formal ceasefire.

Furthermore, in paragraph 34 - the very last one -
of resolution 687 (1991), the Security Council did not limit
itself to the ritual formula, "decides to remain seized of the
matter". It went beyond that and stated its decision

"to take such further steps as may be required for the
implementation of the present resolution".

The conclusion we draw is that the question of the
implementation of the conditions for the ceasefire with Iraq
remains firmly under the wing, so to speak, of the United
Nations and the Security Council. Only the Security
Council has the authority to determine if, when and under
what conditions the formal ceasefire it declared on 3 April
1991 holds or not.

Since the beginning of the informal consultations on
this draft resolution, we were assured by its sponsors that
it was not their intention to imply any automaticity in the
authorization of the use of force in case of a possible
violation by Iraq. After the changes made to the text of the
draft resolution - in particular the simplification of the
second preambular paragraph and the new formulation for
operative paragraph 5, which are in line with resolution 687
(1991) - we are satisfied that nothing in its provisions
delegates away the authority that belongs to the Security
Council under the Charter and in accordance with its own
resolutions. During the discussions on the draft resolution,
the Brazilian delegation was also guided by the need to
ensure the unity of the Security Council and sought to make
its contribution to this end.

For these reasons, we will cast our vote in favour of
this draft.

