Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Lithuanian delegation for preparing
today's resolution 2220 (2015), on the illicit trade and
destabilizing accumulation of small arms and light
weapons, and to commend your and your colleagues'
unflagging efforts, Madam President, to arrive at a
text that is both ambitious and pragmatic. We welcome
the text's adoption and the fact that it obtained the
sponsorship of more than 50 Member States, proof of
the international community's support for this Vital
cause.

France voted in favour of the resolution for several
reasons. It reflects an important initiative, first
introduced in the Security Council two years ago by
Australia, on the threat posed by the trafficking and
spread of small arms. For the first time the Council
considered this scourge through a cross-cutting
approach, leading to our adoption of resolution 2117
(2013), which has been a reference text on the subject
ever since.

The new resolution's provisions put civilians and
their protection at its core, because, of course, it is
civilian populations, particularly women and children,
who are the first Victims of the proliferation of such
weapons. They are responsible for nearly half a million
deaths a year and remain by far the world's deadliest.
The resolution also highlights the role of the United
Nations in implementing the Arms Trade Treaty,
which marks a historic step forward and will help to
strengthen international peace and security. The ability
of the United Nations to act could not be allowed to fall
behind. The resolution also addresses the flow of small
arms that benefits armed groups, criminal networks
and terrorist groups that take advantage of the lack of
regulation in the area to continue their barbaric and
destabilizing activities all over the world, particularly
in Africa.

Lastly, today's resolution is designed to integrate
the fight against the illicit trade in small arms into
every aspect of United Nations action, for which we
had to mobilize not only the sanctions committees
and the expert groups responsible for monitoring
embargoes but also, when necessary and appropriate,
our peacekeeping and special political missions. Of
course, the United Nations architecture for combating
terrorism also has a role to play. We hope the issue of
small-arms trafficking will be systematically taken
into account in the analyses of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate and the Monitoring
Team of the Committee established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities.

Madam President, during the negotiations you
took the time to hear the views of every member of the
Council, and I would once again like to pay tribute to
you and your team for all your efforts. We would of
course have preferred the text to be more ambitious in
some respects, such as on the protection of civilians,
and in recognizing the achievements of the Arms Trade
Treaty. But a resolution is of necessity the result of
compromise, and today's is ultimately a demanding one
that we are convinced will advance the Organization's
ability to fight the deadly scourge of the illicit trade in
small arms.

