Mr. Lewicki (Poland): First of all, let me thank
our three young and excellent briefers. I must say that
we are very pleased to have them here in the Chamber
today. It is really important for us to hear from them as
women, young leaders and civil society representatives
about their views and expectations with respect to the
Security Council and about the way forward.

I would also like to thank you, Mr. President, and
your country, Peru, as well as former Security Council
member, Sweden, for their commitment to the youth,
peace and security agenda. Peru and Sweden were
instrumental in the adoption of the previous resolution
on this topic, resolution 2419 (2018).

My delegation cannot agree with the view that the
youth, peace and security agenda should not be a topic
for discussion in the Security Council Chamber. There
is nothing in the Charter of the United Nations that
prohibits us from discussing this important topic. Quite
on the contrary, given that young people constitute
almost one third of our world's entire population, it is
our obligation to discuss it. That is why we also discuss
various other thematic topics, such as the protection
of civilians, sexual violence in conflict and climate
change; it is precisely for that very same reason that
we are meeting again to discuss the role of youth in
conflict prevention and building sustainable peace.
Judging by today's debate, this view is shared by a
majority of Council members.

As has already been highlighted by a number of
other delegations, inclusiveness in peace processes is
crucial to ensuring sustainable peace. That is why any
peace process - any peacebuilding or peacekeeping
process - will not be fully implemented and sustained
without the full inclusion of young people from the
outset. In this context, the adoption of resolutions
2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018) were ground-breaking
achievements, demonstrating that younger generations
are ready to take centre stage in peace and security
initiatives and become agents of change. I am also
very encouraged by today's briefers because they have
demonstrated that young people are not only waiting for
us, older people, to do something - they are changing
the world by themselves. They are agents of change.

Having established the legal framework through
those two resolutions, the next key stage is their proper
implementation. Regional organizations and regional
cooperation should play a key role in that regard. I
therefore concur with the statement delivered by the
representative of Equatorial Guinea on behalf of the
African members of the Council, which demonstrated
the African approach to this agenda item. The Secretary-
General's Envoy on Youth has already highlighted a
number of different regional initiatives and conferences.
To echo my friends in the Chinese delegation, I should
also like to commend the Government of Mongolia for
having organized, in cooperation with the Department
of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, the youth, peace
and security workshop on perspectives for dialogue in
North-East Asia, which took place in June.

Let me highlight some issues that are of particular
importance to Poland in the context of this topic. The
first is the situation of young people with disabilities.
As you know, Mr. President, just a few weeks ago, the
Security Council adopted by consensus its first-ever
resolution on people with disabilities in armed conflict
(resolution 2475 (2019)), which is especially important
to us because people with disabilities are particularly
affected by conflicts - they are very often ostracized
or marginalized within their immediate families and
communities and find themselves at a particular risk of
violence and abuse.

The second issue of importance to us is the
situation of young girls. For girls, the situation is
even more alarming. Every day, millions of young
women are exposed to gender-based violence, child,
early and forced marriage, sex trafficking, sexual
harassment, rape and abuse. They are in critical need of
humanitarian assistance and access to medical services.
Young women should be free to live without prejudice
or limited, unequal opportunity. They should be able
to live as true and complete versions of themselves.
Furthermore, we need to remember that men too are
the victims of the patriarchal mindset and oppressive
masculinity. The Secretary-General's Envoy on Youth
referred to these negative stereotypes, which in fact
affect both men and women. That is why we stand
before the great challenge of changing the stereotypes,
norms and roles assigned to each sex. We want to live
in a world where equality between women and men is a
reality, not an aspiration.

Today's boys and girls, teenagers and young adults
are our future leaders, and they no long want to remain
silent. The best example of that is the young briefers
who are in this Chamber with us today, and I hope that
one day soon they will replace us around this table. They
have enormous power, dedication and a strong voice.
Young people are increasingly aware of their rights
and opportunities. They are able to exchange views
and engage in meaningful discussions through the
Internet and social media. With a growing gap between
aspirations, training and decent job opportunities, the
transition we are living has become more uncertain
than ever.

The frustration of young people and their lack
of trust in authorities, Governments and leaders are
growing. Young people do not want empty promises
and assurances - they want to see concrete action. It
is our responsibility to bridge the gap between policies,
plans and practical impacts across the globe. It is
important to draw attention to the unique contributions
of many young peacebuilders, activists and volunteers
in conflict prevention and justice systems as they
work to build and sustain peace. Youth and student
organizations are becoming increasingly active in
delivering aid and humanitarian assistance to people in
the most dangerous places. We already have the guiding
principles - investment, inclusiveness and partnership.
It is crucial that we undertake a partnership dialogue
with young people in order to work together to achieve
the goals of sustainable development.

I would like to echo Ambassador Heusgen of
Germany by paying special tribute to 16-year-old
Swedish activist Greta Thunberg for the way in which
she has inspired us, the world and even a 13-year-
old girl in Poland, thereby demonstrating the power
of young people. In her speeches - including at the
landmark twenty-fourth Conference of the Parties to
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, organized by Poland in Katowice last year,
which operationalized the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change by adopting the Katowice rulebook - Greta
Thunberg continues to call for a change in our behaviour
vis-a-vis climate change.

Another important point - and I should like to
refer to the statements made by the representative of
Equatorial Guinea on behalf of the African members
of the Council and by Ms. Wevyn Muganda - is that,
in thinking about conflict prevention and effective
conflict resolution, we must address the problem in a
comprehensive way, in line with the three pillars of the
United Nations, which includes not only development
and peace and security, but also human rights - and
it was that human rights element that was mentioned in
Equatorial Guinea's statement. One of the key elements
of the human rights pillar is justice. I fully concur with
Ms. Wevyn Muganda in that there can be no peace
without justice. That is exactly what Poland continues
to repeat in this Chamber at each and every opportunity.

In conclusion, let me again express our appreciation
to Peru for having put this important matter high on the
agenda ofthe Security Council. We hope to see it further
strengthened. We are looking forward to Secretary-
General's youth, peace and security report in 2020 and
hope that that will become a recurrent report. Finally,
we would like to see young people in this Chamber, not
only at thematic debates on youth, peace and security,
but also at country-specific debates, as was the case
with the very brave young disabled person from Syria,
Nujeen Mustafa (see S/PV.8515).

