Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
President Kafando, Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for Burundi, and Ambassador Lauber, Chair
of the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, for their important briefings and for their
commitment. On behalf of France, I would like to make
three main points.

I would first like to express our concerns about
various developments in Burundi in recent months.
Secondly, I want to call on the Burundian authorities
to take appropriate measures to enable free and
peaceful elections to be held in 2020. And thirdly, in
this context, I want to support the Secretary-General's
recommendation that the Security Council remain
seized of this matter, in the understanding that we
should reflect collectively on the best way for the
international community to help Burundi emerge from
this crisis.

My first point is about the latest developments
in Burundi. We would like to once again welcome
President Nkurunziza's announcement that he will not
stand for re-election in 2020 and will support the next
President to be elected. That positive gesture could
contribute to finding a peaceful way out of the crisis.
However, that does not diminish the fact that the recent
situation presents real concerns, as the Secretary-
General has described. The fact that the Burundian
authorities did not participate in the fifth session of the
inter-Burundian dialogue held in Arusha at the end of
October is particularly regrettable. The announcement
that foreign non-governmental organizations in the
country were being suspended for three months has
also given rise to doubts. It is part of a general context
of deterioration, as the international Commission of
Inquiry has highlighted, concluding that there have
been serious human rights violations and that the
space in which civil society can act is constrained.
The Secretary-General's latest report (S/2018/1028)
also points out those serious human rights violations.
In particular, we are concerned about the growing role
played by certain elements of the Imbonerakure, the
youth movement of the ruling party. And we deplore
the threats, intimidation and personal attacks against
the members of the Commission of Inquiry.

We are also worried about aspects of the
humanitarian situation, such as the 3.6 million
Burundians in need and the plight of displaced
persons and refugees. While a number of people have
returned, we reiterate how important it is that they do
so voluntarily, safely and with dignity, in accordance
with the principles of international humanitarian law.

My second point is that we are extending a hand
to the Burundian authorities in asking them to move
forward. We should now all focus on the 2020 elections,
which must be free, fair and transparent. Now is the
time for the Burundian Government to change its
trajectory and make a return to stability possible. In that
regard, we encourage it to resume the inter-Burundian
political dialogue. We also ask it to ensure that all
political parties have fair and equitable access to the
2020 elections. The priority right now is creating the
conditions for free, fair and truly inclusive elections
that respect the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement. In that regard it will be crucial to ensure
women's participation in the whole process. We also
call for respect for fundamental freedoms, particularly
freedom of opinion and expression, which will help to
restore the Burundian people's trust in their institutions
generally. That is essential to an open, peaceful society
and long-term stability. In the same spirit, we call on
the Burundian authorities to cooperate fully with the
independent mechanisms of the Human Rights Council
and with the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights. We want to see them act neutrally and
impartially in investigating and prosecuting cases of
human rights violations, whoever the perpetrators may
be.

My third point concerns how the international
community should help Burundi emerge from its crisis.
France shares the Secretary-General's view that we
must work closely with the East African Community
and the African Union to help Burundi hold fair, free
and transparent elections in 2020. Like the Secretary-
General, we believe that this issue should remain on
the Security Council's agenda. Human rights violations
and the importance of the 2020 elections demand
special attention on the part of the Council, because the
stability of both the country and the region depends on
it. We will follow very closely what the Heads of State
and Government of the East African Community say
at their important meeting at the end of the month, just
as we will of course listen with great interest to the
recommendations of the facilitator, President Mkapa.
Lastly, I would like to reiterate France's support for the
facilitation led by the East African Community, as well
as the efforts of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General, whom I would like to thank once again.

