Mr. Sareer (Maldives): Let me begin by expressing
our gratitude to the French presidency of the Security
Council for convening this high-level open debate on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict, which
has become one of the most critical humanitarian
challenges for the Council. This debate is particularly
timely following the recent General Assembly thematic
debate on the United Nations, peace and security and
the World Humanitarian Summit. We would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2016/447)
on this issue, which comprehensively examines the key
issues at hand and provides a useful starting point for
today's dialogue.

Although Governments and parties bear the
primary responsibility for the protection of civilians
in armed conflict, it is evident that United Nations
peacekeeping operations have had and will continue
to have a role in the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. To further enhance that role, the Security
Council and the respective Member States must make
the protection of civilians a clear priority in determining
the scope and mandates of peacekeeping missions,
while respecting the primacy of the host Government.
They must set out clear and comprehensive guidelines
to identify threats to civilians according to the local
context, along with respective response strategies, and
ensure that adequate staff is deployed to implement
those mandates effectively.

Peacekeeping operations should also work closely
with the local communities and Governments in the
conflict-affected zones to monitor and assess their
performance in fulfilling their mandates. In order to
facilitate that, mechanisms for community outreach
can be formulated in order to establish networks within
local communities. These can be built on lessons learned
from past experiences in the coordination between
peacekeeping operations and communities, which are
highlighted in the Secretary-General's report.
As a country that has recently signed an agreement
with the United Nations with the intention of
contributing to the noble objective of peacekeeping,
Maldives recognizes the importance of providing
training to personnel on the protection of civilians.
Those priorities should be integrated into their basic
training at the national level, as well as into preparation
for specific missions through the United Nations.
The principles of international human rights law and
humanitarian law should also be an integral part of
their national training to ensure that those principles
are adhered to at all times. It is also essential to monitor
and assess the actions of peacekeepers to ensure that
they are upholding the mandate assigned to them. In that
regard, we welcome the development of new indicators
to better evaluate the performance of such mandates and
to enhance the efficiency of peacekeeping operations,
as recommended in the Secretary-General's report.

In the context of the protection of civilians, it
is important to consider the protection of civilian
infrastructure. Too often, we observe that civilian
buildings in conflict zones, especially schools and
medical facilities, are being targeted with alarming
regularity. Not only do such attacks result in the tragic
loss of lives, but they also infringe on the basic human
rights of civilians. They deprive civilians ofthe sources
of their livelihood, impede access to basic material
needs, and severely impair the provision of educational
and health services.

The all-too-common result is the creation of a
broken society. In the aftermath of armed conflict,
civilians are confronted with the stark realities
of destroyed homes and infrastructure, limited
opportunities for gainful employment, a generation of
youth without access to a functional educational system,
the spread of preventable disease in the absence of
adequate health care, and the widespread destruction of
cultural heritage. Those present what are often almost
insurmountable challenges to a meaningful recovery
from conflict, leading to continued weakness in social,
political and economic institutions. Such weaknesses
create a breeding ground for future hostility and lead
to a potentially self-perpetuating cycle of conflict. It
is therefore critical that we devise a robust framework
for the protection of civilians and assist in the rapid
reconstruction and rehabilitation of societies in
conflict zones.

As the events of the past year have sadly shown
us, the protection of civilians in armed conflicts is
an issue on which much work remains to be done to
satisfactorily achieve that goal. We applaud the work
of the Security Council towards that end, and we
believe that the Secretary-General's recommendations,
as well as constructive input from this debate, when
implemented, will have a meaningful impact on
furthering the protection of civilians and the recovery
of societies during and after armed conflict.

