The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Poland.

At the outset, I would like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Mark Lowcock and Special Envoy
Geir Pedersen for their briefings. As always, I reiterate
our full support for their work.

The current situation in Syria remains unacceptable.
As we speak, a deadly escalation of the conflict in
north-west Syria is ongoing. Since April, more than 500
civilians have been killed and hundreds more injured,
including the most vulnerable groups, that is, women
and children. Strikes have caused the destruction of
civilian infrastructure, including internally displaced
persons camps, markets, schools and, most importantly,
health-care facilities.

Any military operation should be conducted
fully in line with international humanitarian law
and international human rights law. The protection
of civilians and provision of unhindered access to
humanitarian assistance are not a choice but a legal
obligation for all sides to the conflict. Those who do
not comply should be held accountable.

That is why we should focus on the need to enhance
multilateral cooperation and uphold international law
to address the multiple challenges not only in Syria but
also in a wider regional perspective. That was the aim
of our high-level debate, held almost two weeks ago, on
challenges to peace and security in the Middle East (see S/PV. 8600).

As almost every day we hear about the suffering
of the civilian population in Idlib province, we want to
underline that civilians should be subject to protection,
in line with the international law. In that context, I
would like to thank the three penholders in charge of
the humanitarian dossier on Syria for proposing a draft
resolution, as recently announced. They can count on
our support.

There is a need for enhanced efforts aimed at
the promotion of and compliance with international
humanitarian law, as indicated in the recently adopted
presidential statement S/PRST/2019/8, on the initiative
of Poland, on the occasion of the seventieth anniversary
of the Geneva Conventions. Let me recall the words of
the President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, Mr. Peter Maurer, on this important anniversary

"[C]ontinued violations of the law do not mean the
law is inadequate, but rather that efforts to ensure
respect are inadequate. We can and must do more.
The Council can do more." (S/PV. 8596, p.5)

Let me conclude by underlining that there can
be no military solution to the Syrian conflict. Any
lasting settlement can be achieved only through a
political agreement, in line with resolution 2254 (2015)
and the Geneva communique (S/20l2/522, annex). A
political settlement is urgently needed, since it remains
the only way towards sustainable peace under the
extremely dire circumstances. We look forward to the
establishment of the constitutional committee, the first
step towards a genuine political process, under the
supervision of the United Nations.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.

