Mr. Sychov (spoke in Russian): First, allow me to
thank you for having convened this meeting of the
Security Council.

The Government of the Republic of Belarus has
been closely following events in East Timor. We
sincerely welcome the fact that the holding of the popular
consultation of the people of East Timor became possible
thanks to the efforts of Indonesia and Portugal, and that
it took place with the efficient and active participation of
the United Nations.

Our delegation agrees with assessments of the
Secretary-General made at the meeting of 3 September
immediately after the ballot results were announced. We
also believe that the results of the popular consultation of
the East Timorese do not give grounds either for the
celebration of victory or for the declaration of failure. It
marks the beginning of a long, complicated path of
building statehood, in which the assistance and support of
the United Nations must play an important part.

Unfortunately, events of recent days in East Timor
give many grounds for concern for the international
community. The peaceful transition to independence has
turned out to be a rather complex matter. Belarus
welcomes the balanced and well-considered approach
adopted by the Security Council, which we believe makes
it possible for the Government of Indonesia and the
people of East Timor themselves to resolve all the
complexities of the transitional stage and to guarantee the
political stability of the country.

We believe that the possibility for a political and
diplomatic solution of any, even the most complex crisis,
is always present. But here the will of all interested
parties, inside and outside East Timor, is particularly

 

important, their will to respect the results of the popular
consultation. In this context, the provisions of the
Agreement between Indonesia and Portugal on the question
of East Timor, and the Agreements between the United
Nations and the Governments of Indonesia and Portugal
signed on 5 May 1999 must be fully complied with.

In View of events taking place in East Timor, there is
a priority need to consider all further steps by the United
Nations, which is becoming the only guarantor of the peace
process in East Timor. We are convinced that solely on the
basis of the provisions of the United Nations Charter, which
ascribes the priority role to the Security Council for
resolving questions of the maintenance of international
peace and security, can the United Nations and the world
community as a whole properly discharge the truly historic
tasks facing them at this stage.

