The President: There are no other speakers
inscribed on my list. We have come to the end of a
debate that has seen 45 contributions: that in itself
demonstrates the importance of this subject. We have
had a very rich debate. It has given us lots of food for
thought. The Secretary-General's report has been
roundly welcomed in those contributions. The
challenge now, very clearly, is to convert what some
feared might be an abstract concept and change it into
something which is implemented before conflict, after
conflict and at all stages. But it applies to all countries
and indeed, should be done in solidarity with countries
and not imposed as one arrangement for everybody.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council thanks the Secretary-
General for his report dated 3 August 2004,
which was reissued on 23 August 2004
(S/2004/616), and reaffirms the vital importance
that the Council attaches to promoting justice and
the rule of law, and post-conflict national
reconciliation. The Council will consider, as

appropriate in its deliberations, the
recommendations set out in paragraph 64 of the
report.

"The Security Council urges the Secretariat
of the United Nations to take make proposals for
implementation of the recommendations set out
in paragraph 65 of the report, and draws attention
in particular to the importance of the practical
measures set out in that paragraph that can be
implemented rapidly, including coordination of

existing expertise and resources, setting up
databases and web-based resources and
developing rosters of experts, workshops and
training. The Council urges Member States which
are interested in doing so to contribute national
expertise and materials to these developments
within their means, and to improve their
capacities in these areas.

"The Security Council recalls the important
statement made by the Secretary-General to the
General Assembly, at its fifty-ninth session, on
21 September 2004 and endorses his view that, 'It
is by reintroducing the rule of law, and
confidence in its impartial application, that we
can hope to resuscitate societies shattered by
conflict.' The Council stresses the importance and
urgency of the restoration of justice and the rule
of law in post-conflict societies, not only to come
to terms with past abuses, but also to promote
national reconciliation and to help prevent a
return to conflict in the future. The Council
emphasizes that such processes must be inclusive,
gender-sensitive and open to the full participation
of women.

"The Security Council underlines the
importance of assessing the particular justice and
rule of law needs in each host country, taking into
consideration the nature of the country's legal
system, traditions and institutions, and of
avoiding a 'one size fits all' approach. The
Council recognizes that building national
capacities and independent national institutions is
essential, that local ownership and leadership in
that process should be encouraged and respected,
and that international structures can play a
complementary and supportive role.

"The Security Council emphasizes that
ending the climate of impunity is essential in a
conflict and post-conflict society's efforts to
come to terms with past abuses, and in preventing
future abuses. The Council draws attention to the
full range of transitional justice mechanisms that
should be considered, including national,
international and 'mixed' criminal tribunals and
truth and reconciliation commissions, and
underlines that those mechanisms should
concentrate not only on individual responsibility
for serious crimes, but also on the need to seek
peace, truth and national reconciliation. The

Council welcomes the report's balanced appraisal
of the lessons to be learned from the experience
of the ad hoc international criminal tribunals and
'mixed' tribunals.

"The Security Council recalls that justice
and rule of law at the international level are of
key importance for promoting and maintaining
peace, stability and development in the world.
The Council underlines also the importance of
helping to prevent future conflicts through
addressing their root causes in a legitimate and
fair manner.

"The Security Council warmly welcomes
the Secretary-General's decision to make the
work of the United Nations to strengthen the rule
of law and transitional justice in conflict and
post-conflict societies a priority for the remainder
of his tenure. The Council invites the Secretary-
General to keep it informed on the Secretariat's
progress in taking forward the recommendations
set out in paragraph 65 of the report and
expresses the intention to consider this matter
again within six months."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2004/34.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda. I thank again all the participants for their
contributions and for the quality of the discussion of
this very important and topical subject.

The meeting rose at 6.45 p.m.
