Mr. De Palacio Espafia (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I wish at the outset to thank Ambassador
Munoz for his endeavours as Chairman of the Security

Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) concerning Al Qaeda and the Taliban and
associated individuals and entities. He has contributed
to maintaining the fight against terrorism as one of the
priorities both of the Security Council and of the
United Nations as a whole.

His briefing today speaks for itself with regard to
the work of the Committee and of the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team. The
contribution of each, within its mandate and duties, is
one of the keys that will make future progress possible
in the fight against terrorism.

With respect to the Committee's cooperation with
United Nations Member States, Spain believes that
visits to various countries are an essential tool that
should be enhanced. In that respect, we would like to
stress that these are not inspection visits, but rather
visits directed towards dialogue, so that we can become
more familiar with the implementation of the sanctions
which the Committee is charged with monitoring.

I can personally attest to the value and usefulness
of those visits, since I had the opportunity to
accompany the Chairman of the Committee on the
most recent visit: to the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, the
Islamic Republic of Iran and Switzerland. I would like
to take this opportunity publicly to thank the
authorities of those three countries for their
cooperation with members of the Committee. This
shows what can be achieved through cooperation
between States and subsidiary bodies of the Security
Council.

Ambassador Mufioz has pointed out several tasks
that should be among the priorities of the future work
of the Committee, and it is important here to refer to
some of them. First of all, Spain endorses the need to
continue improving the quality of the consolidated list
of individuals and entities associated with Al Qaeda
and the Taliban. The Committee should ensure that a
procedure is established to ensure respect for all legal
guarantees, in order to prevent mistakes on list
inclusions, especially when it comes to individuals.

We must also ensure that inclusions on the list
have all the information necessary to correctly identify
the individuals on the list. We believe that is the only
way we can guarantee the credibility of the
Committee's work in its cooperation with States. In
that connection, we believe that cooperation with
bodies with experience in this area should be enhanced,
and we therefore welcome the contacts that have begun
with the International Criminal Police Organization
(INTERPOL), from which we expect concrete results
leading to an improved consolidated list which would
be easier for Member States to use.

Also important is verification of the
implementation of United Nations sanctions by
Member States, with particular emphasis on detecting
possible problems, with a view to rectifying them. In
that respect, Ambassador Munoz spoke in his statement
about the correct implementation of sanctions in the
financial sphere and made very useful
recommendations that the Committee should seek to
implement in its future work.

Likewise, it is important to stress the need for
closer cooperation with the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, since we should not
forget that Security Council resolution 1535 (2004)
gives the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) the
primary responsibility for facilitating assistance to
States in the fight against terrorism.

In that respect, I want to stress the need for the
Committee, in the future, to address the needs for
technical assistance - not only concerning the
material aspects of the effective application of
sanctions, but also in providing assistance to States that
need it to develop national legislation, in compliance
with their obligations under international conventions
and under Security Council decisions.

We also agree with Ambassador Mufioz's
stressing of the need to continue strengthening
cooperation between the 1267 Committee and the 1540
Committee, and the Counter-Terrorism Committee. We
are convinced that in the future, we will find new ways
of further deepening such cooperation, because the
nature of the work of those Committees should adjust
to the changing circumstances of a threat which we
have recently experienced. As we saw during our
three-country visit, the threat is changing, mutating and
offering new challenges to the Committee.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our
congratulations to the Permanent Representative of
Chile, Ambassador Heraldo Mufioz, and his team in the
Permanent Mission of Chile, and, in particular, to all
the members of the Monitoring Team for their work,
respectively, in leading the Committee and in the
monitoring tasks. On the eve of our departure from
membership of the Security Council, we express our
confidence that the incoming Chairman of the 1267
Committee will be able to face up to the new
challenges, knowing that the Organization must
continue and strengthen its comprehensive coordinated
and objective action in the fight against terrorism.

