Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I would like to thank the
delegation of France for its excellent performance during
its presidency of the Security Council and express our
appreciation for its convening of these debates.

We are deeply concerned ov er the alarming scale
and severity of Violations committed against children,
as documented in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/821). There is an urgent need to intensify the
efforts of the international community to ensure the
enhanced protection of children in armed conflict.

Ukraine has always been consistent in its policy
on ensuring the protection of children in situations of
armed conflict. We were among the first States to ratify
the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child, as well as to endorse the Paris Commitments
and the Paris Principles. That is strong evidence
of our commitments and pledges in this sphere. It is
important that more and more countries join our efforts
in order to achieve the universal acceptance of those
documents. We also attach great importance to the Safe
Schools Declaration. In September, Ukraine's Minister
of Education and Science announced firm support
for the initiative to endorse the Declaration, thereby
underscoring our commitment to promote and protect
children's rights.

Paragraph 3 of the Secretary-General's report reads
as follows:

"[T]he present report documents situations in
which apparent violations of international norms
and standards for the protection of children affected
by conflict are considered to be of such gravity as
to warrant international concern".

Let me give examples of what the experts under
the previous leadership did not believe warranted
international concern and attention.

According to the United Nations human rights
monitoring mission in Ukraine, which has already
produced 19 reports, 90 boys and 47 girls have lost their
lives since the beginning of the Russian aggression.
Eighty children were killed as a result of Flight MH-17
being shot down by a Russian missile. Sixty-eight
children have been maimed in the conflict zone by
mines and unexploded ordnance. Overall, some 15,000
children living in the grey zone are at risk of being
maimed or killed due to fighting, mines or unexploded
ordnance. As I said, 19 periodic reports have already
been produced by the United Nations, yet none of that
information made its way into those reports.

We should also not forget that there are thousands
of children in Ukraine whose lives have been severely
affected by a war brought to our soil by a neighbouring
country that is, ironically, a permanent member of the
Council. According to State authorities in Ukraine,
out of approximately 1.7 million internally displaced
persons, 240,000 are children. Almost 200,000 boys
and girls live in the 15-kilometre zone along the line
of contact on both sides, yet that is not part of the
report. Moreover, according to non-governmental
data, in over 80 cases children were recruited in the
non-Government controlled areas in the Donetsk and
Luhansk regions. The reports of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) also prove
that irregular armed formations in the east of Ukraine
are preventing young men from leaving Donetsk and
forcefully recruiting them to join their ranks, which
could amount to human trafficking.

More than a year ago, terrorists in the City of
Yasynuvata, in the occupied areas ofthe Donetsk region,
detained six teenage boys, accusing them of sabotage
activities. Those children remain captive today. I also
wish to express our utmost dismay that representatives
of the International Committee of the Red Cross, the
United Nations and OSCE continue to be denied access
to them. That is indeed unacceptable and represents a
flagrant Violation of those children's rights. There have
been reports from various sources that children as young
as 15 years old are being recruited into armed youth
groups and taking part in active combat as full-fledged
members of combined Russia-backed militant forces,
including as youth reconnaissance and sabotage groups
operating in the Government-controlled territory.

Ukraine has undertaken a number of steps at
the legislative and executive levels to enhance the
protection of the rights of displaced children who have
been forced to leave their homes due to the aggression
of a permanent member of the Council. Those
internally displaced children have unhindered access
to education in their current places of residence. For
those children who remain in the temporarily occupied
territories, the Government has introduced special
programmes to give them an opportunity to receive
higher education at Ukrainian universities. This year
alone, over 1,500 students enrolled in our universities
through the Crimea-Ukraine and Donbas-Ukraine
special educational centres.

It is worth highlighting that children in the occupied
areas ofthe Donetsk and Luhansk regions and in Crimea
are deprived of the right to receive education in the
Ukrainian language and even to study it. To illustrate
that point, the number of classes with Ukrainian as the
primary language of instruction has plunged by a factor
of 31 in Crimea over the past two years. I would like
to recall in that regard that in April, the International
Court of Justice issued an order regarding the request
of Ukraine for the indication of provisional measures
in the case concerning Application ofthe International
Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of
Terrorism and of the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination
(Ukraine v. Russian Federation). The Court order
demanded that Russia "ensure the availability of
education in the Ukrainian language".

Moreover, children living in proximity to the line of
contact in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions and those
who were forced to leave their homes regularly suffer
from symptoms consistent with post-traumatic stress
disorder. In that regard, we highly value the practical
assistance of UNICEF in providing training for
psychologists who work on a daily basis with children,
students, teachers and other education personnel to
address that problem.

In that regard, I wish to reiterate that we deeply
regret that the Secretary-General's report on children
and armed conflict does not contain any reference
to the situation of Ukrainian children affected by
the conflict in the Donbas region of Ukraine. I am
personally convinced that the current leadership of
the United Nations and the current leader on the issue
are committed, and I believe that the deficiencies of
previous reports will be eliminated in future reports of
the United Nations.

In closing, let me reiterate Ukraine's commitment
to doing our utmost to ensure the protection of children
in armed conflicts.

