The President (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Egypt.
The drafters of the Charter of the United Nations
revealed their forward-looking vision when they
included Chapter VIII, which provides the necessary
basis for the establishment of a partnership between
the United Nations, as the primary entity responsible
for maintaining international peace and security,
and regional and subregional organizations, which
play a crucial role in preventing, managing and
settling conflicts.

The African Union is proof of the comparative
advantages of regional organizations, including their
ability to have an in-depth understanding ofa conflict's
context and root causes. They are therefore capable of
playing vital roles in mediation and sponsoring the
political operations aimed at the peaceful settlement
of conflicts.

In addition, regional organizations are always
ready to deploy peacekeeping operations in the early
stages. The role played by the African Union and other
African subregional organizations in Somalia, Mali,
the Central African Republic and other countries is
the best proof that the continent is ready to assume the
heavy burden of bringing peace and security to African
countries. They are also upholding the principle of
African solutions to African problems.

Over the past decade, in cooperation with different
partners, at the forefront of which is the United Nations,
the African Union has gone a long way towards building
the components of the African Peace and Security
Architecture, both at regional and subregional levels. It
has also built the necessary capacities to operationalize
it. This is a full-fledged Architecture, which includes
prevention mechanisms, mediation, the management
and settlement of crises, as well as reconstruction and
development for peacebuilding and preventing post-
conflict countries from relapsing into violence. It is in
line with the African Union's endeavours to ensure a
continent free from conflicts and in which everyone
enjoys peace and stability, which is also one ofthe main
objectives of the ambitious Vision Africa 2063.

The AU has developed a road map for 2016-2020 that
aims at enhancing coordination among all components
of the African Peace and Security Architecture and
the regional and subregional mechanisms. The road
map is designed to ensure their effective engagement
at the earliest signs of conflict, from the management
and settlement of conflicts and all the way to the
peacebuilding and reconstruction phases.

In line with those important developments at the
level of Africa and in the broader context of the United
Nations, the three reviews - on the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture, peacekeeping operations
and the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), on
women and peace and security - came to encompass
all the changes in the nature and scope of conflicts and
international crises. The reviews have opened a new
chapter that will help to formulate a comprehensive
vision based on the concept of sustaining peace, which
in turn is based on the interaction among the different
security, political and development forces brought to
bear on putting an end to military conflicts, coming up
with effective solutions and addressing the root causes
of conflict.

Egypt believes that the reviews and the important
resulting recommendations present new and welcome
prospects for partnership between the United Nations
and the AU through a paradigm shift in the way we
deal with the challenges of peace and security. We
are moving from the current trend based on the
management of conflicts after they erupt, along with
the subsequent high humanitarian costs, destruction
of State infrastructure and the tearing of the fabric of
society, to a model that addresses conflicts in a more
comprehensive way, including through preventive
diplomacy mechanisms, by giving priority to political
solutions that seek to prevent, manage and settle
conflicts and by upholding the principle of national
ownership and leadership as the fundamental safeguard
for successful efforts aimed at building sustained peace.

In that context, Egypt affirms the importance of the
continuing United Nations support for capacity-building
in the African Union and in regional and subregional
organizations following the conclusion of the United
Nations Ten-Year Capacity Building Programme for
the AU in 2016 through the New Partnership for the
Development of Africa and the Framework for a
Renewed United Nations-African Union Partnership
on Africa's Integration and Development Agenda 2017-
2027. It is also crucial that the United Nations provide
the necessary flexible, sustainable and predictable
financing for all activities related to peace and security
for the AU, in particular those mandated by the
Security Council, taking into consideration the primary
responsibility of the United Nations in the maintenance
of international peace and security.

In conclusion, Egypt stresses that we have to
formulate more in-depth and inclusive partnerships at
both the regional and international levels. That is the
ideal way to confront the contemporary forms that
security challenges are taking in today's world, since
such challenges are highly complex, multidimensional
and plagued with intertwined root causes.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate their texts in writing and to deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber. I
would appeal to speakers to deliver their statements at a
reasonable speed so that interpretation may be provided
accurately. I wish to inform all concerned that, given
the lengthy list of speakers, we will be carrying on this
open debate right through the lunch hour.

I now give the floor to Her Excellency Ms. Annika
S6der, State Secretary for Foreign Affairs of Sweden.

