Mrs. Carrion (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Ladsous for his briefing, and the Department for
Peacekeeping Operations for the strategic assessment
carried out in the Republic of Liberia. We are also
grateful to the Vice-Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission and to Victoria Wollie.

Uruguay is troubled by the situation in Liberia, not
just the current situation but also what could happen
in the future with high indicators of school dropout,
youth unemployment, an inefficient State aparatus and
economic crisis - open wounds from the past.

The results of the strategic assessment present us
with a range of options for the future regarding the
presence of the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL). However, we understand that the challenges
Liberia is currently facing will likely remain and
befall UNMIL or, sooner or later, befall the presence
of the United Nations. In that regard, we believe that
the Government and the people of Liberia should
focus efforts on building capacities to create better
opportunities in the long-term with a View to building
their own capacities and putting an end to their
dependency position.
However, the presidential and legislative elections
to be held in October constitute be a major landmark,
during which time the international community will
need to keep close watch over the process and be present
in supporting the Liberian people. To that end, Uruguay
believes it is necessary to maintain the presence of
UNMIL at least until after the upcoming elections. The
Mission will need to maintain some kind of structure in
order to act in the event of a deterioration of the situation.
For example, we are inclined towards option 3, but after
Council members reviewed the Secretariat's assessment
to outline a presence that would achieve peace in the
country and protect, uphold and defend human rights,
it would ultimately have to act in a scenario of dire or
imminent instability. Therefore, it is important for the
Council to continue working closely with the Swedish
Ambassador as Chair of the Liberia configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission to ensure the
implementation of the recently adopted resolutions on
the review of the peacebuilding architecture.

Finally, we believe that peace in Liberia can be
achieved and sustained only through improving the
institutions guaranteeing national stability with a truly
inclusive process and national ownership, thereby
addressing the root causes that divide the population
with a View to achieving national reconciliation.

