The President: In accordance with the decision
taken today at the 484lst meeting, I invite the
representative of Israel to take a seat at the Council
table.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Gillerman
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: Also in accordance with the
decision taken at the 4841st meeting, I invite the
Permanent Observer of Palestine to take a seat at the
Council table.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al-Kidwa
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.


The President: The Security Council will now
continue its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document 5/2003/980, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Guinea, Malaysia,
Pakistan and the Syrian Arab Republic.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Angola, Chile, China, France, Guinea, Mexico,
Pakistan, Russian Federation, Spain, Syrian Arab
Republic

Against:
United States of America
Abstaining:
Bulgaria, Cameroon, Germany, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland


The President: The result of the voting is as
follows: 10 votes in favour, 1 against and 4 abstentions.
The draft resolution has not been adopted, owing to the
negative vote of a permanent member of the Council.

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements following the
voting.

As no other members wish to take the floor, I
shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the United States.

The draft resolution put forward today was
unbalanced and did not condemn terrorism in explicit
terms. It failed to address both sides of the larger
security context of the Middle East, including the
devastating suicide attacks that Israelis have had to
endure over the past three years. A Security Council
resolution focused on the fence does not further the
goals of peace and security in the region. We believe
that all resolutions on Israeli-Palestinian peace should
reflect the kind of balance of mutual responsibilities
embodied by the Quartet's road map. That draft
resolution did not do so.

All parties have responsibilities in bringing peace
to the Middle East, to prevent outrages such as the
Haifa attack and to deny perpetrators safe haven in
their territory. Ending terrorism must be the highest
priority.

The United States and our Quartet partners have
engaged intensively to encourage Israel and the
Palestinian Authority to take concrete steps towards the
implementation of a road map to peace that has broad
support within the international community and the
United Nations. The destructive impact of terrorist
bombings and the failure to dismantle the organizations
and infrastructure that encourage those acts have
slowed progress on the road map, but we will not be
deterred.

We have repeatedly urged Israel and the
Palestinian Authority to avoid actions that can lead to a
further heightening of tension in the Middle East and to
think carefully about the consequences of their actions.
In addition, senior United States Administration
officials are engaging directly with Israel on the matter
of the fence.
For its part, the United States, with its Quartet
partners, remains committed to the implementation of
President Bush's vision of a two-State solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, as set forth in the road map.

I now resume my function as President of the
Council.

The Permanent Observer of Palestine has asked
for the floor to make a statement. I give him the floor.


