Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
First, I would like to say to our colleague,
Ambassador Jones Parry, how greatly I appreciate the
way in which he led our mission: intelligently, skilfully
and effectively. I was pleased to work with him in
jointly leading the mission in Chad.

I think it was important that we went to Chad.
From their previous discussions with President Konare
at Addis Ababa, members of the Council could already
appreciate the risks that the destabilization of Chad
would present to the entire region. Moreover, by
visiting the Goz Bei'da camps not far from Abeche -
camps housing refugees from Darfur and camps for
persons displaced following attacks by J anjaweed from
the Sudan - we were able to see how much the Darfur
conflict has affected Chad. The Council must take this
link between Darfur and Chad into account.

We had a long visit with President Deby. We
recalled the statements issued by the Security Council
and our condemnation of the 13 April attack against
N'Djamena. We raised all the points that we wanted to
raise within our terms of reference. All of that will be
in the written record. But today I would like to stress
three points.

First, as regards Darfur, President Deby
reaffirmed his steadfast support for the Darfur Peace
Agreement and informed us about the contacts that he
had had to try to get the non-signatories to sign it. That
is important, because so much depends on the
Agreement, which is fragile and which must absolutely
be strengthened.

Secondly, the relationship between the Sudan and
Chad has deteriorated greatly. We have heard
accusations from both sides, in Khartoum and in
N'Djamena. When he gave us a report on the attack of
13 April, President Deby told us that his country had
been the victim of aggression by the Sudan and that he
would be complaining about it to the Security Council.

In accordance with our terms of reference, we
stressed the importance of both countries implementing
the confidence-building measures of the Tripoli
Agreement. I think that the African Union can certainly
be of major assistance in that area.

Thirdly, with regard to the camps, it seems that
the international community is faced with two
problems. At the humanitarian level, there are 300,000
refugees in Chad and 50,000 displaced persons in
camps there. That is a lot of people in a very poor
country, and international assistance is insufficient. Jan
Egeland said as much to us. I believe that we need to
help mobilize donors with a view to increasing
international humanitarian assistance. The second
problem relates to the protection of the camps. The
camps have been politicized; we saw that for ourselves
from the demonstrations that greeted us. It is said that
the camp that we visited is opposed to the Peace
Agreement. There was obvious manipulation.
Politicization is thus a major factor, and the problem of
forced recruitment is serious.

Lastly, humanitarian workers are being attacked
and are very worried. President Deby expressed his
concerns about that, as well as telling us that he was
unable to deal with the problem - his army must first
protect the borders. He would therefore like the
international community to take responsibility for
protecting the camps and the humanitarian workers
who have to move from one camp to another.

I believe that if nothing is done in that area, we
might see a serious deterioration in the situation in all
respects. It would be appropriate for the Secretary-
General to consider the question of international
protection for the camps and to make recommendations
to us. I can see only advantages to Jean-Marie
Guehenno's visiting Chad, since he is already in the
region.

