Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to begin by welcoming you, Mr. President,
and thanking you for travelling to New York to preside
over today's meeting in the Security Council. I also
wish to thank Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco, Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his detailed
report this morning on the current situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question.

Once again, Colombia reiterates its view that the
process for achieving a lasting peace in the Middle
East must be comprehensive, well structured and based
on the principles of the United Nations Charter and the
lofty goals of international peace and security. We
therefore believe that the creation of a viable
Palestinian State, living in peace beside Israel and
having clearly defined, secure and internationally
recognized borders, must be the result of direct
negotiations between the parties. That will ensure
coexistence between those two peoples.

We make particular mention of the meetings that
have been held in Amman between the Israeli and
Palestinian negotiators. We welcome these meetings.
They were held in the framework of the plan put
forward by the Quartet on 23 September (see SG/2178)
and under the good auspices of the King of Jordan. We
ask the parties to continue these talks, which could lead
to the prompt resumption of the negotiating process in
a spirit of mutual trust that guarantees the achievement
of lasting and stable peace for which we all hope.

Each of the parties must make efforts to remove
what are considered obstacles in the path of
negotiations, as we have heard today from the
representatives of Palestine and Israel. On the one
hand, the settlements in the occupied territories and the
blockade of Gaza have an adverse impact on the well-
being of the populations and on the human rights
situation, as well as on access by those people to basic
services, particularly with regard to health and
education, as revealed recently by Under-Secretary-
General Amos to the Council. We also must find
solutions to the legitimate concerns of Israel with
regard to its security and must put an end to all acts of
violence against its people.

We believe that in order to achieve lasting peace,

the parties must abstain from adopting unilateral
measures that contravene international law and are
aimed at harming or endangering civilians. The
international community, in turn, must do everything
possible to ensure that the parties take effective
measures to guarantee respect for and enjoyment of the
human rights and fundamental freedoms of the people.

My delegation wishes to stress the achievements
of the Palestinian Authority in preparing its institutions
for the creation of a State. We therefore support the
actions of the international community to strengthen
the capacities of the Palestinian institutions to make a
viable, independent sovereign State possible for the
well-being ofits people.

With regard to Syria, we remain concerned at the
extremely serious human rights situation in that
country and the lack of progress in implementing the
various initiatives put forward by the Arab League. We
insist on the absolute need to put an end to all acts of
violence. We welcome the efforts of the Arab League
to avoid further worsening of the situation and to find a
political solution to the crisis in Syria. We urge the
Government of Syria and the opposition to initiate a
political dialogue aimed at the establishment of a
government of national unity and at setting favourable
conditions for calling elections.

