Mr. Tileuberdi (Kazakhstan) (spoke in Russian):
Please allow me at the outset to congratulate the
delegation of the Russian Federation on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council this month and
to thank it for the invitation to participate in today's
meeting. We would also like to thank the Secretary-
General and the heads of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization (SCO), the Collective Security Treaty
Organization (CSTO) and the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS) for their very informative and
useful briefings.

During its term on the Security Council in 2017
and 2018, Kazakhstan paid special attention to the role
played by regional organizations in ensuring peace,
conflict prevention and conflict settlement. Those
bodies better understand the specificity of the issues
that arise in their regions. Close cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations allows
for more effectively countering the challenges and
threats in various parts of the world, and we welcome
the initiative undertaken by the Russian side to conduct
the discussion today.

The world is in a state of danger and uncertainty
today, owing to the rapid spread of terrorism and
extremism. The global security architecture and
international law have been weakened, as the situation
continues to worsen. At the seventieth session of the
General Assembly, the first President of Kazakhstan,
Nursultan Nazarbayev, proposed an initiative to form a
global coalition to combat terrorism (see A/70/PV.13).

In pursuance of that idea, we developed a code of

conduct to achieve a world free from terrorism that 84
States have joined. It calls on all countries to undertake
10 steps that could help eradicate terrorism by 2045,
the centenary of the United Nations. We are grateful to
our partners for their ongoing support in implementing
that initiative.

Kazakhstan has also ratified all 19 of the United
Nations sectoral conventions on the suppression
of terrorism. We call on other Member States that
have not yet done so to accede to the code and the
relevant conventions.

In 2018, as Chairman of the CSTO, Nursultan
Nazarbayev defined as one of the five core priorities
of the organization its participation in the formation of
an international system to counter terrorism. Last year,
in Central Asia, we launched the third phase of the
joint plan on the implementation of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and Kazakhstan
became the first donor funding the implementation of
that project.

We are committed to continuing our close
cooperation with the Office of Counter-Terrorism. In
pursuance of resolution 2396 (2017), together with
the Office, we are preparing the launch of an advance
passenger information and passenger name record
system in Kazakhstan and are ready to share best
practices with other Eurasian countries.

At the initiative of Kazakhstan, through the CSTO
and CIS, we are working on developing a single list
of international terrorist organizations, unifying legal
norms on the arms trade and regulating migration in
all the regional bodies. Within the framework of the
SCO, we took the important step of signing in Astana
in 2017 the SCO Convention on Combating Extremism,
which has created the legal framework to halt financial
resources for international terrorist organizations.

I would like to take this opportunity to draw
the attention of those present to the Conference on
Interaction and Confidence Building Measures in Asia
(CICA), established back in 1992 at the initiative of
Kazakhstan. It is also evolving dynamically, with new
and unique packages of confidence-building measures
on the Asian continent.

Yesterday, at the general debate in the General
Assembly Hall, the President of Kazakhstan,
Mr. Kassym-Jomart Tokayev, stressed the importance
of transforming that universal pan-Asian structure
into an organization for the security and development
of Asia (see A/74/PV.4). During our CICA presidency
from 2020 to 2022, we intend to include the issue
of countering terrorism as one of our military and
political priorities.

The defeat of Da'esh in Syria and Iraq resulted in
foreign terrorist fighters moving back to their countries
of origin or relocating to other parts of the world. We
are trying to counter that process and have mounted a
humanitarian operation, known as Jusan, to bring back
from Syria 600 nationals from our country, the majority
of whom are children. Among those who returned were
men and women who participated in terrorist activities
and criminal proceedings have been initiated against
them. We are working with the remaining returnees in
a targeted manner to rehabilitate and reintegrate them
into society. The Jusan operation is ongoing. We are
currently working for the return of 12 children from
Iraq whose mothers have received life sentences for
terrorist activity.

We are particularly concerned about the situation
in Afghanistan, where terrorist groups are cooperating
with organized criminal networks engaged in drug
trafficking. We must ensure that the efforts of the
Central Asian Regional Information and Coordination
Centre for combating the illicit trafficking of narcotic
drugs, psychotropic substances and their precursors are
more effective.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm that
Kazakhstan will continue to take active efforts to
further strengthen the global counter-terrorism capacity
of the United Nations and regional organizations. I am
convinced that all the proposals voiced today, at such
a high level, will see their practical implementation
contribute to the eradication of terrorism throughout
the world.

