Mr. Jurica (Croatia): At the outset,
Mr. President, allow me to thank the Security Council
presidency of Panama for organizing the open debate
on children and armed conflict.

I would also like to use this opportunity to
welcome the presence among us of the Vice-President
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Panama,
Mr. Samuel Lewis-Navarro, as well as Their
Excellencies Mr. Bernard Kouchner, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of France, and Mr. Charles Michel, the
Minister for Development Cooperation of Belgium.

We also welcome the report of the Secretary-
General on children in armed conflict and commend
the work of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, as well as the
non-governmental organizations working on the ground.

Croatia welcomes the Security Council's active
engagement in addressing violations against children in
armed conflict in the past nine years. The Council's
adoption of action plans and the practice of the
independent reporting and monitoring mechanism have
significantly contributed to the ending of recruitment
of children by parties to armed conflict. However,
stronger Council action is needed to ensure that all
parties to armed conflict act in compliance with
relevant Council resolutions and other relevant
international instruments in order to secure the
protection of children.

Croatia strongly endorses the recommendations
contained in the report of the Secretary-General. If
adopted and implemented by Governments, those
recommendations will create a significant step forward
in addressing the current scope of monitoring and
reporting, which is currently too limited.

In particular, Croatia believes that reporting on
the six grave violations against children should not be
contingent solely upon whether a country is listed by
the Secretary-General as recruiting child soldiers.
Application of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism needs to be expanded to include all of
those violations in all situations identified in both
annexes of the report of the Secretary-General.

We condemn in the strongest possible terms the
rising sexual violence against children and women in
situations of armed conflict as an unacceptable method
of warfare. We encourage the Security Council to use
targeted measures when needed and in accordance with
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1612 (2005), where
special measures are called for in order to protect
women and girls from gender-based violence.

Croatia strongly supports the work of child
protection advisers in all of the missions of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Political Affairs, as well as the work of
United Nations mission personnel guarding internally
displaced persons camps, as it has become evident in
the report of the Secretary-General that those areas
have become the recruiting grounds for child soldiers.

Croatia continues to advocate a zero-tolerance
policy towards sexual abuse of women and children
and consequently trains Croatian participants in the 15
United Nations missions in which it participates on
issues of child rights. We would therefore encourage
all troop-contributing countries to do the same.

We urge Governments to end impunity for
perpetrators accused of committing violations against
children in armed conflict. We believe that the Security
Council should refer those violations to the
International Criminal Court in cases where national
systems fail to address them, as proposed by the
Secretary-General.

Croatia is actively engaged in the work of the
Security Council Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict. We would like to see the
strengthening of the Working Group's methods by the
use of organized briefings with concerned countries six
months after the adoption of the Working Group's
conclusions on the situation in those countries

concerned. In that way, the Working Group and the
concerned country would be given an opportunity to
review the progress achieved based on the work of
both parties. We urge the Working Group to start using
all the possible actions provided in the tool kit, as
needed, especially field trips followed by a report.

We urge all parties to armed conflict to stop using
child soldiers and to start acting in compliance with
international humanitarian and human rights law,
including the Paris Principles. While working in the
Security Council, member States have a responsibility
to protect peace and security for children, especially
where they are being brutally exploited. If a whole
generation of children is being systematically ruined,
either physically or mentally, there can be no positive
changes for the future of their respective countries.

Allow me to also express the support of my
country for the idea of the adoption of a new Security
Council resolution that would provide a stronger
mechanism for the protection of children in armed
conflicts.

