Mr. Argiiello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina, at the outset, would like to thank the
delegation of Mexico, which holds the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of April, for its
initiative in organizing today's debate. We congratulate
the Mexican delegation on its efforts as Chair of the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.

Our thanks go to those who addressed the
Security Council this morning. In particular, we
listened carefully to the statement of Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, for which we are most grateful. And
we cannot fail to thank Ms. Grace Akallo for sharing
her perspective and her experience as a former child
soldier.

It is our understanding that the issue of the
protection of children, in all its aspects, falls primarily
within the purview of the General Assembly. In that
regard, we shall continue to work to strengthen the
mandates of existing mechanisms and to search for
new institutional solutions. We also view most
positively the progress made in the protection of
children affected by armed conflict since the adoption
of resolution 1612 (2005). This progress has been
achieved through the joint endeavours of States and the
mechanisms created by the United Nations system,
with the invaluable support of civil society
organizations.

We appreciate the action taken by a number of
national Governments, as outlined in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2009/158). This includes their
commitment to action plans agreed upon by parties to a
conflict, consistent with resolutions 1539 (2004) and
1612 (2005) and with international law. But a source of
great concern is the widespread persistence of the
abhorrent practice of recruiting child soldiers,
including in cases of inadequate supervision of official
practice meant to ensure that young recruits are of
legal age, and of manipulating child soldiers in the
context of peace negotiations.

We are also alarmed by the upsurge of violence of
all kinds, including attacks that impede the exercise of
the right to education and numerous recorded cases of
sexual violence in a context of insecurity and impunity.

Argentina attaches great importance to the
promotion and protection of the rights of children.
Every State has the imperative obligation to ensure that
its inhabitants fully enjoy human rights, even under the
most difficult circumstances. In that regard, we are
grateful for the recommendations set out in the report
of the Secretary-General, which we shall study
carefully. In addition to what we have said in previous
debates on this item, we wish today to underscore our
agreement on a number of points.

First of all, the fight against impunity and the
quest for justice are at the core of any effective
response aimed at preventing and eliminating human
rights violations in any situation. It is therefore
indispensable to make greater efforts to end impunity,
including in cases of systematic and generalized sexual
violence. It is imperative to ensure due process and
recourse for the victims to adequate legal remedies,
including the International Criminal Court, where
applicable.

Secondly, we have listened closely to the
statements of the representative of Costa Rica and
other delegations, and we agree with what they said.
We consider that the deliberations of the Security
Council Working Group should be extended to all
situations of armed conflict, where there is proof not
solely of the recruitment and use of child soldiers but
of any of the other five categories of grave violations,
including rape and other serious sexual violence. We
believe it relevant to review the criteria for inclusion in
the annexes, taking all forms of violence into
consideration.

Thirdly, the action plans agreed upon have proven
to be a valuable tool, and we encourage the Security
Council to continue urging parties to armed conflict
situations to prepare and put into practice concrete
action plans with definite time frames in order to end
the illegal recruitment and use of children, as well as to
undertake concrete commitments regarding other types
of alleged violations and abuses.

Fourthly, we are convinced of the need to carry
out effective programmes of demobilization,
reintegration and rehabilitation so that victims have a
real opportunity to be reintegrated into society. For this
purpose, these programmes must have sufficient
funding and pragmatic and effective mechanisms to
achieve sustainable results over time. We believe that
that is an indispensable component for peacebuilding
that must receive appropriate political attention in all
relevant forums, including the Peacebuilding
Commission.

In line with what I said earlier, we would like to
stress the importance of the programmes initiated by
some Governments with the support of the United
Nations and the international community to ensure
appropriate rehabilitation and reintegration of children
who have been released or who have managed to leave
armed groups.

Argentina reiterates its unshakeable commitment
to the protection of children from all forms of violence
and to continued cooperation with the Working Group
and all mechanisms contributing to the promotion and
protection of the rights of children in order to secure
for them the potential for a childhood free from
violence where their human rights can be fully
enjoyed.
