The President: I thank the representative of the
Russian Federation for his kind words addressed to me.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs of the Gambia.

The situation in Iraq and its relations with the United
Nations have been very disturbing for a long time, and
more particularly in the past few weeks. Following the
ceasefire agreements of 1991, Iraq has been in constant
violation of its obligations to the United Nations.

Notwithstanding these violations, the United Nations
has been considerate enough to put in place the oil-for-food
programme, which was recently generously increased as per
Security Council resolution 1153 (1998), a humanitarian
gesture geared towards alleviating some of the hardship
faced by the Iraqi people. This programme is apparently a
successful one.

Reports reaching the Council, however, have revealed
that Iraq has constantly obstructed the United Nations
Special Commission (UNSCOM) in the performance of its
duties and denied the Commission access to the eight
presidential sites it unilaterally declared as sensitive sites.
The reports also reveal that Iraq is not just being
obstructive, but also not transparent in its disclosures. It is
the position of my delegation that Iraq must comply with its
obligations or be made to comply.

The Memorandum of Understanding signed between
the Secretary-General and the Deputy Prime Minister of
Iraq is a very welcome window of opportunity. We once
again congratulate the Secretary-General for his heroic
achievement. This is a clear manifestation that preventive
diplomacy is the best solution to threats to world peace. My
delegation applauds this achievement. It has brought great
relief to the world and will thus remain indelible in the
annals of history of the United Nations.

The present Iraqi issue has revealed how very peace-
loving this world is, and thus we must always endeavour to
give the world that which it cherishes: peace for humanity.
We hope that Iraq will share the same sentiments.

While we call on Iraq to comply with its obligations,
it is our belief that this Council should be prepared to act
should Iraq, as usual, violate its obligations under the
Memorandum of Understanding and/or other relevant
resolutions.

My delegation wishes to take this opportunity to
register our profound appreciation for the job done by the
sponsors of the present resolution on Iraq. The lengthy
consultations that took place recently and their present
outcome clearly manifest the unity of this Council. The
present resolution is a welcome idea. It has very
important provisions which my delegation believes should
be applauded in lending our support to it.

In paragraph 1, the resolution clearly endorses and
approves the noteworthy achievement of the
Secretary-General. This resolution is not meant to address
the question of automaticity.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The Council will now hear statements under rule 37
of its provisional rules of procedure.

The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Egypt, in which he requests to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Elaraby
(Egypt) took the seat reserved for him at the side of
the Council chamber.


The President: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Mexico. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.


