The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

At this meeting, we will hear briefings by the
Chairmen of the Security Council Committee
established by resolution 661 (1990), concerning the
situation between Iraq and Kuwait; the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
864 (1993) concerning the situation in Angola; the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999); the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1343
(2001) concerning Liberia; the Ad Hoc Working Group
on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa; and
the Working Group of the Security Council on United
Nations Peacekeeping Operations.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend invitations under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Ole Peter Kolby,
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established by resolution 661 (1990) concerning the
situation between Iraq and Kuwait; Mr. Richard Ryan,
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 864 (1993)
concerning the situation in Angola; the Chairman of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999); Mr. Kishore Mahbubani,
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1343 (2001)
concerning Liberia; Mr. J agdish Koonjul, Chairman of
the Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention and
Resolution in Africa; and Mr. Wegger Christian
Strommen, Chairman of the Working Group of the
Security Council on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations.

It is so decided.

I now give the floor to Mr. Ole Peter Kolby,
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established by resolution 661 (1990) concerning the
situation between Iraq and Kuwait.

