Mr. Goledzinowski (Australia): Australia
welcomes the opportunity to address the Council on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, a subject
which should be at the centre of our collective efforts
in the field of international peace and security.

I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having convened this debate and all of the speakers for
their contributions today.

Discussions about the situation in Libya and in
other places quite rightly have occupied the attention
of Governments and peoples from around the world.
Australia is firmly on the record as a supporter of the
strong action taken by the Council on Libya through its
resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011). Recent
debates have highlighted the importance of the concept
of the responsibility to protect and the seriousness with
which Governments must take their responsibilities in
relation to their populations.

However, given the broader topic of this debate, I
would like to focus today on a separate subject: the
distinct body of work on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict that has been developed in the United
Nations over recent years.

The protection of civilians during times of armed
conflict is firmly rooted in international law. Our
efforts towards this objective have come a long way,
but there is still much more to be done.

Australia has worked closely with others on
concrete steps and actions to enhance the protection of
civilians by peacekeeping operations. We would like to
highlight four aspects of this work which continue to
require sustained attention from all of us.

First, peacekeepers need to know how to protect
civilians in increasingly complex operational
environments. Guidance and training are key. Australia
is very pleased at the progress made this year by the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, which
recognized the need for guidance for peacekeepers on
the protection of civilians and noted the important
2

work under way to develop training modules for
peacekeepers on this issue. To assist in supporting
these broader training efforts, Australia has been
pleased to partner with the United Nations Institute for
Training and Research to develop a documentary on
the protection of civilians in peace operations.

Secondly, engaging local communities, including
women, in discussions on protection requirements is
key both in the planning stages and while peacekeeping
missions are deployed in the field. Engaging the
community builds trust and lines of communication; it
assists in ensuring consistency with efforts which
communities already have under way, and can help
manage expectations about what peacekeeping
missions are able to do, which can assist in preserving
their credibility. The development of community alert
networks in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is a
good example of local engagement that allows isolated
communities to contact local authorities and bases of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo when under
threat.

Thirdly, a coherent and comprehensive approach
by peacekeeping missions to protection of civilians is
critical. This includes the clear articulation of roles and
responsibilities within a mission and with other
relevant players. The Strategic Framework for Drafting
Comprehensive Protection of Civilian Strategies,
which was also recognized by the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations this year, is an important
tool in that regard.

Fourthly and finally, peacekeeping missions are
there to support the host Government in building
capacity to protect its civilians. This requires a clear
understanding of the longer-term needs of the host
Government. We would argue that it is important to
work towards defined benchmarks that can, in the
long-term, assist transition planning. Events in Cote
D'Ivoire have demonstrated the need for the use of
force in response to imminent threats to civilians. The
challenge now in Cote d'Ivoire is shifting towards
supporting the Government on longer-term protection
challenges, such as security sector reform.

After a decade of mandating explicitly for the
protection of civilians in peacekeeping operations,
there has been considerable progress, but it is
important that undertakings made in New York flow
through to the field. The establishment of a new United
11-33111
Nations mission in southern Sudan provides an
important opportunity to ensure that we draw on the
lessons we have learned and the best practices we have
developed in the field from the very beginning.

Ultimately, the best way to protect civilians is to
prevent armed conflict in the first place. We believe
that the regular horizon-scanning briefings from the
Department of Political Affairs can enhance the
Council's capacity in this regard. We would also like to
add our voice to those who have expressed support for
the conflict prevention initiatives of regional
organizations, which, given their comparative
advantages, can play a unique role in preventing
conflicts and their harmful effects on civilians.

