Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to begin by conveying the condolences of
Spain to the Permanent Missions of Japan and Ecuador
in the light of the very high number of victims resulting
from the earthquakes that struck both countries over
the weekend. We would also like to begin this statement
by condemning all acts of terrorism wherever they
take place.

I will begin by referring to the Palestinian issue,
and subsequently will turn to the latest events in
Yemen, Syria and in Lebanon. I will try to abide by the
five-minute rule.

A few months ago, in October, we held an
open debate on the situation in the Middle East (see S/PV.7540) under Spain's presidency of the Security
Council. That was at the beginning of the terrible wave
of violence, which has continued all this time. In recent
weeks the violence seemed to have attenuated, even if
today the news is not that good.

A point that we have made on many occasions is one
that we think needs repeating now: setting a political
timeline of hope is the only way to put a permanent
end to the violence and move towards a solution to the
conflict. It is the only way whereby we can ensure the
security ofIsrael on a sustained basis. Setting a timeline
that will bring hope in its wake is essential and urgent,
because the viability of the two-State solution is at risk.

In last October's open debate, Spain made the
point that the international community must be fully
involved in the solution to the conflict, and that we
could do that through an international conference
that would relaunch the peace process and prevent the
demise of the two-State solution. We therefore support
the efforts currently being made by France to convene
an international conference on the peace process. We
believe that that needs to be the priority at this juncture,
including here in the Security Council.

We also agree with the point that the Security
Council has a key role to play in defending the two-
State solution. We bear a responsibility for that. But
we have to tread very carefully in deciding how we
are going to fulfil that responsibility, and make sure
that we prioritize a course of action that holds out a
genuine possibility of making headway at the present
time towards breathing new life into the peace process.
Moreover, as I have just indicated, we believe that that
means choosing a particular course of action, namely,
the holding of an international conference. Such action
is fully complementary to the work of the Quartet,
particularly to its initiative of drafting a report about
the situation on the ground and about the viability of
the two-State solution.

We trust that once that report has been submitted,
it will serve to provide guidance for the subsequent
action on the part of the Security Council to address
the issue and find such a solution, one that the entire
international community yearns for and that will
uphold the two-State solution. The involvement of the
international community does not mean in any way
that the parties to the conflict cannot be involved. If
they truly yearn for peace, they must work to foster the
appropriate conditions on the ground for a return to
negotiations. They therefore must avoid any action that
could imperil the two-State solution.

The construction of settlements in the occupied
territories is the most blatant example of such an action.
It is illegal under international law and constitutes
one of the main threats to the feasibility of the two-
State solution going forward. The Security Council
has repeatedly spoken of the illegal nature of the
settlements. It is a point that we have expressed loud
and clear on various occasions, including in resolutions
446 (1979) and 465 (1980).

Secondly, Israel must put an immediate halt to
the demolitions, the forced evictions of people and the
seizure of land. Israel must also adopt transformative
measures to rebuild the necessary climate of trust in
order to preserve the two-State solution.

Thirdly, irrespective of all that I have just said on
those points, I think it is also worth underscoring once
again our robust and unequivocal rejection of violence,
echoing a point that I made at the beginning of this
statement: such violence can never be justified. In
particular, acts of terrorism must be condemned once
again by all of us robustly and categorically - such
acts constitute terrorism, in any situation, under any
circumstances, anywhere. Both parties must refrain
from any incitement to violence and must refrain from
the disproportionate use of force.

Finally, I think it would be remiss of me not to
make the point that intra-Palestinian reconciliation is
also key if we are to move forward in the peace process.
We hope that the talks held in Doha between Hamas
and Fatah will provide an opportunity for both parties
to abide by previous agreements, thus ensuring that we
can restore the jurisdiction of the Palestinian Authority
over Gaza and set a course for elections.

1 will now turn to the matter of Yemen. The parties
to the conflict have finally agreed to a ceasefire, which
we hope will last and become permanent. That will then
mean that we have a window of opportunity to mitigate
the terrible humanitarian suffering in that country.

Direct negotiations were scheduled to commence
today. However, we have learned that they have been
postponed, but we hope that such a delay will not be
repeated in the future. We would like to reiterate our
support for the efforts of the United Nations Special
Envoy for Yemen in ensuring that the talks go ahead
and that they lead to an inclusive solution that will
guarantee the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of Yemen.
Turning to Syria, seven weeks have now gone
by since the cessation of hostilities came into effect.
We have just begun the second round of the so-called
proximity talks in Geneva. Nonetheless, we are
seeing - and we are worried about this - an escalation
of clashes, which is threatening to derail resolution
2268 (2016). The lack of progress on the humanitarian
track is also an indication ofthe fragility ofthe process.
For that reason, we urge all the parties to the conflict to
immediately halt attacks targeting all those forces that
have agreed to the cessation of hostilities agreement.
We call for a robust commitment to the negotiation
process to lead us towards a political transition in
the talks taking place in Geneva. Finally, we call for
full respect for international humanitarian law by all
parties. In particular, we call on the Government of
Syria to urgently review its policy on the provision of
medical equipment to the besieged areas.

Finally, with regard to Lebanon, I would like to
thank the Secretary-General for the information that
he has made available to us and his commitment to
Lebanon, which was made abundantly clear during
his recent trip to that country. I would like to take this
opportunity to pay tribute once again to the people of
Lebanon, who have demonstrated an understanding of
their responsibility and the need for social solidarity,
which serve as an example and a model. They have
provided their hospitality to an extraordinary number
of refugees.

At the same, I must express our concern about
the institutional deadlock that has racked that country
for too long now. It is of the utmost importance that
the political forces in Lebanon arrive, as quickly as
possible, at an agreement that will allow for the election
of a new President.

