Mr. Errazuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): May I
begin, Sir, by congratulating Pakistan on its assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of January and commending the presence here this
morning of Pakistan's Foreign Secretary. I should like
also to thank the Secretary-General for his statement.

My delegation endorses the statement made by
the Permanent Representative of the Arab Republic
of Egypt, Ambassador Khalil, on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

This debate provides us with yet another opportunity
to look into an important tool in the architecture for
the maintenance of international peace and security:
peacekeeping operations. These operations, in a
changing international situation that is increasingly
complex, have had to adapt and now function in a
different way to how they were originally conceived.
Thus, beginning in the late 1980s, the traditional model
was supplanted by an increasingly multidimensional
kind of operation with civilian, military, political, rule
of law, human rights, humanitarian aid, reconstruction,
gender and civilian protection components, among
others. Whatever its nature, a peacekeeping operation
must be undertaken pursuant to the guiding principles
of consent of the parties; impartiality; use of force
only in self-defence or in defending the mandate; and
unswerving compliance with the Charter of the United
Nations.

The multidimensional nature of peacekeeping
operations requires clear and appropriate guidelines
that bolster the operational dimension and ensure an
appropriate organizational structure, logistical and
financial resources, and appropriately trained staff.
My delegation believes that the relation between
peacekeeping and peacebuilding is clear. They form
two sides of the same process proceeding in parallel.
We consider it essential that the mandates of the various
peacekeeping operations not only have clear, precise
and feasible instructions, but also a strategic vision for
entry, transition and exit that allows appropriate use of
resources to ensure the safety of the members and is
based on a withdrawal strategy.

These increased efforts call for systematic joint
efforts among all actors involved in establishing and
implementing a peacekeeping operation. To succeed,
they must also be undertaken in close coordination
with the national authorities in order to meet local
needs and interests and ensure national ownership of
the process. We endorse those mechanisms that ensure
communications among the Security Council, troop-
and police-contributing countries and the Peacebuilding
Commission. We urge all to establish the mechanisms
necessary to ensure prompt implementation of the
decisions of the Security Council.

We recognize the role played by women in
preventing and resolving conflicts, and appreciate the
inclusion of the gender dimension in mandates. Further
work is necessary in that regard to ensure women's
full participation in peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
security issues. In that context, we also draw attention
to the potential role of regional entities, given their
successful past experiences in Africa.

Active collaboration and communication among the
receiving country, the Security Council, the Secretariat
and Member States are fundamental to understanding
the reality on the ground and the problems and
expectations of the local population. Coordination
of those factors will ensure improved decisions and
support for the mission. Only insofar as peacekeeping
operations respond to the desires and aspirations of the
local population will it be possible to guarantee the
relevance and continuity of that important international
instrument.

My delegation welcomes resolution 2086 (2013),
unanimously adopted today, which follows the path of
the ideas outlined earlier. Lastly, my delegation pays
tribute to those who have given their lives in pursuit of
the noble cause of peace and peacekeeping.

