Mr. Petrella (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to take this opportunity to convey the very best
wishes of my Government to you, Sir, and to commend
you on the excellent work your delegation is doing as
President of the Security Council under the leadership of
Ambassador Danilo Turk and his staff.

Like the preceding speakers, we pay tribute to the
United Nations staff members who died in the plane
accident in Kosovo last Friday.

We would like to thank the Presidency of Bosnia
and Herzegovina for being here today and for the
information its members have given us this morning. It is
of extreme importance that four years after Dayton we are
able to welcome in the Security Council, in a historic
meeting, the three members of the Presidency of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. This shows that the implementation of
Dayton is moving forward in spite of the difficulties and
that there has been no decline in the Council's interest in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Also of the utmost importance, in our view, are the
visits to Slovenia and Germany, since they demonstrate
that the joint nature of the Presidency has begun to
function in practice. We encourage the leaders to continue
along this unified path. In this respect, we value the New
York Declaration, adopted last night, as a document that
strengthens that trend and that is consistent with the
concerns of the Security Council.

Argentina takes pride in the recent presentation of
the credentials of the Argentine Ambassador to Bosnia

 

and Herzegovina and the possibility that it will soon be
reciprocated, to the benefit of the large and prosperous
community of people from Bosnia and Herzegovina now in
Argentina and to bilateral relations between the two
countries.

In another context, we hope that the draft law on State
border services will be sent to the parliamentary Assembly
as soon as possible. It is essential that a sovereign State
have a service of this nature, in order to prevent smuggling
and illegal immigration. It is a vital institution, whose
implementation must not be further delayed because of
problems of competence. The New York Declaration
reflects important progress in this direction.

Another problem is the situation of approximately
800,000 internally displaced persons and the thousands of
refugees outside the country who have not yet been able to
return to their places of origin. This situation must be
reversed. We therefore believe that the recent legislation on
property, promulgated by the High Representative, Mr.
Wolfgang Petritsch, must be given the greatest political
support, since it meets the needs of the majority of those
people who are in that situation. On the same subject, the
New York Declaration also proposes measures that we
support.

We encourage the Presidency to adopt the economic
and legal measures necessary to create a stable and secure
environment conducive to foreign investment and an open
economy. We agree that Bosnia and Herzegovina has a role
to play in the region and in Europe.

We urge the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
embark on the path it outlined in its statements today and
in the Declaration of New York. Aware of its
responsibilities for the maintenance of peace, Argentina will
continue to participate in the Stabilization Force in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

In conclusion, the attendance here of legislators from
the United States Congress, whom we respectfully
welcome, reminds us of the importance of the Security
Council's and the United Nations holding open meetings
like today's. These make it possible for people to see the
useful and effective way in which we fulfil our mandates.

