Mr. Da Cruz (Angola) (spoke in Portuguese; English text provided by the delegation): I take the
floor on behalf of the Community of Portuguese-
speaking Countries (CPLP): Brazil, Cape Verde,
Guinea-Bissau, Mozambique, Portugal, Sao Tome and
Principe, Timor-Leste and my own country, Angola,
which is the current Chair of the Community.

At the outset, I would like to welcome the
participation in this meeting of His Excellency
Mr. J ose Ramos-Horta, President of Timor-Leste. I also
take this opportunity to welcome the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2012/43) on the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT).

It is with great pleasure that we note the progress
made by Timor-Leste in recent times and how the
report of the Secretary-General does justice to it.
Timor-Leste is one scenario where cooperation within
the CPLP has proven very important for all Member
States, and we sincerely hope that the result of our
joint efforts will benefit the Timorese nation.

The installation of the permanent representation
of the CPLP in Dili is progressing thanks to the
invaluable support of the Timorese authorities.
Moreover, the CPLP strategic plan for Timor-Leste
should soon be in place, especially in the area of the
promotion and dissemination of the Portuguese
language. Thus, the reformulation of the mandate of
the permanent representation that was agreed at the
summit in Luanda, with a strong cultural component
and support for the use of the Portuguese language in
Timor-Leste, in addition to the political component, is
of added importance.

Timor-Leste's commitment to forging a strong
relationship with the CPLP has also been demonstrated
by its performance as the current President of the CPLP
Parliamentary Assembly and the good results achieved
at its third session, held in Dili in September 2011. The
CPLP has confidence in the country's political stability,
which has been reflected in the preparation of political
parties for an electoral contest and in the holding of
each party's congress in a peaceful environment. The
CPLP also supports the initiatives of the Government
concerning stabilization and reconciliation through
institutional dialogue.

The States members of the CPLP will remain
committed to continuing the excellent cooperation
developed with Timor-Leste to date in order to
strengthen its stability, consolidate its institutions and
grow its economy. This process also contributes to the
growing assertion of the country in its region, which is
beneficial to the involvement of the CPLP in South-
East Asia and the Pacific.

Timor-Leste's successful application for
membership in the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations and the appointment of a working group to
consider the process of accession attest to the country's
progress in recent years. We are further pleased to see
Timor-Leste taking its first steps as a country that

contributes to peace and security in the world with the
integration of soldiers of the Falintil-Forcas Armadas
de Defesa de Timor-Leste (F-FDTL) in the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon in Lebanon and in
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau, as well as a military observer in South
Sudan.

In other areas, Timor-Leste will certainly be an
example to follow in ensuring a more peaceful and
more secure world. I note the lessons learned and
shared by Timor-Leste with regard to the peaceful
demobilization of the veterans of the liberation
struggle, the new military recruits, the legislation
concerning F-FDTL, and the professionalization of the
defence forces of Timor-Leste, which should pride
themselves for serving the people and democracy of
their country.

The year 2012 is of great importance to the
consolidation of the Timorese democracy, and the
Community I represent here reaffirms its confidence in
the maturity of the Timorese people and leaders as they
embark on the political steps that lie ahead. We are
certain that the next presidential and legislative
elections will take place in an environment of
tranquillity and security, reflecting the positive
developments of recent years in the country.

The Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries maintains its solidarity with Timor-Leste and
has confidence in the capacity of the Timorese leaders
and people to maintain peace and stability, which are
essential to the economic and social development that
can make Timor-Leste a factor for increased stability
and security in the region.

