The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of Ghana.

We thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report (S/2007/593), and we take this
opportunity to express our appreciation for the
briefings provided by His Excellency Mr. Abou
Moussa, Deputy Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and by His Excellency Mr. Djibrill
Bassole, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Burkina Faso,
on behalf of His Excellency Mr. Blaise Compaore,
President of Burkina Faso and Facilitator of the C6te
d'Ivoire peace process. We congratulate Mr. Choi on
his appointment as the new Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Cote d'Ivoire.

Ghana welcomes the election of Burkina Faso, a
neighbouring country with which we have excellent
relations, as a non-permanent member of the Security
Council.

The signing of the Ouagadougou Agreement
opened a window of opportunity for all parties to the
conflict to work towards peace and stability in C6te
d'Ivoire. The enthusiasm and confidence expressed by
the international community at that time marked the
beginning of a genuine process towards peace, and we
are aware of the progress that has been achieved since
then.

However, I wish to express concern about delays
in the implementation of the Ouagadougou Agreement,
which are due mainly to the limited capacity of
national institutions charged with the implementation
of key tasks. In particular, the lack of the requisite
planning, logistics, personnel and financial capacity
has affected the deployment of mixed units and the
restoration of State administration throughout C6te
d'Ivoire.

At the same time, we acknowledge that there are
issues that require stronger political will on the part of
the Ivorian parties to advance the peace process. There
has been no progress in unifying the defence and
security forces in C6te d'Ivoire with the Forces
nouvelles, owing to disagreement over ranks and the
number of Forces nouvelles personnel to be absorbed
into the new armed forces, and the preference of the
Forces nouvelles not to disarm before joining the
restructured force. Clearly, the onus is on the leaders to
resolve their differences so as to enable the
implementation process to regain its earlier
momentum.

We commend Cote d'Ivoire's international
partners for the pledges made in support of the peace
process, and we urge them to redeem those pledges to
ensure the provision of the financial and logistical
support necessary for the implementation of the Peace
Agreement.

We support the Secretary-General's
recommendation that the current troop levels of the
United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire be
maintained and that a further review be conducted at a
future date.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I call on the representative of cote d'Ivoire.

