Mrs. Theofili (Greece): Greece would like
to commend Poland for convening this high-level
meeting. This open debate is timely and topical, taking
into account the ever-increasing challenges to the
fundamental principles of international law and the
Charter of the United Nations.

As a general remark I would like to point out that,
for Greece, international law constitutes the cornerstone
of its policies. Greece has always been a staunch
supporter of the peaceful settlement of international
disputes. In that spirit, the peremptory rule of the
Charter that prohibits the use or the threat of use of
force and acts of aggression in international relations is
ofutmost importance. States should settle their disputes
by peaceful means, as set forth in Chapter VI of the
Charter. Furthermore, we underline the significance of
judicial mechanisms in the prevention and resolution
of legal disputes. Resorting to those mechanisms,
particularly the International Court of Justice, would
greatly contribute to the maintenance of international
peace and security. At the same time, we believe that
preventive diplomacy and early warning could help to
stop the emergence and escalation of conflicts. In that
respect, the role of the Security Council in addressing
international disputes at an early stage and without
delay is crucial.

Furthermore, respect for international humanitarian
law is an essential component of the rule of law in
conflict situations. In that regard, Greece reiterates its
unwavering support for the role of the International
Criminal Court in putting an end to impunity for
the perpetrators of the most heinous crimes, thereby
preventing their recurrence. There is no doubt that the
Security Council has an important role to play and a
responsibility to shoulder by referring situations of
mass atrocities to the Court, ensuring accountability
and thereby enhancing its own credibility.

Last but not least, allow me to point out the
fundamental significance of respect for the rule of law
and the public order of the oceans as reflected in the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. With
its universal and unified character, the Convention
contributes to strengthening peace, security,
cooperation and good-neighbourly relations among
all nations and is a factor of stability and security in
a challenging international context. We therefore
stress the need to abide by its provisions, which have
long been recognized by jurisprudence as reflecting
customary international law.

Greece deems it important that we all comply
with the purposes and principles of the Charter, in
order to fully implement Security Council resolutions
and to safeguard the fundamental, indisputable norms
governing international relations, such as respect for
the principles of the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of nations, non-aggression and good-neighbourly
relations. That is our common duty and obligation. It
is equally important to resolve disputes through such
peaceful means as dialogue and consultation. That is
our common responsibility.

Transforming those doctrines into practice
constitutes the quintessence of our approach in
international relations. A recent example of that
approach is the initiative by Greece to organize and
host for the past two years the Rhodes Conference for
Security and Stability, an informal ministerial meeting
of countries of the wider eastern Mediterranean region
aimed at fostering stability and security in the region.
Continuing that tradition, the third Rhodes Conference,
taking place in June, will highlight the importance of
shaping a positive agenda in the wider region.

