Mr. Lambertini (Italy): The Council will not be
surprised that Italy aligns itself with the statement
made by the observer of the European Union and with
that by the representative of Switzerland on behalf of
the Group of Friends on the Protection of Civilians in
Armed Conflict. Nevertheless, we wish to add a few
remarks in our national capacity.

The stakes of today's debate could not be higher.
The news we hear from several conflict areas is
appalling. The involvement of defenceless civilians in
armed conflicts seems to have become the rule rather
than the exception. Civilians are victims of senseless
violence. Neither children nor other vulnerable groups
are spared in, for instance, Syria, South Sudan and the
Central African Republic from massacres that have
ethnic, religious or political motivations. Our first
duty is therefore to state loudly and clearly that there
can be no justification for those acts and that those
responsible, whether individuals or Governments,
can be held accountable. The condemnation of the
international community and of the United Nations
must be unanimous and unequivocal.

The responsibility to protect belongs primarily to
States. That is a consolidated principle of international
law from which we cannot waver. But there are,
unfortunately, far too many situations in the real world
where that principle simply does not work because
States are too weak or somehow unable to deliver. That
is where the United Nations needs to grab hold of the
reins, which it can do only if its Members allow it to.
Take, for example, the fact that some 75,000 civilians,
mostly women and children, are being sheltered in the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan camp in Juba. I
wonder whether that information is taken into account
by the people who so easily criticize this Organization
and dismiss its work to mitigate the troubles of the
world.

But the protection of civilians in armed conflicts
is a relatively new task for the United Nations and
its peacekeeping missions. It is a mandate that Italy
supports, in the firm beliefthat, as a world organization,
we have a duty to oppose the folly that too often invades
the behaviour of human beings. But it is a mandate that
requires appropriate tools and fresh thinking about the
relationship between peacekeeping and humanitarian
actions.

First and foremost, it requires the unity of
peoples and nations on the action needed, at least at
the humanitarian level. When humanitarian aid is
necessary and humanitarian access is requested, we
need to think solely about those who are suffering and
join forces to provide them with relief.

Secondly, Italy welcomes the most recent
developments in peacekeeping operations, notably the
introduction of modern technology. The unmanned
aerial systems currently used by the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo already seem to have significantly
improved the situation on the ground and have enabled
the Mission to deliver on its mandate to protect
civilians. They have also strengthened the security of
the peacekeepers themselves. Without ignoring the
precautions those tools require, we strongly encourage
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to continue
on this path and to explore the possibilities offered
by modern technology for the protection of civilians.
Even in the most inaccessible and remote areas, new
instruments can help us to identify at-risk groups of
civilians, to deliver aid and to prevent attacks against
them.

Thirdly, it is essential that the Council strengthen
coherence in seeking recourse to the International
Criminal Court and helping the Court to fulfil its
mandate, including by ensuring appropriate follow-up
to Security Council referrals. The effective protection
of civilians depends on a culture of accountability in
all conflict scenarios. To strengthen the protection of
civilians, we must make sure the perpetrators of crimes
realize that the Council is serious about enforcing
individual responsibility for crimes under international
law.

Allow me to conclude with a word about the safety
of journalists. It is commendable that the Security
Council took up the question in an open debate in
July (see S/PV.7003). Thanks to journalists, we know
when the world's worst brutalities are taking place. We
must remain vigilant on the issues. Protecting a free
press means protecting free speech, and a free press is
what most threatens the perpetrators of crimes against
defenceless civilians.

