Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to join others in welcoming the
participation of the United States Secretary of State,
Mr. Mike Pompeo, in today's meeting. I also thank
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, for her comprehensive briefing
on the sixth report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation ofresolution 2231 (2015) (S/2018/1089),
as well as the Facilitator for the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015), and the observer of the
European Union on behalf of the Joint Commission, for
their briefings to the Council.

Three years ago, Kuwait welcomed the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action and the Security
Council's subsequent adoption of resolution 2231
(2015). It is true that the agreement does not address
all of the concerns of the countries of the region, such
as deteriorating security conditions and interference
in their domestic affairs. However, we welcomed the
agreement because we fully support all United Nations
resolutions, efforts and endeavours that seek to achieve
security and stability in the Middle East. We maintain
a principled and firm position on all non-proliferation
issues in general, and on a Middle East free of weapons
of mass destruction in particular.

We have taken note of the sixth report of the
Secretary-General, drafted in accordance with annex B
of resolution 2231 (2015), which provides an overview
of the nuclear-related provisions and ballistic-missile
and arms-related provisions geared to strengthening the
resolution's implementation. In that regard, we welcome
the contents of the report on Iran's implementation of
its commitments related to its nuclear programme, as
verified by the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA). We reiterate that Iran should stay on that
positive course, in accordance with the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and the
IAEA Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement. Iran's
early ratification of the Additional Protocol would
guarantee that it is continuing to maintain its status as
a non-nuclear-weapon State.

The provisions of resolution 2231 (2015) are
not limited to nuclear issues alone. They extend
to controlling activities related to ballistic-missile
technologies and the transfer of traditional weapons.
In that regard, we are concerned about the continued
firing of ballistic missiles into the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia, as the report states. The report also mentions
the transfer of weapons and military equipment to other
countries in the region. The Secretariat could not verify
the dates on which such transfers took place but is
continuing to investigate the issue of ballistic missiles.
We still consider the matter very serious and a possible
threat to international peace and security.

Kuwait condemns the recurring firing of ballistic
missiles into our sister Kingdom of Saudi Arabia,
threatening its national security and jeopardizing
civilians' lives. We stress our firm position in that
regard, which calls for maintaining security and stability
in the region and the safety of its peoples. It is also
important to refrain from interfering in the domestic
affairs of countries and to respect their sovereignty in
accordance with the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations, international law and the principles
of good-neighbourliness, as well as to work to settle
disputes by peaceful means, refrain from the threat or
use of force and reject sectarianism.

In conclusion, the State of Kuwait reiterates that
the Security Council should continue to shoulder its
responsibilities and follow up on the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015) in a comprehensive manner
that guarantees compliance by Iran and other States
with their commitments, not only in the area of
nuclear non-proliferation but also with regard to other
issues mentioned in the resolution. I would also like
to take this opportunity to express our appreciation
to Ambassador van Oosterom, in his capacity as
Facilitator for the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015), and to the members of his delegation for their
efforts in the past year. We wish them and their friendly
country every success.

