Mr. Francese (Italy): First of all, I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing today's meeting, through
which the Bangladesh presidency is helping make the
Security Council more effective and fully consistent with
the spirit and letter of Article 31 of the Charter, as well as
of article 37 of the provisional rules of procedure of the
Council.

The international community's success in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is a fundamental test for the region as a
whole. As Carl Bildt recalled, the only way to address
crisis areas is through a regional approach. The Permanent
Representative of Portugal has already effectively described
the central role that the European Union plays in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and Italy fully endorses his statement. I
would like to add that, last July, Sarajevo became the
location of the summit that launched the Stability Pact, an
ambitious project that involves the countries of the region
in an economic and political reconstruction policy aimed at
their complete integration into the European context.

The key objective of my statement today is
integration - a discussion of integration against the
background of still-active forces of disintegration. I would
like to emphasize that there are two paramount goals:
integration within Bosnia and Herzegovina, and the
integration of Bosnia and Herzegovina into its natural
geopolitical context, which is that of Europe.

Thus far, the forces of disintegration have prevailed,
fomented by what Nobel laureate John Hume has called the
seeds of war. New outside enemies have been invented for
the sake of keeping power inside societies, and this trend
must now be reversed. Diversity must no longer be seen as
a threat. Recent developments in Croatia have moved
precisely in the right direction and shown the way.

Allow me to describe some of the priorities of the
Italian Government in pursuing these goals. On the
domestic integration front, we are strongly involved in
two key sectors: justice and military cooperation. As
regards justice, the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina led
Italy, in 1993, to present the draft statute of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. The
first President of the Tribunal was an Italian citizen,
magistrate and judge, Antonio Cassese. In Rome in 1998,
Italy also sponsored the Diplomatic Conference for the
adoption of the Statute of the International Criminal
Court. Now, while awaiting completion of the signing and
ratification process, we are actively promoting the work
of the Court's Preparatory Commission, aimed at defining
aggression and the rules of procedure, and we applaud the
commitment in particular of the Bosnian delegation to this
end.

The other aspect is that of the armed forces.
Pursuant to the Dayton/Paris Peace Agreement and the
New York Declaration, we can also make a concrete
contribution to the integration of the armed forces in that
country. The armed forces still in Bosnia and
Herzegovina can be transformed from divisive elements
into forces for internal and external integration. Inter-
entity military cooperation can lead to the creation of
joint units that will participate in United Nations
peacekeeping operations elsewhere, in other parts of the
world. The Secretary-General's report notes interesting
progress in this regard, and Italy, for its part, has just
invited a mixed battalion from Bosnia and Herzegovina,
consisting of personnel from the three ethnic groups, to
participate, together with a brigade of Italian paratroopers,
in peacekeeping manoeuvres in Italian territory for two
weeks. This will be the first test of joint exercises
involving the different ethnic units of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

In this context, it is also fitting to recall two
initiatives in favour of the integration of Bosnia and
Herzegovina into its natural European context. On 19 and
20 May this year, the city of Ancona will host a
conference for the development and security of the
Adriatic and Ionian Seas. The participants will include the
leading officials of the European Union and the Foreign
Ministers of Adriatic and Ionian countries, including,
obviously, the Foreign Minister of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which is an Adriatic country. Italian civil
society has a long-standing commitment to the grass-roots
integration of the region. An early example was the
extensive programme of decentralized cooperation
implemented in Bosnia and Herzegovina. As further
evidence, the Presidents of the regions of the Italian east
coast will also be in Ancona.

 

The conference will focus on safeguarding the
environment and water resources, navigation and
cooperation, cultural and tourist cooperation and the fight
against crime, which comes from across the Adriatic and is
a threat to law and order in my country, too. Criminality
and corruption squeeze economic growth and block private
international investment. A commitment to this sector
would thus foster both the domestic growth of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and its international integration.

We must underline the fact that Italy considers with
great interest the observation in the report of the
Secretary-General on UNMIBH's need for more security in
order for it to be more efficient in its police and judiciary
functions. In this regard, I must recall the special
professional background of the Italian corps of carabinieri
engaged in the country, who have a dual professional
profile, acting as both policemen and soldiers. They have
been placed in the International Police Task Force in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and, above all, in the multinational
specialized unit of the Stabilization Force, in Kosovo and
in other regions of the world.
Finally, culture and education also deserve a focus in
the efforts of integration. To this end, a cultural initiative is
being organized by the Italian Government in collaboration
with the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the
United Nations and with the universities of Sarajevo and of
Rome. It will take the form of a seminar, hosted in the
capital of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and devoted to the role
of universities in humanitarian assistance and the peace
process in crisis areas. This will be a great occasion to
underline that culture, and universities in particular, are the
best way to build bridges of peace.

And speaking of bridges, in conclusion, we cannot
forget that the pseudo-culture of disintegration has led to
the destruction of the Mostar bridge, which was a unique
testimony to the dialogue of culture among civilizations. In
this context, the reconstruction of the bridge is emblematic
of the rebirth of the city of Mostar, a development that
should rightly spur efforts in other areas of the city and of
the country of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

