Mr. Sen (India): As this is the first statement I
am making in the Security Council this month, I wish
to take this opportunity to warmly felicitate you,
Mr. President, on your dedicated and talented
stewardship of the Council. I would also like to
sincerely congratulate you and the members of your
team on your effective guidance of the work of the
Council. Let me also thank the Chairmen of the three
Security Council Committees established pursuant,
respectively, to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001)
and 1540 (2004).

Earlier this month, terrorists struck for a second
time in Bali, Indonesia, exacting a terrible toll on
innocent civilians. The victims were unconnected with
any ideology, policy or programme directed against
terrorists, but nonetheless fell to those very forces. Our
thoughts go out to them and to their families. Such
incidents reinforce awareness of the absolute necessity
for countries to work together to root out the scourge
of terrorism. India is determined to continue to
effectively contribute to that effort.

Terrorism has become a global phenomenon to
which no country or society can remain totally immune
or indifferent. The Prime Minister of India recently
stated that

"The end of the cold war, increasing global
interdependence and the trans-border nature of
many threats have made strategic concepts
developed in a bipolar world somewhat
irrelevant.

"While the international community has
made some progress in evolving a rule-based
order for managing the economic and commercial
dimensions of globalization, the absence of an
effective, rule-based order is acutely felt in
addressing contemporary security threats, such as
terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction."

The United Nations is uniquely placed to provide
the multilateral platform necessary for real global
cooperation and coordination in our common fight
against terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction. For the same reason, the actions of
the Security Council, alone - no matter how
effective - cannot provide a sufficient response to the
global security threats we face today.

The 2005 World Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/1) contained a clear and
unqualified condemnation by all Governments of
terrorism. Inter alia, it reiterated its call to States to
refrain from organizing, financing, encouraging,
providing training for or otherwise supporting terrorist
activities and to take appropriate measures to ensure
that their territories are not used for such activities. It
also stressed the need to make every effort to reach an
agreement on and conclude a comprehensive
convention on international terrorism during the
sixtieth session of the General Assembly.

India initiated a draft comprehensive convention
on international terrorism at the fifty-first General
Assembly session. We believe that draft supplements
the 13 sectoral conventions on terrorism and provides a
comprehensive legal framework upon which States can
base their cooperation for extradition and mutual
judicial assistance in connection with terrorist crimes.
However, it has thus far been almost a decade in the
making. Every effort has been made to narrow the
existing differences and to address the issue of
reconciling the legal regime under the draft convention
with international humanitarian law. In situations
where international humanitarian law applies, it is
important that the legal balance not be altered. In the
current climate, with increasing acts of terrorism, we
believe that all States should work expeditiously
towards the adoption of the draft convention early in
the sixtieth session, as proposed by the President of the
General Assembly. We remain convinced that such a
convention would also greatly facilitate the work of the
Security Council in the area of counter-terrorism.

The people of India have faced the scourge of
cross-border terrorism for well over two decades. We
have suffered its consequences but have also, over
time, accumulated the expertise and experience to deal
with this menace through prevention, interdiction and
deterrence. Our experience has addressed the unique
forms and techniques utilized by terrorists in our
region to attain their objectives. Unfortunately, we
have also seen the increasing use of such methods in
other parts of the world. These include the use of
informal banking channels and the movement of people
and arms, facilitated by the unholy nexus of drug and
human traffickers and terrorists.

The relevant Indian departments and specialized
agencies have developed considerable expertise in
tackling such problems as terrorist financing,
alternative currency transfer systems, money
laundering and illegal arms trafficking. They have also
acquired a sound knowledge of customs law,
extradition law, immigration law, financial law, the
drafting of legislation, and border patrol, police and
law enforcement issues. We have bilaterally shared our
experience, even with some permanent members of the
Council, on tackling the ramifications of Hawala. We
would be happy to share our expertise with countries
that require capacity-building in such areas.

We note that the third report of the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team established
pursuant to resolution 1526 (2004) (S/2005/572),
issued last month, warned that with Al-Qaida's
continuing evolution, the threat of significant attack
remains real. It also acknowledged that the various
sanctions against Al-Qaida and the Taliban have not
achieved their full potential. It is clear that the Council
will need to continually adapt its existing measures to
match the ability of those organizations and of their
associates to find a way around the efforts of the
international community to tackle them. Containment
measures have to keep abreast of methods that mutate.

We would also like to caution against any casual
moves towards reconciliation with elements of the
Taliban. We continue to maintain that individuals on
the Taliban list must remain there with their assets
frozen, unable to rejoin Afghan society. They must not
be delisted unless they give up their former affiliations
and are made accountable, through due process, for
past actions against their countrymen.

The Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) must continue its
work to ensure the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction. Such an effort must remain equally
vigilant against the proliferation of such weapons by
both States and non-State actors. At the same time, it
should act against both the recipients and the sources
of proliferation. Nor can non-proliferation be selective.
Turning a blind eye to supposed allies and targeting
supposed adversaries can only undermine resolution
1540 (2004). Here, I would like to thank the Permanent
Representative of France for his reference to India's
report to the 1540 Committee.

In conclusion, the working group established
under resolution 1566 (2004) has the unique
opportunity to shape the future direction of the United
Nations effort against terrorism. We wish to commend
the Philippines for chairing the working group and for
its contribution to the work of the Council. My
delegation has made certain suggestions to the Chair of
the working group on the implementation of resolution
1566 (2004). We are hopeful that the working group
will expeditiously move forward and advance the
cooperation on counter-terrorism identified in that
resolution.

