Mr. Niang: I would like at the outset to congratulate
Germany and France on their joint presidency of the
Security Council.

In January, we urged the Security Council to take
action and make progress on the road to achieving
the two-State solution and the full realization of
the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people (see S/PV.8449). This call has now become a matter of
utmost urgency as we face the expressed intention by
Israel to make the occupation irreversible and annex
parts of the West Bank territory.

Extendinglsraelilaws andsovereigntyonsettlements
in the West Bank is a flagrant violation of international
law and, if followed through, would thwart the chances
of reaching a peaceful solution. These declarations
must be condemned by the international community
and require urgent action in line with international law
and the relevant resolutions, as well as the international
community's long-unfulfilled responsibilities towards
the Palestine question. If these worrying trends are left
unchallenged, they will contribute to the entrenchment
of the occupation, eroding the commitment to a two-
State solution, with Israel and Palestine living side by
side in peace and security within the pre-1967 borders
and with a sovereign and independent State of Palestine,
with East Jerusalem as its capital.

The Committee was encouraged to note, during its
various activities and, most recently, in its meetings
with European Union and Belgian officials and
parliamentarians during the Committee delegation
visit to Brussels in March, that a solution based on
these long-standing parameters continues to enjoy the
overwhelming support of the international community.

Recently, steps have been taken to undermine the
permanent settlement of the conflict by unilaterally
dismantling the agreed building blocks of the final
status issues, including settlement construction, the
right of return of Palestine refugees and the status of
Jerusalem, among others. Moreover, the obligation
under international humanitarian law to protect the
Palestinian population is also being disregarded by the
occupying Power, including in Gaza. Regrettably, on
29 January, the mandate of the Temporary International
Presence in Hebron was not renewed and international
monitors left the city, removing an essential element of
protection for the local population.

Israeli settlement planning and construction and
the demolition and confiscation of Palestinian property,
including in East Jerusalem, increasingly accompanied
by settler-related violence, are continuing unabated and
are illegal and in violation of resolution 2334 (2016),
inter alia. As noted by the Secretary-General in his
latest written report of 20 March (S/2019/251), the
advancement, approval or tender of more than 3,000
units in the occupied West Bank is the largest batch
since May 2018. The Committee welcomes the written
reports of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of the resolution and looks forward to future reports in
this format.

Paragraph 5 of resolution 2334 (2016) calls on
Member States to apply the principle of differentiation
in all their relevant dealings between the territory of the
State of Israel and the occupied Palestinian territory.
Regrettably, some private companies continue to
disregard such provisions. It goes without saying that
third-party States must uphold their obligations under
international law. It is only by respecting international
law that we can ensure accountability and bring 52
years of illegal occupation to an end.

The Committee welcomes the final report of the
independent international commission of inquiry
established by the Human Rights Council to investigate
the demonstrations held between 30 March and
31 December 2018 (A/HRC/40/74), to identify those
responsible for violations of international human
rights and international humanitarian law. We call
on Member States to implement the Commission's
recommendations, to promote compliance with human
rights obligations and to ensure respect for international
humanitarian law in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including an investigation into possible war crimes and,
if appropriate, the prosecution of suspected perpetrators
of international crimes.

Meanwhile, the situation in Gaza remains volatile
and demonstrations at the fence with Israel are ongoing.
On 30 March, the first anniversary of the Great
March of Return, 50,000 protestors gathered. Four
Palestinians were killed and 207 injured on that day
alone. An economy captive and dependent on Israel,
de-development and high levels of unemployment
among frustrated youth, especially in Gaza, where an
environmental disaster is looming, can only lead to
disaster. The Committee reiterates its call on Israel to
lift the 12-year illegal blockade that is creating dire
humanitarian conditions in the Strip.

In the meantime, the Committee reiterates its call
for the continuation of funding for the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East so that it can reliably and predictably
continue to deliver crucial services in health, education,
protection and social services until the time when the
right of return of Palestine refugees is addressed in
final negotiations.

Turning now to the newly formed Government of
the State of Palestine, the Committee hopes that this
will constitute a step towards reconciliation among
all political players to safeguard the interests of the
Palestinian people and advance the realization of their
legitimate national aspirations.

In closing, the Committee would like to call on all
members of the Council and all supporters of the rights
of the Palestinian people - also represented around
this table - to take bold initiatives and move closer
to the establishment of a sovereign and independent
Palestinian State, based on its territorial contiguity,
which is the only recipe for a peaceful, stable and just
solution for the Palestinian people.

