Ms. Mulvein (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank the Prosecutor for her latest report on Libya and
for her briefing today.

The United Kingdom remains deeply concerned
about the ongoing conflict in Libya. The situation
remains fragile and the fighting has continued. While
we welcome the progress that has been made in the
United Nations-led Libyan political dialogue, the
United Kingdom condemns those on both sides who
continue to use violence to attempt to achieve their
political goals. Both sides in Libya need to demonstrate
control over their armed forces in order to implement
the ceasefire needed.

There can be no military solution to the current
crisis in Libya. We urge those taking part in the United
Nations talks to reach agreement on a national unity
Government and a ceasefire as quickly as possible. We
reiterate our support for resolutions 2213 (2015) and
2214 (2015) and the strong resolution on Libya that was
adopted by consensus at the United Nations Human
Rights Council on 27 March (A/HRC/RES/28/30).

The United Kingdom strongly shares the
Prosecutor's concerns about grave crimes committed
by armed groups and militias in Libya. As highlighted
in the Prosecutor's briefing, the ongoing violence and
instability have allowed extremists, including those
purportedly claiming allegiance to the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant, to emerge. We strongly condemn
their savage and cowardly attacks.

The United Kingdom is particularly concerned
by reports that indiscriminate gunfire, artillery
and air strikes have killed and injured civilians and
damaged civilian infrastructure, including schools and
hospitals. Civilians on both sides of the conflict have
been deliberately intimidated and targeted, including
the forcibly displaced Tawergha tribe. Human rights
defenders, social activists, journalists and the judiciary
have all been intimidated, abducted or murdered. We
support the Prosecutor's call to all parties in the conflict
to refrain from targeting civilians or civilian objects.
We join the Prosecutor in urging all parties to refrain
from committing atrocities and to take active measures
to prevent the commission of such crimes.

The treatment of detainees in Libya also remains
deeply concerning. In April 2014, the United Nations
Special Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) reported that
10,000 people were being held in detention. UNSMIL
cited ongoing reports of torture and deaths in custody,
with perpetrators including judicial police and militia
groups. Reports indicate that detentions without
trial and arbitrary arrests incresed as the political
and security crisis worsened in 2014. In some areas,
including Derna and Benghazi, and particularly
when dealing with cases concerning conflict-related
detainees, judges, prosecutors and judicial police were
intimidated, detained or assassinated. We call on the
Libyan authorities to ensure due process and fair trial
rights for all detainees.

We welcome the fact that the Prosecutor and her
Office continue to receive cooperation from the Libyan
Prosecutor-General's Office. The United Kingdom
wishes to underline the importance of continuing
judicial cooperation between the Office of the
Prosecutor and the Libyan authorities in order to tackle
impunity for atrocities. We thank the Prosecutor for her
briefing on the cases against SaifAl-Islam Al-Qadhafi
and Abdallah Al-Senassi. We note that her Office will
continue to monitor the situation in Libya and its impact
upon the domestic proceedings against Mr. Al-Senussi.

With regard to the case against Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi, the United Kingdom recalls that in March
the Council adopted resolution 2213 (2015), which
reiterates that Libya is obliged to cooperate fully
with, and provide any necessary assistance to, the
ICC and the Prosecutor. We note the decision of the
ICC Pre-Trial Chamber of 10 December 2014, which
found that Libya had failed to comply with requests
for cooperation by the ICC, including the request to
surrender Mr. Al-Qadhafi. The United Kingdom calls
on Libya to surrender Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi to
the ICC and to consult with the Court to address any
problems that might impede his transfer to The Hague.

The United Kingdom urges the Libyan Government
to cooperate fully with the ICC as part of efforts
to combat impunity for the crimes that have been
committed and continue to be committed in Libya.
Libya's future should be built upon a firm foundation
that protects and promotes human rights for all. In order
to build sustainable peace, it is necessary to tackle
impunity for atrocities. Perpetrators of war crimes and
crimes against humanity must be held to account for
their actions. The Libyan people deserve to see justice.

