Mr. Schulz (Germany): First of all, we welcome
Ambassador Dian Triansyah Djani of Indonesia as
the new Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and
thank him for his very informative and comprehensive
the briefing.

The risk of non-State actors, particularly terrorists,
using weapons of mass destruction continues to be a
huge threat for global security. Resolution 1540 (2004)
therefore remains a central pillar of the multilateral
non-proliferation architecture, as an important tool
for preventing the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction to non-State actors. This is an issue that
needs our continued attention and cooperation.

Wewelcometheprogressmadeintheimplementation
ofresolution 1540 (2004) since its adoption, in 2004. As
we heard this morning, 182 countries have submitted
initial reports on the implementation of the resolution,
which is good news, but no reason for complacency.
To guarantee the full and effective implementation
of the resolution, it is of the utmost importance to
provide assistance to States requiring such support.
The process of matching requests for such assistance
with offers from States or international, regional or
subregional organizations remains absolutely vital and
needs constant updating and refining. We particularly
welcome the intensified cooperation of the Committee
and the Group of Experts with the regional centres of
the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs,
as well as with such international organizations as the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons,
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the
World Customs Organization and the International
Atomic Energy Agency. We appreciate the support
those entities can offer in the implementation process.

We also welcome the speedy adoption of this
year's programme of work and support the goals of the
Indonesian Chair for the upcoming 2021 comprehensive
review, especially as regards building and strengthening
partnerships. We look forward to working closely with
the Committee and the Group of Experts to that end.

I would like to make one last point, concerning the
administrative status of the members of the Group of
Experts. The work of the Group of Experts is obviously
crucial to the success of the Committee's work, and we
are concerned about the financial difficulties that have
been reported. We urge that the financial difficulties
in paying the experts be solved as quickly as possible.

Before I conclude, I would like to say a few more
words on the Wiesbaden process, which was mentioned
by the Chair in his briefing. Since 2012, Germany
has been active in promoting intensified cooperation
between States and industry through the biannual
global Wiesbaden conferences. Those conferences
have proved to be very fruitful in providing a platform
for exchange among regulators, industry, international
organizations and academia. Since 2016, those global
conferences have been complemented by regional
Wiesbaden conferences, which so far have taken place
in South Korea, Mexico and India, usefully bringing
in regional specificities. This year, we are planning to
hold another regional conference, in southern Africa.

The Wiesbaden process helps to raise awareness and
promotes exchanges of information, effective practices
and fosters private sector engagement, which is vital to
successful non-proliferation in a globalized world. The
concerns, feedback and concrete proposals of industry
representatives, as well as supporting industry-industry
cooperation, have proven very helpful in identifying
measures to prevent non-State actors from obtaining or
using weapons of mass destruction.

