Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I have the honour to
present the report of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), in accordance with
paragraph 18 (h) of that resolution. The present report
covers the period from 13 December 2013 to 19 March
2014, during which time the Committee held two
informal meetings and one informal informal meeting,
and conducted additional work using the no-objection
procedure envisaged in paragraph 15 of the guidelines
for the conduct of the Committee's work.

The Committee presented its annual report to the
President of the Council on 27 December last year. The
annual report provides a useful snapshot of the range
of activities pursued by the Committee in accordance
with its mandate over that year.I would particularly
like to highlight the Committee's communications
with Member States and international organizations on
matters of implementation and compliance. Providing
guidance to Member States that request assistance with
their implementation of the relevant provisions of the
key resolutions is obviously a critical dimension of
the Committee's programme of work. I encourage all
Member States to take us up on our offer.

Another aspect of our work, highlighted in the
2013 annual report, is the reports from Member
States themselves of action they have taken to enforce
the sanctions measures. Some of the cases related
to violations of national implementation measures
investigated by local enforcement authorities; for
others, the Member State concerned invited the Panel of
Experts to investigate the incident, in particular those
that appeared to be a breach by Iran of its obligations
under the resolutions. I cannot overstate the importance
to the Committee's work of these incident reports and
the willingness of Member States to invite the Panel
of Experts to participate in the investigation of such
incidents.

The Committee twice reached out to Iran last year
in relation to incidents investigated by the Panel of
Experts. We wrote on 12 April 2013 in relation to the
Panel's unanimous conclusion that Iran's launches of
the Shahab-l and Shahab-3 missiles during the Great
Prophet VII exercises contravened paragraph 9 of
resolution 1929 (2010), and on 21 May 2013 in relation
to the Panel's conclusion that an intercepted arms
shipment in Yemen was at the very least a probable
violation by Iran of paragraph 5 of resolution 1747
(2007). Iran has still not replied, and the Committee
continues to call on Iran to do so.

Although the Committee remains mindful of
ongoing talks between the P5+1 and Iran following the
joint plan of action agreed in Geneva on 24 November
2013, the work of both the Committee and the Panel of
Experts remains unchanged for 2014. As I mentioned
during my last report in December 2013 (see S/PV.7082),
the Security Council measures imposed by resolutions
1737 (2006), 1747 (2007), 1803 (2008) and 1929 (2010)
remain in effect, and Member States continue to have
an obligation to implement them duly.

The Committee adopted its programme of work for
the period 1 January to 30 June 2014 on 24 January and
has already been actively engaged with Member States.

The Committee received multiple communications
from several Member States, updating the Committee
on the outcome of enforcement actions they had taken.
One Member State reported on the steps it had taken to
prevent multiple attempts in 2011 and 2012 by Iran to
procure carbon fibre, suspected of being in violation of
relevant Security Council resolutions. Another Member
State informed the Committee of the confirmation of
the judgement against a person found guilty ofviolating
its laws implementing the Council's sanctions on Iran.
The Committee continued to consider its response to
the report by the Panel of Experts, which had concluded
that Iran's attempted procurement of carbon fibre

in December 2012 - those goods were intercepted
and seized by a Member State - contravened the
resolutions.

The Permanent Representative of a Member State,
named in media reports as having contracted to procure
arms from Iran, in contravention of paragraph 5 of
resolution 1747 (2007) , called on me in my capacity
as Chair of the Committee to deny the reports. The
Permanent Mission also sent a note verbale to the
Committee in similar terms. The Panel of Experts is
separately engaging with the Member State concerned
on those reports.

During the reporting period, the Committee
responded to requests for guidance from Member States
covering a range of issues, ranging from notification
requirements and engagement with the originating
State of seized items to the supply of target-shooting
ammunition to Iran for sport shooting purposes, and
updated lists of designated individuals, entities and
goods to which the sanctions apply. The Committee
is also working with an international organization on
clarifying whether a particular proposal for technical
assistance to Iran is compatible with the sanctions
regime.

The Committee has also engaged with a number
of Member States over the past three months on the
implementation of the targeted financial sanctions
regime. The Committee provided additional identifying
information of a listed individual from publicly available
sources, including photographs, to assist a Member
State in clarifying a possible match. The Committee
similarly responded to another State's request for
assistance in determining whether particular entities
were included in the Committee's consolidated list.

The Committee itself received assistance from a
Member State, which transmitted to us a list of persons
who had travelled through the country with names similar
to those of listed individuals and provided additional
identifying information for those possible matches
that was missing from the Committee's consolidated
list, such as birth dates and passport numbers. That
data will allow the Committee to determine whether
any of the individuals were indeed listed individuals
travelling in contravention of the travel ban and, in that
case, to strengthen the effectiveness of both the ban
and targeted financial sanctions by including the new
identifying data in the consolidated list.

As we are approaching the end of the current
mandate of the Panel of Experts and the submission of
its final report in May, I thought it would be timely to
inform the Council of the outcome of the Committee's
deliberations on the Panel's recommendations to the
Committee from its report of May 2013.

The Panel's first recommendation was to designate
an entity the Panel found to be in violation of paragraph
12 of resolution 1929 (2010) for procuring valves for
use in the Arak heavy water reactor. The Committee
stands ready to consider such a designation if and when
a Member State puts the designation to the Committee,
as required by the Committee's guidelines.

Secondly, the Panel recommended that the
Committee encourage States to be alert to attempted
procurement of any items destined for an end use
prohibited by the resolutions. That is a reference to the
fact that the obligation to prevent the supply to Iran
of all items that could contribute to Iran's prohibited
nuclear and missile-related activities applies not only to
items included in the lists named in the resolutions and
updated by the Committee, but to any further items if
the Member State determines that they could contribute
to those prohibited activities. The Committee continues
to discuss whether some form of written guidance
for Member States on that obligation is necessary. In
the meantime, we encourage any Member State with
questions concerning the scope of the obligation to
contact the Committee.

The Panel's third recommendation related to vessels
under the control of the Irano Hind Shipping Company,
which is a designated entity under sanctions. The
company was dissolved by its joint venture partners in
the first part of 2013, preventing the Committee from
taking up the recommendation.

Fourthly, the Panel recommended that the
Committee consider providing guidance to States on
how to implement aspects of the targeted financial
sanctions that extend the application of the measures
to agents and affiliates of designated persons and
entities. Noting that the language identified in the
recommendation is used in targeted financial sanctions
under other Council resolutions, the Committee has
been reluctant to consider the question unilaterally.
However, we have begun a process of consultation with
other relevant sanctions committees to consider the
issue collectively.

The Panel's fifth recommendation was for the
Committee to provide guidance on the modalities
surrounding a State's inspection of cargoes and possible
seizing of goods suspected to be in contravention
of the resolutions, including such matters as timing
and content of reports to the Committee and inviting
inspection by the Panel. The Committee is developing
text to include in the Committee's Fact Sheet and other
relevant Committee documents.

Finally, the Panel recommended that the Committee
address discrepancies in the list where designated
individuals no longer hold the positions identified
in those designations. The Committee is taking that
forward as part of the comprehensive review of the
Committee's list mentioned in part 1 ofthe Committee's
work programme.

Just before concluding, I would like to turn now to
conditional exceptions to the ban on supplying nuclear-
related items to Iran, notably in relation to items for light
water reactors, which the Council considers to be less
proliferation-sensitive than heavy water reactors. The
Committee must be notified of supplies to Iran of items
falling under the exception and, during the reporting
period, the Committee received one such notification
by a Member State concerning the delivery of items for
reactor unit 1 of the Bushehr nuclear power plant.

With regard to the obligation of Member States
to freeze assets on their territory that are owned or
controlled by a person or entity listed by the Council
or the Committee and to prevent any assets being made
available to such persons or entities, the Committee
received one notification from a Member State pursuant
to paragraph 15 ofresolution 1737 (2006) and paragraph
4 of resolution 1747 (2007), which allow for payments
owed by a listed person or entity under a contract
entered into prior to the listing to be made from that
person or entity's frozen funds, subject to notification
to the Committee.

I should note, in concluding, that a slightly more
detailed version of this report will be available online.
I might also note that we will continue to make efforts
to try to "de-dry" these reports in the future, but there
are certain legal obligations according to which the
Committee is required to transmit certain information
to the public in an ordinary meeting of the Security
Council.

