Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
would like to welcome President Jose Ramos-Horta to
the Council. The United States deeply appreciates his
passionate advocacy of human rights and democracy
around the world and thanks him for his presence and
assessments on the progress Timor-Leste has made.

We also wish to congratulate Timor-Leste on its
tenth anniversary of independence. Timor-Leste has
taken its rightful place on the global stage, becoming a
contributor to United Nations peacekeeping missions
and founding and chairing the Group of Seven Plus of
post-conflict countries.

I thank Special Representative Haq for today's
briefing. Her dedicated leadership and continued
commitment to solidifying peace in Timor-Leste are
much appreciated. The United Nations and the
international community as a whole have worked
together since the independence of Timor-Leste and
will continue to partner with that young democracy to
help it develop and prosper.

Today we have the opportunity to reflect on the
advances made in sustaining the stability of Timor-
Leste and the country's remaining needs. We must also
focus on the progress of the planned withdrawal of the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) and begin to consider post-UNMIT and
United Nations engagement in Timor-Leste.

I would like to address five issues. First, the
United States welcomes the transfer of primary
policing responsibilities from UNMIT to the Policia
Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL). The contribution of
all parties to maintaining stability throughout the
upcoming election period in Timor-Leste will be
critical, and that transfer is a key step in that process.
We welcome the progress to professionalize and
strengthen the PNTL so that it can carry out its full
security responsibilities and command the role UNMIT
has played. We note that challenges remain and we
encourage the Government of Timor-Leste to define
more clearly the respective responsibilities of the
PNTL and the Timorese defence forces, especially as
we near elections.

As Timor-Leste continues to develop its own
national security institutions, clearly defined
authorities, accountability and impartiality will be
crucial to increasing stability. The United States is
committed to supporting the continuing development
of the military and police forces, and we have recently
increased our bilateral support in that area. Our efforts
to advance community policing and sharpen the
investigative skills of police and prosecutors are two
examples of that commitment.

Secondly, we commend the preparations of the
Government of Timor-Leste for the upcoming
elections, and praise the efforts of the United Nations
and other international partners in supporting the
electoral process. The conduct of peaceful, free and
fair elections will be a critical milestone in Timor-
Leste's history. The success of the electoral process
will indicate a further solidification of peace and
security throughout the country and signal continued
progress towards a peaceful and prosperous future.

We continue to urge all political parties to respect
the outcome of the democratic process and to conduct
political activities peacefully. We welcome the
commitments the political leaders have made so far to
respecting a peaceful democratic process.

Thirdly, the development of competent and strong
rule of law and governance institutions is critical to the
country's long-term success. We are encouraged by the
Government's progress in promoting anti-corruption
and transparency initiatives, and underscore the
importance of strengthening those institutions. We also
encourage the resolution of outstanding truth and
reconciliation issues from the period 1975-1999,
including the establishment of a memory institute or
other institutional mechanism. We also hope that the
Serious Crimes Investigation Team will be able to
complete its important work within its mandate. We
urge the Timor-Leste authorities to pursue full and
credible accountability for all crimes and abuses,
including, among others, those arising from the 2006
crisis, in order to deliver justice and build trust in the
institutions of justice.

Fourthly, I want to recognize the truly impressive
level of collaboration that has taken place between
UNMIT and the Government of Timor-Leste in
developing a transition plan for UNMIT's withdrawal
by the end of 2012. We encourage both parties to
continue to focus their work on transition planning,
even as the electoral cycle begins. We encourage
UNMIT and the Government of Timor-Leste to
continue to engage international partners to ensure that
any capability gaps are quickly identified and filled.

Finally, with UNMIT'S expected withdrawal
approaching, we must think about the future
engagement of the United Nations and the Security
Council in Timor-Leste. Discussions on the role of the
United Nations following UNMIT's departure will
need to include the Government of Timor-Leste and the
international community. We strongly believe that the
elections themselves should not be an exit strategy, but
rather that UNMIT's transition should be determined
by the progress of events on the ground. We believe
that continued United Nations engagement could play a
constructive role in addressing issues related to
security, human rights, justice, economic development,
governance and accountability.

In closing, the United States would like to once
again commend the leadership and dedication of
Special Representative Haq, the peacekeepers of
UNMIT for their work and contributions, the
international community for its multilateral and
bilateral support to Timor-Leste, and the Timorese
themselves for their continued dedication to peace and
security in Timor-Leste.

