I thank Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda for her written report and her very enlightening briefing to the Security Council. Today I would like to stress three points: the need to bring justice to the victims of the most heinous crimes in order to achieve peace in Libya; the critical cooperation of all stakeholders, without which the International Criminal Court (ICC) cannot implement its mandate; and, finally, Belgium's strong and unwavering support for the Court and its staff. First of all, Belgium congratulates the Libyan parties on the signing of a ceasefire agreement on 23 October under the auspices of the United Nations. Yesterday's holding, in Tunis, of the first face-to-face meeting of the Libyan political dialogue forum, with a view to reaching a lasting political solution, is an additional important step. Bringing justice to the victims of the most serious crimes committed, by any party, is undoubtedly critical to achieving peace and stability in Libya. In that context, the International Criminal Court can play an important role by continuing to support the efforts of national authorities in that regard. In that connection, Belgium notes with great satisfaction that the Office of the Prosecutor has made considerable progress in its investigations and that it continues its active collaboration with the Libyan authorities, in particular with a view to supporting cases at the national level concerning allegations of crimes against refugees and migrants. I would like to reiterate how much the ICC depends on the cooperation of all relevant actors, in general, and States, in particular, to carry out its mandate, pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011). In that respect, Belgium welcomes the efforts made by the relevant Libyan authorities. In particular, they have made it possible to organize two field missions by the Office of the Prosecutor and to collect and preserve evidence with a view to future investigations. My country strongly encourages those who have made a positive contribution to peace and reconciliation in Libya to cooperate with the Court. I am thinking in particular of the steps that could be taken to facilitate access to all Libyan territory and the execution of the Court's outstanding arrest warrants by arresting the fugitives and turning them over to the ICC. This last point also concerns third States where some of these suspects have been located, such as Egypt. Cooperation with the Court also involves such organizations as the European Police Office and the United Nations. The strengthening of working relations between the Office of the Prosecutor and the United Nations Support Mission in Libya is to be welcomed. However, it is unacceptable that the Security Council has still not met the expenses related to the referral of cases to the Court as provided for under article 115 (b) of the Rome Statute. It is anomalous to place the financial burden of these investigations solely on the States parties, particularly at a time when additional resources are needed to advance the Office's investigations in Libya. In conclusion, allow me to once again reiterate Belgium's unwavering support for the ICC as an independent and impartial judicial institution. My country deplores the application of sanctions against the Court, and in particular against its Prosecutor and the members of her Office, as well as the continued threats by United States authorities. These attacks hinder the proper functioning of the Court, undermine its integrity and threaten its independence. Attacking the International Criminal Court is an attack on our core values and interests. This is unacceptable. Together with its partners, Belgium stands ready to respond and assist the Court in countering the effects of these measures in a concrete and practical way, and we call once again on the United States to reverse these measures.
