The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Botswana.

Five years ago, a devastating famine and a destructive
civil war catapulted Somalia to the front pages of the world
news media and the forefront of the conscience of the
international community. The gruesome pictures that
appeared on our television screens will for ever remain
indelible in our minds. They troubled the consciences of all
men and women of goodwill. The United Nations had to
intervene in 1992 in the face of this humanitarian
catastrophe. When the United Nations Operation in Somalia
(UNOSOM. II) withdrew exactly a year ago this month, it
had succeeded in rescuing the people of Somalia from
hunger and starvation. In other words, UNOSOM. II had
managed to attain the humanitarian goals for which it was
initially established. It was only the attempts to restore
political sanity in the country that were less successful and
contributed in the end to the withdrawal of the mission in
1995.

It is sad indeed that, just one year after the departure
of UNOSOM. II, a new humanitarian crisis is emerging in
Somalia in areas that had shown significant improvement
in the past. Malnutrition and disease have resurfaced. In
his recent report to the sixty-third ordinary session of the
Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU), the Secretary-General of that Organization stated:

"the food situation throughout the country is very
grave, with a high degree of starvation and
malnutrition being observed".

It is even more disheartening that most of the malnutrition
cases stem not from a lack of food in the country, but

from the lack of access to food and feeding centres.

Sadly, the international humanitarian organizations
are being hindered from reaching those parts of the
population that are in desperate need of assistance.
Equally, it is most unfortunate that, after half a decade,
the Somali faction leaders have not realized the futility of
their quest to resolve their differences through the barrel
of the gun. The insufferable deaths, the massive
destruction and the untold human suffering they have
visited upon their people are indefensible. It is time that
the Somali clan-based faction leaders placed the interests
of the country and the long-suffering people of Somalia
above their personal and political ambitions. They should
engage in dialogue aimed at finding a peaceful settlement
to their political differences, as do all good leaders who
have the interests of their country and people at heart.

Somalia, whether we like it or not, is a failed State.
The state structures disintegrated and collapsed in 1991
with the demise of President Mohamed Siad Barre's
regime. The country has neither a recognized Government
nor a legitimate central authority. After noting that the
various factions engaged in deliberate and arbitrary
detentions and killings of clan and political opponents, as
well as noting the absence of legal structures to provide
redress for human rights abuses and other crimes, the
November 1995 report of Amnesty International
continues:

"taking hostage UN and relief agency staff and other
civilians, rape, torture and cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment of prisoners, including
punishment of amputation and flogging, summary
executions, and forced displacement of minority
communities are evident everywhere".

 

This is not encouraging at all, to say the least. It is
clear that anarchy and lawlessness reign supreme in the
country. Yet the existence of the people of Somalia is a
reality that we cannot deny. We cannot just forget the
people of Somalia. They are an integral part of our
common human existence. We can neither wish them away
nor consciously leave them to their own wretched devices
to suffer and die in total abandonment. The United Nations,
this enshrinement of our collective desire for the
establishment of an international political environment
characterized by peace and understanding within and among
nations, cannot afford to be a passive observer of the
unfortunate drama that daily mars the lives of the Somalis.

True to their calling, the United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund, the World
Health Organization, the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization, the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the World
Food Programme and other United Nations agencies and
programmes have made the presence of the United Nations
felt in a very dangerous environment. The presence of
international relief agencies and other non-governmental
organizations in Somalia bears testimony to the
determination of the international community to resist the
destruction of a part of the human race.

While it is appreciated that the United Nations will
continue to play a crucial role in the humanitarian field, it
must be made clear to the Somali leaders that humanitarian
assistance cannot be sustained in a conflict situation, nor
can it be substituted for a permanent political solution. It is
imperative that the Somali faction leaders cooperate fully
with these agencies and ensure the safety of their personnel
as they undertake their noble tasks, including assisting the
Somalis to eliminate the reported outbreaks of cholera in
Mogadishu and the central regions before they assume
epidemic proportions.

The restoration of peace and a united Somali State is
the primary responsibility of the leaders and people of
Somalia. They must understand that it is not the wish of the
international community to turn Somalia into a Trust
Territory. The search for a solution to the political crisis in
the country lies squarely in the hands of the faction leaders.
The international community can only help them to help
themselves. It is not in the interests of anybody to witness
the self-destruction of Somalia. There is an urgent need for
coordinated efforts aimed at encouraging a comprehensive
and negotiated political settlement in that war-torn country.

The problem with the Somali faction leaders is that
they all want peace - but on their own terms. The big
question, therefore, is whether a solution to the Somali
crisis is still possible. I wish one could say with certainty
that it is. The OAU is trying its hand in this crisis and it
must enjoy the support of the United Nations. The United
Nations itself has a Political Office in Nairobi to monitor
the situation in Somalia. There is clearly an absolute need
to engage all the faction leaders in a constructive dialogue
leading to the convening of a national conference. We
support all the helpful proposals made by our colleagues
who have already spoken. Surely there must be a solution
somewhere among Farah Aidid, Atto, Ali Mahdi and the
leadership of the break-away "Somaliland Republic". The
international community cannot simply run out of ideas in
a situation which threatens yet another humanitarian crisis
of unimaginable proportions.

I resume my function as President of the Council.
The next speaker is the representative of Tunisia. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make

his statement.

