Mr. Gatan (Philippines): At the outset, the
Philippines wishes to thank Japan, which holds the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
February 2009, for convening this open debate on
Timor-Leste, and commends it for taking the lead on
Timor-Leste in the Council. We welcome the presence
here today of President Jose Ramos-Horta and thank
him for his important statement this morning. We also
thank the Secretary-General for presenting the report
on the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-
Leste (UNMIT) (S/2009/72).

The Philippines also associates itself with the
statement that will be delivered by the representative of
Thailand on behalf of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN).

The Philippines is encouraged by the positive
developments that have continued to take place in
Timor-Leste since the last Security Council meeting on
the subject in August 2008. The leaders and the people
of Timor-Leste should be commended for overcoming
the past crises and for persevering in their efforts to
achieve long-term peace, stability and development.
The United Nations and the international community,
particularly the donors and regional partners, must
continue to fully support Timor-Leste in staying on
course on its painful path of nation-building.

The Philippines submits that the international
community must give its priority attention to three key
areas: security, socio-economic development and
judicial reform.

The Philippines recognizes the important role that
UNMIT plays in promoting peace and stability in
Timor-Leste. The international community should
support UNMIT's ongoing efforts to facilitate the
gradual resumption of policing responsibilities by the
National Police Force of Timor-Leste (PNTL), as well
as other functions, such as the further training,
mentoring and institutional development of the PNTL,
interim law enforcement and public security, until the
PNTL is fully reconstituted. In this regard, the
Philippines supports the extension of the mandate of
UNMIT for a period of 12 months at its current
composition and strength.

The Philippines continues to stress the
importance of sustained international community
support for the socio-economic development of Timor-
Leste. For its part, the Philippines is pleased to inform
the Council that 99 Timorese students arrived in the
Philippines on 13 January 2009 to take up various
courses at Philippine colleges and universities. These
students represent the initial batch of Timorese
Government scholars, and more are expected to arrive
in 2009 and succeeding years. The Philippines also
wishes to inform the Council that the Philippine
Secretary of Agriculture will lead an investment
mission to Timor-Leste on 22 February 2009 to explore
areas related to food security in which the Philippines
could provide assistance.

The Philippines supports efforts on judicial
reform, especially in building capacity and
strengthening the judicial system, thereby ensuring in
the long run an independent judiciary manned by
competent judges and personnel. No one can argue that
an independent judiciary is the last bulwark of
democracy and the guardian of the rule of law. We are
pleased to note that the third post-graduate training
course for judges, prosecutors and public defenders,
organized by the Legal Training Centre supported by
the United Nations Development Programme, began on
29 July 2009. We hope that the international
community will continue to support such work to
increase Timorese ownership and to strengthen national
capacity judicial line functions.

In conclusion, we must be unceasing in our
support for Timor-Leste so that it continues to be one
of the best examples of a successful international
enterprise engineered through the combined cooperative
efforts of the United Nations, regional players and
partners.

