Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I thank Under-
Secretary-General Lowcock for his very detailed and
clear briefing today. It was very powerful to hear
through him the voices of the people of eastern Ghouta.

Russia called this meeting today to allow us to
present our understanding of the situation on the
ground and come up with ways of getting out of the
situation. We have heard very clearly from Under-
Secretary-General Lowcock today and from the
Secretary-General yesterday about the situation on the
ground (see S/PV.8185). This is hell on Earth; the scale
of the human suffering and destruction is unbearable.
The suffering of the Syrian people, while primarily the
responsibility of the Syrian regime, brings shame on all
of us in the Security Council.

Let us be very clear about the main cause of this
hell on Earth. It is the direct result of an escalation by
the Syrian regime of its aerial bombardment of civilian
areas, using cluster bombs and chemical weapons and
systematically killing hundreds of its own civilians.
As others in this Chamber have said today, these are
breaches of international humanitarian law and are war
crimes. The United Kingdom will be unrelenting in its
campaign to ensure accountability and justice for these
crimes using all mechanisms at our disposal.

We owe it to the people of eastern Ghouta to
highlight the utter devastation facing them and then
to take measures to stop it. According to the Syrian
American Medical Society, in the first 48 hours of this
week, 250 civilians were killed and 460 injured. Those
who survived these attacks have been further targeted
by the regime while trying to get help for their injuries.
There have been 22 separate attacks on 20 different
hospitals in the three days since Monday. We applaud
the incredible work of the brave doctors on the ground
who risk their own lives to save others. And like the
Netherlands, we salute the heroes of the White Helmets
who have demonstrated incredible bravery, courage
and resilience to save the lives of thousands of Syrians
on all sides of this conflict.

From the start of the conflict, the Al-Assad
regime has peddled the myth that all of those opposing
Al-Assad are terrorists. This is manifestly not the case.
The people of eastern Ghouta are not terrorists. Jabhat
Al-Nusra has only a small presence in eastern Ghouta;
its fighters number less than a quarter of l per cent
of the population of that area. Nothing can justify the
barbaric bombardment we have seen in recent days or
the blocking ofhumanitarian aid or the denial ofmedical
evacuations. We also condemn the mortar shelling
from eastern Ghouta of civilian areas of Damascus and
attacks against the Russian embassy in that city.

The Security Council has failed to uphold its
responsibilities in Syria. We all know why this is
the case, but we have all agreed that there can be no
military solution to the conflict - only a political one.
The actions of the Al-Assad regime in recent weeks and
the military escalation in an area guaranteed by Russia
and Iran as a de-escalation zone show cynical disregard
by the regime for every member of the Security Council
and for our resolutions. It is therefore vital that we all
send a clear and unified message in response.

The solution to the situation is not difficult. We need
to see an immediate cessation of hostilities, including
an immediate end to the aerial bombing of eastern
Ghouta. If everyone in this Chamber were to commit

unequivocally to this today, it could have an impact
on the ground. It could save the lives of thousands of
innocent men, women and children who are being killed
as we speak here in this Chamber today. We therefore
welcome the draft resolution put forward into blue by
you, Mr. President, and by the delegation of Sweden,
and we look forward to a vote later today.

In conclusion, yesterday we discussed the principles
of the United Nations Charter, which our predecessors
drafted in the name of the peoples of the world to help
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war
(see S/PV.8185). It is clear that we have fallen woefully
short of this aim. We have failed the people of eastern
Ghouta. But let us reverse this trend today. Let us
adopt the draft resolution and take the concrete actions
needed to ease the suffering in this zone of death
and destruction.

