Mr. Radomski (Poland): Poland aligns itself with
the statement to be delivered soon by the observer of
the European Union. I would like, however, to present a
few remarks from our national perspective.

I would first like to thank the French presidency
for giving us the opportunity to discuss the recent
developments in the field of the protection of civilians in
armed conflicts. Poland greatly values the contribution
of France to United Nations peacekeeping operations,
as well as France's engagement in the field of conflict
prevention. I would also like to reiterate my country's
support of the French initiative to limit the use of the
veto in cases involving mass atrocities. We perceive
that initiative as an important contribution to efforts to
protect civilians worldwide. We call upon all permanent
members of the Council to support that initiative.

As underlined in the excellent concept paper prepared
for this debate by France (S/2016/503, annex), the role
of the Security Council in the protection of civilians is
crucial and second only to the responsibility to protect
borne by States. We welcome the Council's recognition
of that obligation, confirmed by the introduction of a
protection of civilians clause in the mandates of ten out
of sixteen current peacekeeping missions. That is a first
step towards ensuring that the missions are equipped
with the tools needed to effectively protect the innocent
victims of armed conflicts.
The second step requires that more attention be
given to the protection of civilians in the process of the
drafting of Security Council resolutions. Peacekeeping
missions' mandates should be tailor-made, and the
resources allocated should match the challenges in the
field. Mandates should be reviewed whenever the need
arises, based on an assessment of the situation on the
ground. That requires close cooperation with the troop-
and police-contributing countries and the Secretariat,
as well as with the Special Committee of Peacekeeping
Operations in the phase of mandate implementation.

Another area that requires greater attention is the
peacekeepers' training process, which has to equip
the Blue Helmets with a clear vision of the mission's
priorities and the general aim of protecting the most
vulnerable. This is why Poland decided to sign the
Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians. We call
upon all troop- and police-contributing countries to
endorse it. We also call for strict implementation of the
zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse
committed by peacekeeping personnel.

We should also bear in mind that United Nations
peacekeepers do not act in a vacuum. On the contrary,
they are deployed within living communities and
troubled societies. To even stand a chance at protecting
endangered civilians, they need strong partnerships
with local and regional actors present in the field. Those
partnerships are in many cases the key to effective
implementation of the mission's mandate.

As many of us argued during the high-level
thematic debate of the General Assembly on the United
Nations, peace and security in May, the time has
come to take a more people-centred approach in our
efforts undertaken in the areas of conflict prevention,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. We hope that our
conclusions from the major reviews in the field of peace
and security will be implemented shortly and we call
on the Security Council to actively join this collective
effort of the United Nations community.

In closing, let me recall the report of the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations, which rightly
pointed out that the principles of peacekeeping "should
never be an excuse for failure to protect civilians or to
defend the mission proactively" (S/2015/446, p. 12). As
an international community, we have heard too many
excuses for non-action. To change it, we need to start
here - in the Security Council - and make sure that
peacekeepers are well prepared to bring safety and
protection to civilians who need it most.

