Mr. Brevik (Norway): Norway welcomes and
strongly supports resolution 1701 (2006). We strongly
encourage the parties to do their utmost to maintain the
cessation of hostilities and transform it into a lasting
ceasefire. We support the Secretary-General in his View
that the recent Israeli military operation in the Bekaa
valley in Lebanon is in violation of the cessation of
hostilities, and we urge all parties to refrain from
further actions that undermine resolution 1701 (2006).

Our main priority must be to achieve a long-term
solution based on the implementation of resolution
1701 (2006). Norway fully supports the Secretary-
General in his efforts to find ways to implement the
resolution. The international community must follow
up with political support and with economic and
humanitarian contributions.

Norway welcomes the positive steps taken on the
ground, including the deployment of the Lebanese
army to the south and the parties' coordination with the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) on
the withdrawal of the Israel Defense Forces.

While the parties bear the main responsibility for
ensuring the implementation of the resolution, we call
on all States in the region to contribute constructively
towards that goal. The rapid deployment of a
reinforced UNIFIL is vital to the implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006). The Norwegian Government is
considering a contribution to the Force, provided that

the conditions necessary to ensure success - in
particular satisfactory rules of engagement - are in
place.
06-47530

The humanitarian needs are enormous and are a
cause of great concern to Norway. It is imperative that
the Lebanese Government and the international donor
community identify the humanitarian needs in
Lebanon. As a contribution to that effort, Sweden,
Spain and Norway have issued invitations to a
conference on relief and early recovery to be held in
Stockholm on 31 August. Let me add that Norway has
already allocated $22 million for humanitarian
assistance to the Lebanese people, with an additional
$1.6 million to remove oil spills on the coast of
Lebanon, and stands ready to contribute to long-term
reconstruction efforts in Lebanon.

We remain deeply concerned about the continued
deteriorating humanitarian situation in Gaza. The
Israeli regime of closures is preventing vital goods
from entering Gaza and is hurting the entire Palestinian
population. Norway strongly urges all parties to return
to the peace process on the basis of the Road Map.

