Mr. Krokhmal (Ukraine): The Government of
Ukraine fully supports the draft resolution before us as
an appropriate and timely measure. Ukraine regrets that
the Taliban continue to ignore the clear demands of
Security Council resolution 1267 (1999). Afghan
territory under Taliban control is used for sheltering
and training terrorists. This is unacceptable.

S/PV.4251

 

The most alarming thing is that Afghanistan,
which has been devastated by 20 years of war, has
become one of the world's major producers of opium.
The international community has continually expressed
its grave concern over that unacceptable practice and
condemned it. It has also repeatedly warned the Taliban
leadership about the possibility of additional measures
to be imposed. Unfortunately, the Taliban have ignored
all these appeals and continue to disregard the relevant
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions.
The Secretary-General's report on the region and the
reports of humanitarian agencies have provided us on a
regular basis with an alarming picture of the Taliban's
ongoing policy of violating humanitarian law, flagrant
violations of human rights, maltreatment of the civil
population, violence and continuing discrimination
against girls and women.

My delegation is particularly concerned about the
continuing threat to the safety and security of United
Nations and humanitarian personnel. We strongly
condemn the acts of violence and intimidation against
these personnel. The humanitarian situation in the
country is drastic. Its population continues to live
under the most deplorable conditions. This deplorable
humanitarian situation has required a very careful
approach in drafting these draft resolutions in order to
avoid possible negative impacts of additional
measures. The sponsors of the draft resolution, and the
Council in general, attach particular importance to this
issue. We are satisfied that these concerns have been
taken into account and properly reflected in the text of
the draft resolution.

We are also pleased to note that the draft
establishes time limits for the imposition of the
sanctions regime. We are satisfied that the problem of
humanitarian flights has been resolved, thereby
allowing humanitarian agencies to deliver
expeditiously goods to those who are desperately in
need. Accordingly, we expect that the Taliban will
provide unimpeded access by United Nations and
humanitarian relief personnel to the most vulnerable
part of the Afghan population and guarantee the safety
and security of those personnel.

The draft resolution, in our View, is well balanced
and structured. It is targeted and has clear and well-
defined goals. By the adoption of these additional
measures, the Council also sends a clear message to the
Taliban regarding the termination of the sanctions
regime. It is full compliance with the provisions of this
draft resolution that will eventually lead to the lifting
of the sanctions.

