Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, we wish to express our thanks for the
presentation of the periodic reports of the International
Tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda and
for the briefings of their Prosecutors, which have
enabled the Council to make an informed assessment
of progress in their work from June to November 2005,
in particular of the progress made in carrying out their
completion strategies. I especially congratulate Judge
Fausto Pocar on his appointment as President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia.

I am pleased to note that the Appeals Chamber,
which is shared by the two Tribunals, has continued to
operate at full capacity, because, as progress is made
on the completion strategies, the Appeals Chamber will
be ofincreasing importance.

We continue to believe that it is necessary to
ensure the continuance of the judges assigned to the
Appeals Chamber in order to prevent the unnecessary
relocation of judges from the Appeals Chamber to the
Trial Chamber, which could hinder the efficiency of the
proceedings and delay the completion strategy at a
time when we all want to do everything possible to
prevent any delays, especially when it has been
suggested to the Council that, given the workload of
the Appeals Chamber, it might be necessary to increase
the number ofjudges assigned to it.

With respect to the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, we value the
efforts carried out by the working groups established
by the Tribunal to improve the Tribunal's rules of
procedure and evidence and practices, with a view to
finding ways to accelerate the Tribunal's proceedings
while ensuring due process.

We believe that the role of ad litem judges in
advancing the trials is also important, in particular after
the Council has had to adopt a series of resolutions to
facilitate the process of electing and assigning those
judges.

The referral of cases of lower-ranking accused is
another important element for facilitating the
Tribunal's completion strategy. But we believe that
such referrals should be accompanied by sufficient
guarantees that due process will be respected. We
believe that one way to ensure that is through
collaboration in the training of the local justice
officials who will take over those trials.

We welcome the fact that cooperation with the
Tribunal has, in general, been satisfactory, except in
the case of Republika Srspka. We wish to underline
two cases in particular.

Mr. Ante Gotovina, one of the most notorious of
the accused, has recently been transferred to the
Detention Unit of The Hague. We hope that his arrest
will give momentum to progress in the work of the
Tribunal.

The other case that we wish to underline, and
which has been mentioned here, is that of the arrest in
my country of Mr. Milan Lukie. We believe that those
arrests represent good cooperation between our
Governments and the Tribunal. The Argentine judicial
system is now in the process of extraditing Mr. Lukic,
We hope that the extradition will take place as soon as
possible.

With respect to the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, we hope that, in the course of
next year, the trials of the 17 accused awaiting trial
will begin, whether those trials take place at the
Tribunal itself or under national jurisdictions in
accordance with the criteria set by the Prosecutor for
the referral of cases to national courts. In the case of
referral to national jurisdictions, we believe in the need
for sufficient guarantees to ensure that due process will
be respected and that national legislation does not
include death penalty. We also believe that all efforts
must be made to bring to justice suspects who have not
yet been detained.

Finally, with respect to the completion strategies
of the two Tribunals, we know that it is not easy to
provide precise dates for a process that is of an
exceptional nature and without international
precedents. We believe that when values such as
personal freedom and the guarantees of due process are
at stake, we cannot set them aside in order to meet
urgent deadlines.

Nevertheless, we believe that we must bear in
mind the need to avoid further delays, which could
affect the efficiency and credibility of these
jurisdictions created by the Security Council 10 years
ago. They are undoubtedly among the main precedents
and examples for the creation of the International
Criminal Court. We believe that the success and
efficiency of the work of the International Tribunals for
the Former Yugoslavia and Rwanda will without doubt
influence the support and cooperation provided to the
Criminal Court by the international community.

