Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I would like to start
by thanking Ms. Kyung-wha Kang and Mr. Antenio
Guterres for their very comprehensive briefings about
the humanitarian situation in the Syrian Arab Republic,
and also for their tireless efforts to ease the suffering
of the many civilians affected by this civil war. Angola
highly commends the quality of their work and the
efforts they are undertaking to bring the facts to the
Security Council. They have done their job, and it is
now up to the Council to deliberate, with the same
amount of courage and objectivity, on the facts that
have been presented to it.

As we were briefed, it is most unfortunate that the
catastrophic humanitarian situation in Syria continues
to deteriorate. This is a catastrophic humanitarian
situation. The persistence of heavy fighting and the
complete disregard for international humanitarian law
have put a very burden on the civilian population, which
continues to leave and experience tragic circumstances,
including death, sickness, famine and displacment,
while the international community remains unable to
find ways to successfully mediate a peaceful solution to
the conflict. Furthermore, due to political differences,
the international community is unable to make a more
meaningful contribution to put an end to the suffering
of the women, children and peace-loving Syrians.

The staggering numbers of internationally displaced
Syrians and refugees in neighbouring countries attest
to the dimension of the humanitarian catastrophe
that has struck the Syrian people. In fact, the civilian
population is the main victim of this savage war. Rape
and sexual violence, enforced disappearance, forced
displacement, the recruitment of child soldiers and

summary executions happen on a daily basis. Human
rights abuses are being perpetrated by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Sham and other terrorist groups, whose
rapid advance across large areas of the Syrian territory
adds an additional element of concern. Such concern
is not only due to its severe impact on the civilian
population of Syria, but also due to their rapid spread
into most of the Middle East, North Africa and beyond.
Those terrorists must be stopped and, ultimately,
defeated.

It is most unfortunate that the parties to the Syrian
conflict continue to pursue a military solution while
showing no commitment to a peaceful settlement with a
view to arriving at the inclusive politial solution that we
have been advocating for some time. It is of the utmost
importance that the international community continue
to exert pressure by urging all the parties concerned to
be fully aware of the magnitude of the humanitarian
crisis and to ensure that relief agencies are allowed
to provide the necessary assistance to the civilians in
need.

With approximately 12 million people lacking basic
humanitarian assistance, the protection of civilians is an
absolute priority. Treating and evacuating the wounded
and providing food, water, sanitation and hygiene,
health care and shelter are some of the most basic
and urgent tasks that humanitarian agencies must be
allowed to perform without interference or obstruction.
It is indeed hard to imagine that more than 3 million
Syrian citizens were forced to become refugees in
neighbouring countries. Those countries, in particular
Lebanon, are approaching a dangerous saturation point,
with more than 1 million refugees in need of shelter and
other basic needs. The situation is just as dire in Iraq,
Jordan and Turkey, with the Governments increasingly
unable to provide basic needs, including health care,
to such large numbers of refugees. Angola pledges its
solidarity with Syria's neighbouring countries. We
look forward to the success of the third international
pledging conference, to be hosted by Kuwait.

In conclusion, may I reiterate Angola's strong
commitment to contributing to finding a political
solution to this conflict, which must be based on the
Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex). We commend
the work being undertaken by Mr. Staffan de Mistura,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria,
and encourage his efforts to build bridges between
the opposing sides. We also encourage the diplomatic
initiatives that have been undertaken, including the
Moscow and Cairo initiatives, aimed at restarting the
political dialogue among the parties to the conflict.

