Mr. Neewoor (Mauritius): We thank Mr. Lubbers
for his comprehensive briefing on the humanitarian
situation on the common borders between Guinea,
Sierra Leone and Liberia. The dire humanitarian
situation portrayed by Mr. Lubbers in his briefing is
indeed very distressing. The appalling conditions in
which the refugees and internally displaced persons
find themselves in both Guinea and Sierra Leone are a
matter of grave concern. Unless immediate steps are
taken, we could be heading towards a real humanitarian
catastrophe. The situation is certainly going to become
further aggravated with the beginning of the rainy
season in West Africa.

While we derive some comfort from the fact that
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) and the World Food
Programme have been able to dispatch some food
convoys to the "parrot's beak" region, where both the
Sierra Leonean refugees and the internally displaced
persons in Guinea had not received any food in five
months, we are particularly concerned by the
predicament faced by the most vulnerable victims of
the situation - namely, the elderly, women and
children. The death rate among children under five
years of age in the refugee camps is still very high.
According to a report recently issued by the
International Rescue Committee, one third of infants
born in the Kenema district in Sierra Leone die before
reaching their first birthday. Such a situation cannot be
allowed to continue.

My delegation welcomes the demarche by
UNHCR, in particular Mr. Ruud Lubbers' personal
involvement, in establishing safety corridors for the
return of refugees. It is our hope that both the
Government of Guinea and the military will extend
their full cooperation to UNHCR for the operation of
the safety corridors within Guinean territory, in
particular along the main road between Gueckedou and
Kissidougou, as well as the route leading to Conakry.
Let me emphasize that we are indeed very grateful to
the Government of Guinea for hosting such a vast
number of refugees despite its own economic and other
difficulties.

We are aware that some humanitarian
organizations working on the ground in Guinea do not
believe that safety corridors for the return of refugees
to Sierra Leone can work. According to them, the
refugees would not like to utilize the safety corridors
for fear that no matter what guarantees are secured for
safe passage they may be attacked by the
Revolutionary United Front (RUF), since the corridors
would pass through rebel-held areas. These
organizations prefer that the refugees be temporarily
relocated to northern Guinea until the situation
improves enough for them to go back to Sierra Leone
safely. We would appreciate Mr. Lubbers' views on
this.

The impact of the civil war in Sierra Leone and
its spillover effect into Guinea have been the principal
causes of the misery suffered by innocent civilians on
both sides of the borders of the two countries. It is
imperative that the leaders of the Mano River Union
address the issue at the highest political level. In this
regard, we welcome the appeal made by the President
of Mali and Chairman of the Economic Community of
West African States to the leaders of the Mano River
Union to meet urgently at summit level to seek a
negotiable solution to the crisis.

My delegation believes that it is equally
important for the Government of Liberia, in particular
for the President of Liberia, to be fully involved in
finding a comprehensive solution for the safe return
home of all refugees. In this regard, we wish to
reiterate the demand made to the President of Liberia
in the Security Council resolution adopted yesterday to
stop all support provided to the RUF in Sierra Leone.
The President of Liberia should also fulfil his
commitment to UNHCR to adhere to the basic
principles agreed in the discussions with Mr. Lubbers
for ensuring a safe passage for the refugees.

We have no doubt that the community of donors
and the international financial institutions will respond
to the mammoth humanitarian situation existing today
in West Africa and will contribute generously to
alleviate the suffering of the refugees. In this regard,
we welcome the meeting of the officials from the
World Bank and the International Monetary Fund and
the representatives of the Guinea Government to assess
the country's social service needs in the wake of the
humanitarian situation along its common borders with
Liberia and Sierra Leone.

My delegation agrees with Mr. Lubbers that the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone must be
strengthened as urgently as possible so that it can assist
in the return of refugees to Sierra Leone through the
safe passage that is proposed to be created. Mr.
Lubbers has also spoken about the need to address
seriously the problem of poverty, which further
exacerbates conflicts in the Mano River Union region.
We share Mr. Lubbers' assessment and call upon the
United Nations bodies concerned to redouble their
efforts in this regard. We also urge the international
community and the Bretton Woods institutions to put in
additional efforts towards alleviating poverty in the
Mano River Union region.

I cannot conclude without paying a warm tribute
to UNHCR and all the non-governmental organizations
that are engaged in assisting the refugees.

