Archbishop Parolin (Holy See): My delegation
commends the United States of America for convening
this timely Security Council open debate on threats to
international peace and security caused by terrorist
acts.

Today's debate comes at a time when we face the
dehumanizing impact of terrorism, fuelled by violent
extremism. The ongoing, and in some regions escalating,
use of terror is a reminder that this challenge requires
a shared commitment from all nations and people of
goodwill. Indeed, terrorism represents a fundamental
threat to our common humanity.

This institution was founded in the wake of an era
in which a similar annihilistic view of human dignity
sought to divide and destroy our world. Today, as
then, nations must come together in order to fulfil our
primary responsibility to protect people threatened by
violence and direct assault on their human dignity.

Pope John Paul II reminded us in the wake of the
tragic events of 11 September 2001 that the right to
defend countries and peoples from acts of terrorism
does not provide license to meet violence with violence,
but rather must be exercised with respect for moral and
legal limits in the choice of ends and means. The guilty
must be correctly identified, since criminal culpability
is always personal and cannot be extended to the
nation, ethnic group or religion to which the terrorists
may belong.

International cooperation must also address the
root causes of international terrorism. In fact, the
present terrorist challenge has a strong sociocultural
component. Young people travelling abroad to join the
ranks of terrorist organizations often come from poor
immigrant families, disillusioned by what they feel is a
situation of exclusion and by the lack of integration and
values in certain societies. Together with the legal tools
and resources to prevent citizens from becoming foreign
terrorist fighters, Governments should engage with
civil society to address the problems of communities
most at risk of radicalization and recruitment and to
achieve their satisfactory social integration.

The Holy See, which is a sovereign international
subject that also represents a world faith community,
affirms that people of faith have a grave responsibility
to condemn those who seek to detach faith from reason
and instrumentalize faith as a justification for violence.
As Pope Francis reiterated during his visit to Albania
last Sunday,

"Let no one consider themselves to be the
armour of God while planning and carrying out
acts of violence and oppression. May no one use
religion as a pretext for actions against human
dignity and against the fundamental rights of every
man and woman, above all, the right to life and the
right of everyone to religious freedom".

