Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I
should like to begin by aligning myself with the
statement to be delivered later by the Permanent
5
Representative of Finland on behalf of the European
Union.

In welcoming our former colleague Jose Luis
Guterres, I should like to congratulate him on his
elevation to the post of Foreign Minister of Timor-
Leste. Like others, we are grateful to Ian Martin for
leading the assessment mission to Timor-Leste, and to
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(S/2006/628).

We welcome the Secretary-General's proposal for
a compact between Timor-Leste and the international
community in order to reorient the existing national
economic plan and coordinate the activities of the
Government, the United Nations and other actors in
building the capacity of State and Government
institutions. A revised approach will be essential to
address the political origin of the recent crisis. We
therefore support the recommendation made by the
assessment team for United Nations support during the
elections, in order to reassure the population and the
international community that the elections are free and
fair. We can thus endorse the proposal for a mission to
coordinate a comprehensive review of the security
sector, assessing options for the development of both
the defence force and the police service. That will be
vital in achieving sustainable peace in Timor-Leste.

We agree that the reconstitution of the police
service of Timor-Leste is the core task. We therefore
support the proposal for a temporary blue-hatted
executive police force within the mission. That police
component should be of an appropriate size. Following
the recent crisis, police forces outside of Dili have
continued to function reasonably well, so there should
be no need to return to the levels of international police
that were seen in 2001. It is important that a clear
timetable be established for handing back executive
functions to the police service and for a drawdown
following next year's elections.

As a bridging measure, we need the continued
presence of an international stabilization force in the
short term to provide support to the follow-on mission
which we will be deploying, I hope, as a result of this
discussion.

The Australians and others are making a valuable
contribution on the ground. The national command
structures allow them to respond flexibly to changes as
they take place.

Putting in place the force-generation mandate of a
United Nations force would, in our view, inevitably be
time-consuming and, in practice, unnecessary given the
presence on the ground of the partners and the
requirements for the interim. We welcome the
coordinated efforts between partners on the ground
involved in the international stabilization force and the
United Nations mission. We favour its providing
appropriate guarantees to the mission; but it should be
left there.

It is not clear to me that a United Nations military
liaison office needs to be included in the mission to
assist the Border Patrol Unit in the planning and
conduct of border security operations. Border tensions
seem no longer to be a source of instability in Timor-
Leste, as evidenced by the absence of incidents during
the recent crisis. Given that the initial focus of the
mission will be on policing and security-sector reform,
it will be important that the mission have strong
leadership with an appropriate background in that area.

The United Kingdom endorses the findings and
the recommendation in the Secretary-General's report
on justice and reconciliation. The follow-on mission
should assist the Timorese authorities to ensure
accountability for human rights abuses and redress for
victims. We support the Secretary-General's intention
to establish a human rights and transitional justice unit
that would ensure effective follow-up to and
implementation of the recommendations of the
Independent Special Commission of Inquiry for Timor-
Leste and other transitional justice mechanisms,
including the process relating to the Commission on
Reception, Truth and Reconciliation (CAVR). The
transition of all justice-sector actors currently working
under the United Nations Office in Timor-Leste
(UNOTIL) should go ahead, but I note of course that
there are concerns regarding potential duplication with
the United Nations Development Programme.

Since both gender and youth issues have the
potential to lead to future instability, it is important
that gender and youth aspects be incorporated into the
work of a follow-on mission.

I would conclude by underlining the importance
of a public information component in the new mission
to avoid a repetition of the escalation of panic that
occurred during the recent crisis, which was partly
caused by rumour filling the void left by a lack of
reliable information.
In support of Ian Martin's concluding remarks, let
me say that we all need the Security Council to send a
signal of continuing commitment to Timor-Leste, a
signal that that commitment will be sustained until the
job of the international community is done.

