Mr. Pressman (United States of America): As we
terminate sanctions today, it is worth recalling how far
Liberia has come. Today is the first day that Liberia
is not subject to United Nations sanctions since 1992.
The current sanctions date from 2003, shortly after
Charles Taylor went into exile and a comprehensive
peace agreement had been signed. At that time, the
Security Council took swift and effective action to
establish a strong sanctions regime aimed at supporting
Liberia's peace agreement. The sanctions first included
an arms embargo, a targeted travel ban and import bans
on the principal natural resources that were funding
the conflict, namely, round logs and timber products
originating in Liberia and rough diamonds from Liberia.

Those innovative natural-resource sanctions,
which were carefully tailored to the specific context in
Liberia, made a powerful contribution to Liberia's peace
and security. The Council adjusted the sanctions as the
situation on the ground changed, adding atargeted assets
freeze. Importantly, the Council clearly articulated
the objectives of those measures, and therefore when
it would be prepared to terminate them. The arms and
travel sanctions were aimed at supporting the ceasefire,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration efforts
and the implementation of the peace agreement, as well
as establishing and maintaining stability in Liberia
and, more generally, in the region.

The sanctions on diamonds were aimed at
preventing diamonds from fuelling the conflict and at
supporting the establishment of a certificate-of-origin
regime. The timber sanctions were geared towards
ensuring that revenues from that industry were not used
to fuel conflict. Over time, as the situation in Liberia
stabilized and the criteria were progressively met, the
Security Council responded by gradually terminating
the natural-resource sanctions, scaling back the
arms embargo and, finally last year, terminating the
targeted sanctions measures. Today, more than 12
years after the end of Liberia's brutal civil war and the
Council's imposition of sanctions, Liberia continues
to consolidate its progress, and the Security Council
has determined that the criteria for lifting the sanctions
have been met, thereby allowing us to fully terminate
the regime. What lessons can we learn from that history
that may be applicable to the threats to international
peace and security we face today?

One lesson is that the Security Council must be
creative and courageous in its design of sanctions.
The Liberia natural-resources sanctions were well-
tailored to the context and demonstrated the Council's
determination to address unconventional sources
of conflict financing. We would do well to consider
similar measures to target the funding and fuelling
of conflict in other situations we face today. That is
neither unprecedented nor novel. It is effective, and one
need look no further than Liberia.

A second lesson is that the effective monitoring and
enforcement of sanctions is imperative. The Liberia
Panel of Experts, and the Panel of Experts on Sierra
Leone before it, reported on many issues that States saw
as sensitive: organized smuggling networks, trafficking
in diamonds and control over and the use of revenues
from the timber industry. The sensitivity of that
reporting only serves to illustrate the importance of it.
The need could not be cleared then, or indeed today, for
candid, diligent and detailed reporting in driving the
evolution of sanctions to better address the challenges
that the international community faces. After all, we
establish such panels to provide us with information
about situations that pose a threat to international peace
and security. We should be ashamed when we prevent
them from doing their jobs, as some are doing in other
contexts today, even if we disagree with what they have
to say.

A third lesson is that the effective collaboration
of international partners and mechanisms is key part
of making sanctions work effectively. We saw that in
Liberia with productive cooperation among the sanctions
committee, the Panel of Experts, the United Nations
Mission in Liberia and the Liberian Government. That
was a testament to what can be achieved when sanctions
are deployed with purpose, grounded within a clear
strategy for promoting international peace and security
and coupled with the necessary political progress from
Governments.

The fourth and last is less a lesson that a reminder.
Sanctions, even the sanctions that last the longest, do
not last forever. Sanctions end. We saw another example
of that earlier this year with the termination of the
C6te d'Ivoire sanctions regime. Just as we must never
hesitate to strengthen sanctions and their enforcement
if necessary to address threats to international peace
and security, so must we move expeditiously to wind
down and end sanctions when they no longer serve the
purpose or when they have achieved what was sought.
That is not to say that Liberia's work to improve its
internal security is finished. In order for Liberia to
safeguard the gains achieved over the past 12 years,
we encourage the Government to prioritize further
capacity-building of its security sector by ensuring that
it has the necessary legal framework in place and by
continuing to strengthen the capacity of its security
agencies to better monitor arms flows, mark weapons
and patrol its borders. We encourage the legislature to
take the remaining steps to finalize the firearms and
ammunition control act, which is an important piece
of legislation in order to address gaps in Liberia's legal
framework for arms and ammunition management.

But perception is not the goal of a Security Council
sanctions regime. Rather, the goal is to address a
threat to international peace and security. That is not
everything, but it is enough. The United States will
continue to work closely with Liberia as it consolidates
its progress towards peace and stability. Today we
celebrate this transition and the role that the Security
Council has played in helping restore peace in Liberia.

