Ms. Bird (Australia): With one month to
go, Australia is encouraged by preparations for
Afghanistan's parliamentary elections. We urge the
Government of Afghanistan to maintain its focus on
delivering an inclusive and credible electoral process
that will accurately reflect the will ofthe Afghan people.
We also acknowledge the bravery and commitment of
the Afghan people, who by registering have asserted
their right to participate in free and democratic elections
despite intimidation, threats and, tragically, violence.
Consistent with our support for Afghanistan's security
and development, Australia will contribute $5 million
to the United Nations Electoral Support Project to assist
with the holding of the 2018 parliamentary elections
and the 2019 presidential elections.

As reflected in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/824), 2018 has been an especially bloody year.
The continuing cost of the conflict, borne by civilians
and the Afghan security forces alike, continues to
deepen the wounds of a country tired of war. We deeply
regret the continuing violence outlined in the report,
and condemn the brutal and illegitimate attacks by
insurgent groups, Daesh-inspired groups, Al-Qaida,
its affiliates and other terrorist groups operating in
Afghanistan. Together with our allies and partners in
the NATO-led Resolute Support Mission, Australia
is committed to supporting Afghanistan to meet the
challenges posed by those groups.

Australia welcomes Afghan Government leadership
in seeking dialogue with the Taliban as an important
step towards ending the conflict. President Ghani's
offer in February of negotiations without preconditions,
his unilateral June ceasefire and his August invitation
to the Taliban tojoin an extended ceasefire are bold and
unprecedented steps. We reaffirm Australia's support
for the Kabul process, and encourage Afghanistan to
use it to draw together peace initiatives into a coherent,
coordinated, non-partisan pathway to a sustainable
Afghan-owned and -led political settlement. We call on
the Taliban to honourably reciprocate the Government's
ceasefire offer so as to reduce violence and create space
for a broad-based and inclusive political process.

We stand with Afghanistan as it works to build
on the political and popular momentum for peace.
The hundreds of courageous Afghans marching from
Helmand to Kabul during Ramadan is a powerful
symbol of hope that should drive current and future
Afghan Governments to set aside political differences
to deliver on the people's priority of a more secure
future. We further call on Afghanistan's neighbours
to do all they can to encourage the Taliban to come to
the negotiating table. Pakistan especially could have an
important role in bringing about a negotiated peace in
Afghanistan by taking sustained and decisive measures
against insurgent groups that threaten regional peace
and stability.

We note, in addition to many other challenges, that
Afghanistan is facing an imminent food shortage that
would affect two thirds of the country. An estimated
1.3 million people are likely to need emergency food
and nutrition assistance. Australia will continue to
help respond, including through our recent multi-year
funding commitment to support the World Food
Programme in Afghanistan.

In conclusion, Australia continues to value the
role of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan under the able leadership of Mr. Yamamoto,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, in coordinating the United Nations
and broader international efforts in Afghanistan. We
appreciate the United Nations hosting the forthcoming
Geneva ministerial conference on Afghanistan and
look forward to the conference - halfway through
the transformation decade - as an opportunity to take
stock of Afghanistan's progress and to reaffirm our
shared commitments to peace and development.

