The President (spoke in Arabic): I wish to warmly
welcome the Deputy Secretary-General, Ministers and
other representatives present in the Security Council
Chamber. Their presence today underscores the
importance of the subject matter under discussion.

In accordance with rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Afghanistan, Argentina, Australia,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belgium, Brazil, Cambodia,
Canada, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus,
Denmark, Djibouti, Georgia, Germany, Haiti, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq,
Israel, Italy, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Maldives, Montenegro, Morocco, Myanmar, the
Netherlands, Norway, Pakistan, Peru, Poland, Qatar,
the Republic of Korea, Saudi Arabia, Slovenia, Somalia,
South Africa, the Sudan, Sweden, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey and the United
Arab Emirates to participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Mohi El-Din
Afifi, Secretary-General of Al Azhar Islamic Research
Academy; and Mr. Steven A. Crown, Vice-President
and Deputy General Counsel at Microsoft Corporation.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following to
participate in this meeting: His Excellency Mr. Alain
Le Roy, Secretary-General of the European External
Action Service of the European Union; His Excellency
Mr. Nakseu-Nguefang, Director of Political Affairs
of the International Organization of la Francophonie;
and His Excellency Mr. Ahmed Fathalla, Permanent
Observer of the League of Arab States to the
United Nations.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document 8/2016/416, which contains a letter dated
4 May 2016 from the Permanent Representative of
Egypt to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-
General, transmitting a concept paper on the item
under consideration.

I now give the floor to the Deputy Secretary-
General, His Excellency Mr. Jan Eliasson.

