Mr. Semakula Kiwanuka (Uganda): The Uganda
delegation joins previous speakers in congratulating you,
Sir, on presiding over the proceedings of this meeting and
on being the President of the Security Council for this
month.

In the same spirit, we congratulate your predecessor,
the Ambassador of Gambia, for the sterling work he did.

The Uganda delegation associates its statement with
those made earlier by the Ambassador of Zimbabwe, on
behalf of the Organization of African Unity, and the
Ambassador of Mauritania, on behalf of the African
Group at the United Nations.

Uganda welcomes this opportunity and commends
the Secretary-General for his concise and comprehensive
report on Africa, entitled "The causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable development
in Africa". We also commend the manner in which the
Secretary-General has carefully identified and weaved the
linkages between peace, security and economic
development. An understanding of this symbiotic
relationship paves the way for the building of stability,
durable peace and sustainable development.

The Secretary-General's report comes at a time
when, in spite of enormous problems, positive change is
under way in Africa. There is a new political leadership
that is championing democracy, human rights and good
governance. That leadership has championed economic
reforms and the stabilization of Africa's currencies.
Economic growth has more than tripled since 1990 in
many African countries. All these positive changes point
to a potential for a stable and democratic Africa.

The Uganda delegation wishes to address a few
areas that are of crucial importance to the future
development of Africa and for which Uganda welcomes
the attention which the Secretary-General has paid to
them.

I turn first to the causes of conflict. To build durable
peace, it is imperative to address the root causes of
conflict. Economies that do not grow cannot develop.
Sustained economic growth is essential, therefore, for
sustainable development. Without sustainable
development, we cannot eradicate poverty; and yet,

 

poverty is a war that Africa must fight and win. To win
that war, we need policies that are multidimensional in the
broad social development sector. Such policies should target
women, the growing population of unemployed youth and
the poor in general. Micro-finance should be channelled to
those groups and into the informal sector. The Government
of Uganda is vigorously addressing these problems through
a wide variety of micro-credit projects for women and
youth and through macroeconomic reforms, the
liberalization of the economy, privatization and the control
of inflation. For Uganda, these measures have ensured a
steady economic growth, with rates averaging 6 per cent
per year.

Concerning agriculture, the green revolution, which
modernized agricultural production in Asia, has,
unfortunately, bypassed Africa. T o eradicate poverty, Africa
must pay serious attention to the agricultural sector, which
needs to be modernized through the application of
appropriate technologies, credit to the farmers and the
provision of rural infrastructures.

I wish now to address myself to industrial
development. Apart from a few countries in the region,
Africa has never undergone an industrial revolution. Thus,
by remaining an exporter of raw materials, Africa cannot
enter the global economy. Industrial development is a key
element of sustainable economic growth. It creates jobs and
expands employment and equity.

The Secretary-General's report pays great attention to
democracy and good governance. Where democracy is
absent; where gross abuses of human rights prevail; where
there is a denial of basic freedoms; where there is an
absence of the rule of law; where citizens are denied access
to resources and are excluded from power, conflicts are
inevitable. Democratization and the protection of human
rights, as well as wide political participation, are essential
benchmarks for the consolidation of lasting peace.

The Uganda delegation appreciates that African
countries are at different levels of the democratization
process and that experiences in governance will differ from
country to country. Empowerment and broad participation
in the political process have been achieved in Uganda
through the decentralization of power from the centre and
through periodic elections down to the village level. All
these activities in good governance are nurturing a culture
of constitutionalism and the rule of law.

As regards the debt burden, Africa's foreign debt of
$328.9 billion is totally unsustainable and has crippled the
region's efforts to build its economies. As the size of debt
has escalated, so have the debt-service ratios to export
earnings. Africa calls for a serious review of the debt
burden to make it sustainable, with higher ceilings and
longer periods. Indeed, the Secretary-General's
recommendations can hardly be improved on. The
Secretary-General has called upon the creditor nations to
convert into grants all the remaining bilateral debt of the
poorest African countries. He has called upon the
creditors to clear the entire debt stock of the poorest
African countries, as recommended by the Organization
of African Unity.

I now turn to the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
(HIPC) Debt Initiative. Uganda, as the first country to
benefit from this facility, welcomes the Initiative but
suggests that there should be more money available and
that the waiting period should be shortened.

The thrust of the Secretary-General's report is
conflict resolution and peace-building. Uganda has
experience in this area. If time had allowed, I would have
shared Uganda's experience in a detailed manner with the
distinguished delegates here present. Briefly, this has been
Uganda's experience. To build lasting peace, there must
be a clear understanding and identification of the
complexity and diversity of the causes of conflicts.
Successful peace-building measures must address all or
most of the causes, and reconciliation in the case of
Uganda has proved to be a major confidence-building
factor.

Many African countries need sustained international
assistance for post-conflict peace-building and for
financing development. Africa needs partnerships to
promote economic growth and development and private
investment, and to expand its currently small
manufacturing sector. Africa needs partnerships to expand
its market size. For this reason, the Uganda delegation
welcomed President Clinton's recent visit to Africa as an
opportunity to convey to Africa that the United States of
America desires, and Africa desires, a long-term
partnership and mutual understanding to promote trade
and investment.

Finally, Uganda thanks the Secretary-General for his
great vision for Africa. We pledge our full cooperation in
the implementation of that vision.

