Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): May I add
my own thanks to Special Envoy Jan Eliasson and
Under-Secretary-General Jean-Marie Guehenno for
their reports today, and even more so for their
continuing efforts to resolve the crisis in Darfur. I
believe today's briefings have shown that the prospects
for early peace are slim. Progress is inadequate on all
four of the tracks of concern to us - the political
track, the security track, the humanitarian track and the
tackling of impunity. Let me take each of them in turn.

On the political process, we welcome and
strongly support the continuing efforts of the United
Nations and African Union (AU) Envoys. We hope the
Council will give its continued support to them and we
call on others to rally behind their efforts. In Sirte, the
Envoys made a start, but it is clear that the process is
going to be long and protracted. We believe we should
keep focused on three points that I hope all members of
the Council would support.

First of all, all parties in Darfur must be
encouraged to engage fully and constructively and, if
necessary, we must push them in that direction.
Secondly, the immediate priority should be the
cessation of hostilities, effectively monitored by the
hybrid force. This will be essential to create a period of
calm for negotiations on political issues. I welcome the
Government of the Sudan's commitment in this regard
and we look to them to honour it. The rebels must
follow suit. Thirdly, the final settlement reached must
be inclusive and sustainable. The talks must involve
the full range of Darfur's society, as Mr. Eliasson has
said today. They should not be limited to leaders of
armed groups. We must learn the lessons of the Darfur
peace agreement negotiations. Patience and realism are
needed to ensure the effective participation of civil
leaders in Darfur.

We will continue to support Mr. Eliasson and
Mr. Salim Salim and we urge the Secretary-General to
appoint a chief mediator to lead the peace talks on a
day-by-day basis in support of the two envoys.

On the peacekeeping force, as Under-Secretary-
General Guehenno has highlighted, there is some
small, slow progress being made, but the deployment
of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) as a whole gets more and more
behind schedule. There is a growing risk that the
hybrid force will not be an effective military force
capable of implementing its mandate when it takes
over on 1 January. The consequences of that will be
severe for the people of Darfur. The recent attack on
the African Union Mission in Sudan in Haskanita was
an illustration of the risks that UNAMID will have to
be prepared to face, quite apart from its being able to
meet the challenge of protecting the civilians of Darfur.

Under-Secretary-General Guehenno has made
clear the problems that the United Nations and the
African Union face. First, United Nations Members
have failed to provide the capabilities needed. We will
continue to lobby potential contributors, and I hope
that others will do likewise. The military alternatives,
as set out by Mr. Guehenno, are not attractive.

Secondly, despite its acceptance of resolution
1769 (2007), the Government of the Sudan has failed
to demonstrate a commitment to the resolution's
effective and timely implementation. Agreements have
still not been reached on force composition or on a
status of forces agreement. We look to the Government
of the Sudan to finalize those quickly; the responses
given so far do not give any encouragement that that is
its intention. The Government of the Sudan must also
provide land and flight permits. The Sudanese
Government's seeming determination to politicize the
United Nations-African Union force in Darfur
increases the risks to the units that are allowed to
deploy.

The hybrid force is a difficult enough challenge
for the United Nations and the African Union; the
Sudan Government's foot-dragging and obstruction
risk making it impossible. I am afraid that the harangue
we have just heard from the Ambassador of the Sudan
does not give us any confidence that the Government
of the Sudan is about to change its ways.

Thirdly, the reason we have devoted so much
time and energy to the issue of Darfur is the huge
suffering of the people of Darfur. Over 200,000 have
been killed and over 2 million forced from their homes,
many of whom have now lived in makeshift camps for
several years. The humanitarian situation remains
critical and it continues to get worse. A further 400,000
people have been displaced from their homes this year,
according to United Nations figures. Seven
humanitarian workers were killed last month - the
highest number ever in a single month. The United
Nations humanitarian communique with the Sudan is
still being only partially implemented. I call on the
Sudan to lift the restriction on access for humanitarian
workers and to allow the international force to create
the conditions in which the humanitarian situation can
be effectively addressed.

Fourthly, peace in Darfur also depends on ending
the culture of impunity. We look to the Government of
the Sudan to respect its obligations under resolution
1593 (2005) and carry out the International Criminal
Court's arrest warrants. It is, frankly, an insult to the
Security Council that one of the indictees charged with
crimes against humanity in Darfur has been appointed
a minister in the Sudanese Government. I am
concerned that, when the Chief Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court reports to this Council
next month, he will have little positive to say, and we
will have to address that.

Urgent action on all four of these tracks is
required to build a sustainable peace in Darfur. The
Council should stand ready to take tough action against
any party that works to undermine any aspect of the
peace process. As we saw following the crisis in the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement, the risks to the security of the Sudan as a
whole continue to grow. The United Kingdom calls on
the National Congress Party and the Sudan People's
Liberation Movement to resume a dialogue to resolve
the key challenges to the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement so that it can continue to be implemented
and remain on schedule.

