Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank all of today's briefers for their
assessments. We would also like to ask the Heads of the
peacekeeping missions' police contingents to convey our
thanks to all Blue Berets for their conscientious service
and for carrying out the difficult task of maintaining
peace and security. We pay tribute to their bravery.

The importance of police peacekeepers in modern
United Nations peacekeeping activities is beyond
doubt. As one of the channels of peacekeeping efforts,
police play a significant role in helping national
authorities to protect civilians. They do this not
only through traditional formats such as patrolling,
surveillance and dealing those who violate public
order, but also by building the capacity of national
law-enforcement bodies in the countries where they
are deployed and assisting with security-sector reform,
thereby improving host countries' ability to tackle the
challenges they encounter.

More and more often, United Nations Police have
to provide assistance in solving problems related to the
fight against organized crime, the illegal drug trade,
human trafficking and other security threats. They also
serve as a liaison both between populations and the
peacekeeping presence and between populations and
host country Governments. It is important to ensure
that their efforts help to build citizens' confidence in
the institutions of power and create the preconditions
for achieving national reconciliation and lasting peace.
In providing that assistance, like all United Nations
peacekeepers, police should adhere strictly to the
Security Council's mandates and comply with the
Charter of the United Nations and the basic principles
of peacekeeping.

The key to effectively implementing these
tasks is establishing constructive relations with the
host country. This process must be guided by the
principle of national responsibility, full respect for
the sovereignty of host countries and consideration of
their individual requirements. It is extremely important
to take a country's concrete national specifics into
account. Attempts to apply a universal approach to
reforms in the areas of law enforcement or the rule
of law are unlikely to produce results or enjoy the
support of populations, whatever their country. The
effective fulfilment of police tasks requires appropriate
logistical, technical and personnel support. Missions
should improve their planning and management and
avoid unnecessary costs and duplication of efforts.
In the framework of these processes, is important to
ensure that the Secretariat pays close attention to the
opinions and recommendations of police-contributing
countries. Attempts to promote different types of third-
party initiatives or concepts that do not have the support
of all States members of the General Assembly's
Special Committee for Peacekeeping Operations are
counterproductive. In that regard, we believe it is
essential to maintain a constant dialogue between the
Security Council, police-contributing countries and
host Governments on every aspect of peacekeeping
activities, including at the planning and mandate
development stages. However, we do not believe it
makes sense to allocate functions to the police that are
not inherently theirs, such as those related to political
or human rights issues, which could distract them from
the tasks they specialize in and make their activities
less effective generally.

We believe firmly in the importance of
strengthening cooperation with regional organizations,
including for United Nations policing. We believe it
is important to broaden support for United Nations
activities aimed at building the capacities of police
peacekeepers among regional actors, including the
African Union, and assisting them in maintaining
regional peace and stability.

As a police-contributing country, the Russian
Federation has continued to increase its contribution to
United Nations peacekeeping efforts by sending staff
with the relevant skills to missions. Since 1992, more
than 500 employees of Russia's internal affairs bodies
have worked as police peacekeepers, and it is gratifying
that United Nations representatives have frequently
remarked on their high level of professionalism. We
continue to comply strictly with our commitments
undertaken at the United Nations Chiefs of Police
summits, in accordance with which Russia has doubled
the numbers of the police peacekeepers it contributes.

Russian police are currently deployed in South
Sudan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Colombia, Kosovo and Cyprus. Almost 30 per cent of
them are women. The number of women involved in
police activity in Russia itselfis also steadily increasing.
The United Nations-certified Peacekeeping Training
Centre of Russia's Ministry of the Interior regularly
graduates police peacekeepers, including foreigners,
many of whom are women, to professional standards.
It is pertinent to point out that more than 30 of the
specialists among them are French speakers. Since
2000, the Centre has trained more than 1,600 Russian
officers and 500 foreign police peacekeepers, including
commanders, from more than 50 countries around the
world. The group of women officers specially trained to
participate in the police components of United Nations
missions deserve particular attention. Approximately
40 women from Russia and a number of African
countries have taken the course.

We are also willing to send experts to participate
in the work of specialized police groups in United
Nations missions. We are interested in considering the
participation of Russian police in such groups' projects,
including working jointly with other countries.

