Mr. Ritter (Liechtenstein): I would like at the
outset to apologize for the fact that Ambassador
Wenaweser, the Permanent Representative of
Liechtenstein, is unable to be here because he is
attending a briefing being given by the Secretary-
General at this very moment.

The world summit made it clear yet again that the
protection of civilians in armed conflict is a major
challenge for and concern of the international
community. Several important decisions were taken by
our leaders at that summit and are reflected in the 2005
World Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/1). They range from the affirmation of the
responsibility to protect and a particular emphasis on
the pressing need to adequately address all forms of
violence against women and children, to the resolve to
increase the protection of internally displaced persons
and to ensure the safe and unhindered access of
humanitarian actors to populations in need.

The call of our leaders to conclude negotiations
on an optional protocol to the Convention on the Safety
of United Nations and Associated Personnel was also
of particular importance. We are pleased to note that
the General Assembly adopted that Protocol just
yesterday, providing for substantial expansion of the
scope of legal protection for such personnel. We invite
all States to become parties to both the Protocol and
the 1994 Convention, in order to strengthen and
universalize that important legal regime.

The recognition of the responsibility of the
international community to protect civilian populations
when their Governments fail to do so constitutes a
major breakthrough in our common endeavour to
prevent genocide, war crimes and crimes against
humanity. The main obligation for its implementation
naturally falls on the Security Council. The Secretary-
General's Special Adviser on the Prevention of
Genocide can play an important role in that respect.
The Council must ensure that disgraceful inaction, as
was seen in the case of the genocide in Rwanda, cannot
occur again.

That responsibility leads almost inevitably to the
conclusion that collective action to prevent and
respond to genocide, crimes against humanity and war
crimes must not be made impossible by a non-
concurring vote of one of the permanent members of
the Council. That principle was proposed by the High-
level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change and has
been taken up in a draft resolution on the working
methods of the Security Council prepared by a group
of countries including Liechtenstein.

The rest of the membership also has
responsibility in this respect, in that it can bring
situations to the attention of the Security Council in
open debates and by other means. In particular, article
8 of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment
of the Crime of Genocide, which was adopted on this
day in 1948, allows any contracting party to call upon
the competent organs of the United Nations to take
appropriate action.

The achievement concerning the responsibility to
protect makes the absence of a reference to the issue of
impunity in the World Summit Outcome even more
anachronistic. More advances have been made in that
area than in most others. Transitional justice is an
inevitable element of any serious discussion of post-
conflict situations. There is now a close and well
established relationship between the International
Criminal Court and the United Nations, as a result both
of the adoption of a Relationship Agreement between
the two organizations and of the Security Council's
referral to the Court of the situation in Darfur.
Prevention is, indeed, the key aspect in the
protection of civilians. Preventive action can be
effective, however, only if it is made clear that abuses
against civilian populations, often carried out against
their most vulnerable members, in particular women
and children, are violations of international law that
will not go unpunished. An unequivocal and firm
stance by the Security Council that there will not be
impunity for such crimes would have a strong deterrent
effect in any situation and would thus serve as a very
useful tool of prevention.

Such a firm stance by the Security Council was
expressed by the adoption of resolution 1612 (2005) on
children and armed conflict. Our leaders welcomed that
resolution as a landmark decision and reaffirmed their
commitment to promote and protect the rights and
welfare of children in armed conflict. We commend the
convening of the first meeting of the Council's
Working Group, and look forward to the full
information of the resolution. In order to assess the
progress made in that regard, we would welcome a
decision by the Council to hold an open debate on the
issue during the first quarter of next year.

One of the most tragic aspects of our collective
failure to adequately protect civilians in situations of
conflict over the past five years is, as the Secretary-
General's report points out, the fact that women and
children have continued to suffer extraordinary
hardship and violence. It is high time to reverse that
trend and to take effective measures that have a
tangible impact on the ground. The adoption of a
strong resolution on the protection of civilians, which
also responds to the need for more consistent and
accurate reporting of protection-related incidents,
would certainly go a long way towards achieving that
goal.

