Mr. Kim Sook (Republic of Korea): I would first
like to welcome you, Madam President, to the Council
Chamber, and thank you for having convened today's
open debate on this important issue. I believe that your
presence, along with the briefing given by Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon, illustrates the increasing
significance of cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations. I would like also to thank
all the representatives of regional organizations for
their presentations this morning. Let me also extend a
warm welcome to Ambassador Samantha Power of the
United States; I look forward to working closely with
her in the days and months to come.

Almost seven decades ago, when the Charter of the
United Nations was being drafted, public discourse on
regional organizations was in its infancy. What inspired
that daring attempt to devote one whole chapter to
cooperation with regional arrangements proved to be
a great vision. Today the complexity and diversity of
threats to international peace and security require a
multidimensional response. The increasing role of
regional and subregional organizations, among others,
constitutes a major feature of that response.

An importantpoint is that the degree ofintraregional
cooperation varies significantly between regions, based
on the unique historical and political background that
each region possesses. It is our view that cooperation
between the United Nations and regional arrangements
will be more fruitful when that reality is duly considered.
Any attempt to invent a singular, uniform modality
for cooperation would prove to be inappropriate. We
need to be flexible, responsive and adaptive. Most
importantly, we should aspire to be as imaginative as
the founding fathers of the United Nations.

Located in an area where the role of regional
organizations is not prominent compared with other
regions, the Republic of Korea would like to add
value to today's debate by pointing out that our
common efforts to strengthen cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations should not
inadvertently lead to an imbalance where the weight
given to regional voices might result in an unintended
disadvantage to those countries that do not belong to
regional arrangements.

Having said that, my delegation would like to join
others in acknowledging that regional and subregional
organizations are better positioned to understand the
root causes and context of conflicts occurring in the
region to which they belong. Such organizations can
play a vital role in the full cycle of conflict, covering
conflict prevention, conflict resolution, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding.

In recent years, the situation in places such as the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mali, Darfur and
the Central African Republic have demonstrated to
us both the valuable achievements and the limitations
of the cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations. Experience
strongly indicates that a successful interaction between
the United Nations and regional organizations requires
the Security Council to bear the primary responsibility
for maintaining international peace and security.
Regional organizations play a complementary role in
principle and in reality.

It is critical, therefore, that regional organizations
enhance their own capacities in order to play a
meaningful role in restoring peace and security. The
United Nations should continue to support them by
sharing the lessons learned through experience while
continually exploring new ways to improve regional
capacity.

The presidential statement adopted today
(S/PRST/2013/12) covers comprehensive areas of
cooperation. We believe that the statement will serve
as a landmark reference on this issue. We appreciate
Argentina's efforts in providing a valuable draft and
coordinating all efforts in the process. We would like
to highlight four specific points.

First, ending impunity for violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law is the first
step towards establishing the rule of law in the post-
conflict peacebuilding process. In particular, violence
and crimes against women and children should not go
unpunished. We hope that regional and subregional
organizations will contribute to accountability through
their enhanced cooperation with international tribunals,
including the International Criminal Court.

Secondly, regional organizations can significantly
contribute to the effective implementation of the
Security Council's sanction regimes by encouraging
their members at the regional level. We also hope that all
regional and subregional organizations will render their
full cooperation to the Council's Sanction Committees
and their Groups of Experts.

Thirdly, coordinated efforts at the national,
regional and global levels are crucial to preventing the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. Sharing
information and experience between and among
regional organizations will help eliminate weak links,
which terrorists can exploit. The Republic of Korea, as
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), will spare no effort
to enhance cooperation with regional organizations
with a view to establishing a living network of
non-proliferation.

Lastly, better coordination with regional
organizations with the United Nations and among
themselves will also lead to a synergic effect in
addressing transnational crimes such as piracy, human
and drug trafficking, and the illicit trade in small arms
across borders. The United Nations can lead the way in
enhancing regional and global partnerships to jointly
address all types of threats to peace and security.

