Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I should like to think President Pocar,
Prosecutor Del Ponte, President Mose and Prosecutor
J allow for their reports on the work of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR).
China is satisfied with the progress made thus far in the
work of the two Tribunals. In particular, the Tribunals
have taken many measures to accelerate the pace of the
trial proceedings. That has inspired our confidence in
their completion strategies.
The Tribunals' smooth implementation of their
completion strategies depends mainly on the following
three elements. First, the two Tribunals should organize
the trial proceedings with a high level of efficiency.
Secondly, the countries in the region must play a role
in those proceedings, and thirdly, the countries in the
region must cooperate with the Tribunals.

We believe, judging from the reports of the two
Tribunals, that there is still much potential in utilizing
the capabilities of the countries in the region in the
context of participation in the trial proceedings. We
continue to urge the two Tribunals to fully consider the
referral of cases involving mid- and low-level accused
to the judicial systems of the countries in the region for
trial.

In that connection, we call on countries with
capabilities to provide further financial and technical
support, and to assist the countries in the region in
building their judicial capacity so that they can meet
the conditions for trial at an early date. Likewise, we
reiterate our appeal to the countries in the region to
continue their cooperation with the two Tribunals.

The positive role played by the two Tribunals in
promoting peace and stability in the countries in the
region has been widely recognized by the international
community. China is closely following the Tribunals'
current implementation of their completion strategies.
We are prepared to join other Member States in
considering the various follow-up options related to the
implementation of those strategies as soon as possible.

