Mr. Legwaila (Botswana): Allow me, Sir, to join
preceding speakers in congratulating you on your
assumption of the Presidency of the Security Council for
this month. I wish you every success in your work.

I would also like to thank all speakers for the kind
words addressed to me and to my delegation.

We are grateful to the Secretariat for the regular
briefings which have kept members of the Security Council
informed on the developments in Afghanistan. The report
(A/50/908) of the Secretary-General issued pursuant to
General Assembly resolution 50/88 B is both realistic and
balanced. We share in the military, political and
humanitarian analysis of the situation contained in the
report as well as the main thrust of its recommendations.

The war in Afghanistan constitutes one of the most
serious and tragic challenges facing the international
community today. The civil war in that country has
continued unabated for more than 17 years, with
disastrous consequences, particularly for the civilian
population. No section of the population has been spared
the terror and destruction.

We are especially concerned about the absolute
contempt with which the fundamental human rights of the
civilian population are being treated. International human
rights organizations have documented numerous abuses
being perpetrated against civilians, including the
bombings of residential areas, particularly in Kabul,
deliberate and arbitrary killings, extrajudicial executions,
detention and torture. Large segments of the population
have been forcibly displaced and their property destroyed.
In short, the overall humanitarian situation in the country
is tragically appalling.

The human tragedy that is Afghanistan derives its
sustenance from the unyielding determination of the
parties to resolve their differences by force. We do not
believe that the crisis in Afghanistan, like others
elsewhere, can be resolved by the use of force. It should
long ago have dawned on the warring factions in
Afghanistan that the military option, despite the untold
suffering that it has visited upon the Afghan people, has
taken them no nearer to a solution of their national crisis
than when they first instituted it. We appeal to them to
refrain from taking any further military initiatives and to
begin the process of negotiation for a political settlement.
They should realise that the ultimate responsibility for
peace and national reconciliation, or continued war and
destruction, in Afghanistan rests with nobody but
themselves.

What the ordinary Afghans need most today is a
peaceful and stable country in which they can be afforded
an opportunity to rebuild their shattered lives. They do

 

not need guns and still more guns to slaughter more and
more of their own people. They need the support and
encouragement of the international community, especially
the neighbouring countries, to start a new process of
negotiation aimed at finding a durable political solution to
the crisis in their country. The people of Afghanistan have
demonstrated on an earlier occasion that they are capable of
sitting around a negotiating table and discussing peace and
national reconciliation. They were on the verge of success,
but for the decision of some to renege on the agreed
timetable within which general elections were to be held.

We therefore believe that, given the right political
atmosphere, the people of Afghanistan are capable of
mustering adequate political will to negotiate another
agreement, and for this they look to their neighbours for
statesmanship and help - help of the helpful kind.
Unfortunately, they are most unlucky in this respect. Their
neighbours are as divided as the Afghans themselves, if not
more so, over the crisis in Afghanistan, and have chosen to
support one or the other of the Afghan warring factions
instead of to reconcile them. The factions are being trained
and armed in the neighbouring countries, which seem
indifferent to the human tragedy being fuelled by their
actions. The countries in the region should be concentrating
their efforts on helping the people of Afghanistan to find
peace, and not farming the fires of hostility and war. They
should refrain from interfering in the internal affairs of
Afghanistan and cease the supply of arms to that country.

It is clear from the disposition of the neighbouring
countries that the conflict in Afghanistan poses a serious
threat to both regional and international peace and security.
Yet the response of the international community to this
crisis with clear international ramifications has generally
been muted.

There are other dimensions to the Afghan conflict that
deserve to be mentioned, albeit in passing. The use of the
territory of Afghanistan for the illicit trade in drugs and the
fact that there will be no easy solutions to the inter-Tajik
conflict so long as Afghanistan is at war with itself are
cases in point.

It is for all these reasons that my delegation believes
that the United Nations should have creatively responded to
the situation in Afghanistan much earlier. It is time the
United Nations broke the vicious circle of reacting to
conflicts after they have degenerated into unmanageable,
bitter-end civil wars. It was clear from the beginning that
the neighbouring States were not going to cooperate to find
a lasting solution to the Afghan crisis, and that the Security
Council should have moved with speed to establish a
confidence-restoration mission in Afghanistan when the
prospects for holding general elections in accordance with
the Islamabad Accord became bleak. At that point,
positions had not yet hardened, the consent of the factions
would not have been difficult to attain and trust and
confidence could have been restored.

We hope, however, that a cease-fire can still be
established in Afghanistan, which the United Nations
could follow up with the dispatch of a fact-finding
mission to review the situation and recommend the
feasibility or otherwise of establishing a visible United
Nations presence in the country, however limited in
scope. The purpose of such a United Nations presence
would be to help the Afghans to prepare and hold general
elections and thus avoid a repetition of the events which
led to the present crisis. A general arms embargo would
be put in place throughout the territory of Afghanistan
prior to the elections. The neighbouring States would have
to be strongly persuaded to observe the provisions of the
arms embargo for the sake of peace in Afghanistan.

This is but one suggestion among many that can be
employed to halt the war and bring about a lasting
political solution to the crisis in Afghanistan. It may
prove to be the least feasible in the political atmosphere
prevailing in Afghanistan today, but any solution which
does not include the establishment of a cease-fire and
negotiations for a new political dispensation would be
equally unrealistic.

In short, there can be no excuse for failure to
respond to this tragic situation. The success of the United
Nations in the maintenance of international peace and
security depends, to a large extent, on its ability to
respond creatively and meaningfully to all crisis situations
at every stage of their development. Doing nothing is the
only option that should be excluded in the search for
solutions to crises. And we do not believe that the
international community is about to do nothing in
Afghanistan.

