Mr. Diallo (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
protection of civilians in armed conflict, including
journalists, is undoubtedly a subject of major
importance. I therefore welcome the inspired decision
of the United States presidency to bring this issue to
our attention in order to further spur salutary action
to better protect rights and freedoms throughout the
world.

First, I should like to congratulate the United States
presidency on its excellent conduct of the Security
Council's work in July, and reiterate my delegation's
ongoing readiness to support it in the discharge of its
responsibilities. I should also like to express my full
gratitude to Mr. Jan Eliasson for his briefing today and
to all those who kindly agreed to share with us their
views and experiences on this topic.

The protection ofjournalists in armed conflicts is
an increasingly pressing issue, according to the 2012
report of the UNESCO Director-General, Ms. Irina
Bakova. Indeed, with 600 deaths over the past decade,
including 121 in 2012 alone, the situation ofjournalists,
staff and freelance alike, is going from bad to worse.
Media professionals continue to be subject to the
most unacceptable treatment, such as abductions,
intimidation, illegal arrests, harassment or rape,
in flagrant Violation of article 79 of the Additional
Protocol I to the Geneva Conventions. I therefore take
this opportunity to pay a strong tribute to all those
martyrs whose sacrifices attest to the importance of
our responsibility.

The international community's response to such
practices should be commensurate with the threat they
represent to international security and to fundamental
freedoms. Media professionals play a crucial role in
bringing the truth to light in times of armed conflict.
They make a considerable contribution to raising
awareness among the international community
about the full extent of the security situation and the
underlying causes of insecurity.

Whatever the nature, sensitivity and issues at stake,
the information that is relayed and dealt with by the
press cannot excuse the reprisals that take place, often
going as far as killings. We must therefore establish
an inclusive approach to strengthen protection for
press workers and, above all, to ensure accountability
for perpetrators of such abuses or those who provoke
them. Such persons must be identified and punished
with the full force of the law. I am pleased in this
regard to commend the United Nations Plan of Action
on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity,
which is aimed at ensuring the ideal of a free and safe
environment for media workers.

The Plan of Action's relevance resides in its Vision
of the role of the press in maintaining global peace and
the modus operandi that should lead to achieving it
through the invaluable contribution of United Nations
agencies, Member States and non-governmental
organizations. We are therefore pleased to note that
the Plan of Action promotes the strengthening of the
mechanisms of the United Nations system, cooperation
with States, the development of partnerships with other
international institutions and organizations, including
non-governmental organizations, and awareness-
raising in order to end the targeting ofjournalists.

This mission is of course very complex, given the
risks facing journalism in times of conflict, but we
must make this noble fight a priority concern. With
that in mind, we should help Governments in need to
establish the legal and institutional instruments that
will enable them to pursue perpetrators of acts of
violence against journalists. Such cooperation with
Governments is all the more important in that, as the
report of the UNESCO Director-General shows, out
of the 29 countries on the 2009-2010 list of murdered
journalists, only 18 responded to UNESCO'S call. The
report also informs us of the low rate of convictions.
Only nine cases out of 245 killings perpetrated between
2006 and 2009 led to convictions and punishment.

This range of measures to strengthen security
for journalists should also include the cooperation of
media professionals to prevent or limit the dangers
they face. It should be fully understood that my
delegation in no way advocates self-censorship; this is
simply a question of not uselessly inviting what could
be perceived in a difficult situation as a provocation
without compromising fundamental tenets. I welcome
the drafting of a charter on security for journalists in
areas of conflict where they are working in areas of
war.

The Security Council should also strengthen action
to protect journalists in conformity with the spirit of
resolution 1738 (2006). In this context, it would be useful
to provide United Nations peacekeeping missions with
the necessary human, technical and legal capacities to
protect journalists.

Lastly, I should like to encourage the Council in
the dynamic already under way, which requires the
international community as a whole to take decisive
action commensurate with the challenge that journalists
face in times of conflict. I therefore reiterate my
country's commitment to contributing to freedom of
information, including in times of conflict.

