Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the Deputy Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, Ms. Khawla Matar, for her briefing. This morning we had an opportunity to discuss the humanitarian situation in Syria (see S/PV.8707). We can only reiterate our call on Western donors to reject the practice of double standards with regard to whether to the provision of humanitarian assistance. Despite the trend marked by the stabilization of the situation in the Syrian Arab Republic, much work remains to be done on a number of fronts. The political process requires the most attention. Russia remains committed to the principle of reaching a peaceful settlement to the Syrian crisis through political and diplomatic means. In the interests of advancing that process, the Constitutional Committee was established under the auspices of the United Nations and began its work in Geneva on 30 October 2019. Its establishment was made possible through the critical help of the Astana format. We value Special Envoy Pedersen and his team's approach to creating the necessary conditions for the negotiators to develop a culture of dialogue and mutual trust, which is an important and indispensable component for achieving success. Constructive and useful meetings among the Special Envoy, Minister for Foreign Affairs Lavrov and Minister of Defence Shoygu took place in Moscow on 24 January. Discussions focused on how to step up joint work both in Geneva and through the Astana format, in which Russia, Turkey and Iran are successfully working together. We expressed our full support for Mr. Pedersen's efforts. The visit by Mr. Pedersen currently under way in Damascus also seems very important to us, as there he will have an opportunity to discuss the prospects for another round of Constitutional Committee consultations. Like the Special Envoy, we are not dramatizing the fact that just a couple of months after the establishment of that body, no momentous results have been achieved. That is absolutely natural. We believe that it is counterproductive to dramatize the situation and designate the guilty parties. We will do all we can to help create the conditions necessary to enable progress at the next session of the drafting commission, to be held at the earliest opportunity. Combating terrorism in Syria is also a priority, and Idlib remains one of terrorism's last strongholds in the country, with civilians being held hostage there. The Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham fighters and their subordinates are not honouring the ceasefire agreements. In early January, a ceasefire was announced upon the proposal of Russia and Turkey. However, terrorists violate it daily. They attack and shell the Syrian army and civilian facilities, as well as the Russian air base in Khmeimim. Naturally, such armed provocations cannot go unanswered. We have long pointed out the need to expeditiously separate members of the armed opposition, if any remain in Idlib, from the terrorists. At the same time, we are concerned about the spread of terrorists from Idlib into other parts of Syria and their infiltration into other countries, such as Iraq, Afghanistan and Libya. We would also like to draw attention to the note of the Permanent Mission of the Syrian Arab Republic to the United Nations, as well as media reports, regarding the plans of terrorists to organize yet another round of provocations and to use chemical weapons in Syria. We find those signals very disturbing, since we know full well how such actions are used for military and political purposes. Another very important area of work in Syria that affects both the political process and efforts to improve the humanitarian situation is the cooperation between Moscow and Ankara on the implementation of the 22 October memorandum in order to prevent armed clashes in the north-east of the country. Russia continues to assist in establishing contacts between the Kurds and Damascus and mitigating the damage caused by the illegal occupation of the area and the dangerous experiment in demographic engineering that was staged there. In conclusion, I would like to briefly touch upon the following story. Yesterday, Washington, D.C., published its vision for a Middle East settlement. Iwill not go into details, as the document requires further review and warrants separate discussion in the future. However, we cannot fail to note that the maps contained in the plan show the Golan Heights as Israeli territory. In that connection, we would like to remind the geographers who crafted the map that neither we nor resolution 497 (1981) recognize Israeli sovereignty over the Golan Heights. The Golan Heights is illegally occupied Syrian territory.
