Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): Pakistan welcomes this
debate and is grateful to the South African presidency
for its initiative. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his report on the rule of law and
transitional justice in conflict and post-conflict

12-2096]
societies (S/2011/634*), and for his statement this
morning.

The international community's efforts to define
and implement the rule of law reflect the march of
civilization. Today, the rule of law is considered a
critical component in our endeavours to build a durable
system for peace and prosperity for all. It is also
central to the concept of global peace and security and
the promotion of fair practices in the struggle for social
and economic justice.

The Charter of the United Nations, its principles
and international law are at the heart of a rule-based
international system. Upholding the principles of
justice and the rule of law, sovereign equality, the
settlement of disputes by peaceful means, the conduct
of international relations without the threat or use of
force, and non-interference in the domestic jurisdiction
of any State is essential to the maintenance of
international order.

The Security Council should lead by example in
upholding and promoting the rule of law. Resort to
Article 39 of the Charter to determine the existence of
any threat to the peace or breach of peace must be
made by the Security Council in accordance with the
principles and purposes of the Charter, as indicated in
paragraph 2 of Article 24. In particular, the use of force
should be consistent with the Charter's principles
relating to collective security. In its decisions and
practices, the Security Council must adhere to its legal
foundation, which is the Charter and international law.
The institutions that are responsible for the
implementation of the rule of law must strengthen it
first by their own decisions and actions. If the
Council's decisions are informed by the same norms of
fair play and justice that it seeks to promote, that
would redound to the benefit of the implementation of
its decisions and the many-fold increase in the
Council's effectiveness.

Concerted efforts should be made to ensure that
the resolutions and decisions of the Security Council
are implemented uniformly and without discrimination.
Selective implementation must be avoided, as it creates
an unjust environment that deepens conflicts and
compounds the suffering of peoples. It also erodes
confidence in the United Nations system and
undermines the credibility of the Organization.

International humanitarian law must remain the
guiding norm in all situations of armed conflict. The

Security Council must persist in demanding full
compliance by all to prevent or mitigate the appalling
consequences of armed conflicts.

We agree with the recommendation of the
Secretary-General that the Council needs to strengthen
its support for the International Court of Justice. The
Security Council should request advisory opinions
from the International Court of Justice whenever it is
faced with issues of legal intricacy. The Council can
make better use of Article 36 of the Charter by
referring parties to a conflict to the International Court
of Justice. The pacific settlement of disputes should be
promoted by negotiation, mediation, conciliation,
arbitration and other means, as enshrined in Article 33
of the United Nations Charter.

Pakistan appreciates the recent efforts to make
the Security Council sanctions regimes streamlined and
transparent. The role of the Ombudsperson was
enhanced by resolution 1989 (2011). We are of the
View that while much has been done, a lot of work is
still needed to improve the procedures and meet the
requirements of the rule of law for ensuring a fair and
transparent listing or de-listing of individuals and
entities under the Council's sanctions regimes.

Each conflict situation is unique and has its own
dynamics. However, justice and the rule of law needs
should be integrated into any international or United
Nations involvement in post-conflict societies. While
we work towards a seamless transition from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding and long-term political
stability, partnerships among various stakeholders need
to be expanded by placing national ownership and
perspectives at the centre of rule of law assistance.

Practices that encourage impunity in cases of war
crimes, genocide and crimes against humanity must be
rejected. We support the mandates and the work of the
International Criminal Tribunals for Rwanda and for
the Former Yugoslavia. The Tribunals play an
important role. They have shown that, within their
scope, no one is above or beyond the reach of
international law.

