Mr. Dj ani (Indonesia): At the outset, I would like to
thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his important
updates on what is happening on the ground, as well as
Ms. Tania Hary for providing a different perspective.
Like others who have come to the Chamber, she has
brought us sad and real stories of suffering that pose
the question of how much more we in this Chamber
can tolerate, and how much more can the people of
Palestine and Israel tolerate on this issue. We welcome
the ceasefire that has been in place since last Thursday
and urge all parties to exercise maximum restraint. With
that in mind, I want to highlight some pertinent points.

First, the violence and provocations must stop. We
condemn violence of every kind, particularly when
it targets innocent civilians, including women and
children. The bombing of eight civilians in Gaza by
Israel, as Special Coordinator Mladenov mentioned,
should be taken seriously and impartially investigated.
My delegation is also appalled at the continuing
provocative actions and violence by the occupying
Power towards Palestinian civilians. That vicious circle
of retaliation must stop. In the Gaza Strip, more than
30 people, including eight members of one family, were
killed last week alone. We managed to avoid another
catastrophe; but how long can we count on such luck?

Indonesia recognizes that some within the
international community may have concerns about
some similar Palestinian actions towards Israel. But to
do justice, we must put the issue in the proper context.
The sequence and gravity of violations of international
humanitarian and international human rights law
perpetrated by the occupying Power are not comparable
to the actions of Palestinians, which often come in
response to insurmountable frustration. One does not
have to be a genius to comprehend the situation. We need
only honesty. The cycles of violence and provocation
must stop. We urge Israel to adhere to international law,
particularly international humanitarian law, and related
Security Council resolutions.

Secondly, the root cause of the conflict must
therefore be comprehensively addressed. We must never
forget that Israel's illegal occupation of Palestinian land
is at the root of this protracted problem. It is compounded
by Israel's illegal settlement policy in the occupied
territories, which blatantly disregards international law
and opinion. I also want to mention the new statement
made this week by the United States. It does not help and
could lead to further deterioration of an already fragile
situation. The settlements are illegal and in flagrant
violation of international law and relevant Security
Council resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016).
Indonesia strongly rejects any attempt to cast doubt
on a policy that incontrovertibly constitutes a de facto
annexation and is a barrier to peace efforts based on
a two-State solution. The United States' irresponsible
and provocative statement can only have the effect of
making a resolution of the conflict more difficult and
a two-State Vision unattainable. We sincerely hope
that this was not the intention of the statement in the
first place, which we should also note was made by
a member of the Quartet. We urge the international
community to reaffirm the illegality of the settlements
and its continued support for the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people to self-determination, statehood
and independence, within the pre-1967 borders, and
with East Jerusalem as the capital ofa State of Palestine.

My third point is the need to address the deteriorating
humanitarian situation. There has been a sharp
deterioration in the humanitarian situation in Gaza.
The ensuing despair and frustration among Palestinians
are capable of provoking anger and worse violations.
The unjustifiable blockade of Gaza must therefore be
lifted now and not later. In the West Bank, the coercive
environment intensified by Israel's demolitions, forced
evictions, discriminatory planning, access restrictions,
settlement expansion and settler violence are also
leaving Palestinians increasingly vulnerable. In
addition, there is growing suffering among Palestinian
refugees as the funding for the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) suffers. As we welcome the renewal of
the Agency's mandate, Indonesia once again appeals to
the international community to extend its full support
to UNRWA's vital work.

In conclusion, I was told this morning to close my
eyes and try to imagine peace in Gaza. Like Martin
Luther King, I too have a dream. I dream that one day the
children of Palestine and the children of Israel can play
together on a playground. But that dream seems hard to
achieve, simply because we are still letting the vicious
circle of retaliation continue, because settlers continue
to colonize and because countries make statements and
take actions that are contrary to international law and
Security Council resolutions. I have a dream that one
day we will reach a two-State solution.

