I wish to extend our appreciation to Mr. Zohrab Mnatsakanyan, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Armenia and the Chair of Council of the Ministers of the International Organization of la Francophonie (OIF); Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant Secretary-General for the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs; and Ms. Louise Mushikiwabo, Secretary-General of the OIF, for their briefings. Over the past few years, the United Nations has been enhancing its relations with various regional and subregional organizations in the advancement of its core mandates, pertaining to the promotion of development, human rights and peace and security. In this regard, South Africa wishes to underscore the valuable contribution that regional, subregional and other international organizations make to the maintenance of international peace and security, and their cooperation with the United Nations in the context of Chapter of VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. As a member of the African Union and of the Southern African Development Community, we recognize the positive and complementary relations between the United Nations and these regional organizations. While acknowledging the complementary roles of the United Nations and regional actors, my delegation wishes to stress the importance of the principles of subsidiarity and comparative advantage in the resolution of conflicts, which the African Union upholds, which entrust regional and subregional organizations with taking the lead in finding a solution to a conflict situation owing to their geopolitical situation and/or familiarity with the crisis. However, we also underline that the Security Council remains the only international body with the primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security. Hence, in our view, the Security Council must work closely with regional organizations whose activities include the promotion of peace and security. South Africa would like to take this opportunity to congratulate the OIF on the fiftieth anniversary of its founding, which coincides with other significant global anniversaries this year, specifically, the seventy-fifth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations, and a review year of silencing the guns on the African continent. We raise this latter point as most members of the OIF are from the African continent. We thus commend the efforts and contributions of the OIF in preventing, managing and resolving conflicts in its member States by focusing, among others, on early warning, prevention and peacebuilding activities, as well as on consolidating democracy and entrenching the rule of law. These efforts are imperative, in particular, to the development trajectory of the African continent, especially in achieving the Sustainable Development Goals. Cooperation among regional organizations is equally important, primarily in instances where there is overlapping membership. We therefore encourage closer cooperation and coordination between the OIF and other regional organizations, such as the African Union; subregional organizations, such as the Southern African Development Community, the Economic Community of West African States, the Economic Community of Central African States, which have overlapping membership with the OIF; and other similar organizations, such as the Commonwealth. The tripartite visits undertaken by the African Union, the OIF and the Commonwealth to Cameroon in the past few months aimed to provide assistance with peacebuilding and national cohesion activities, demonstrate the importance of collective efforts on issues of mutual interest ina member of these three organizations, and derive desired outcomes from such peace and assistance initiatives. We also encourage OIF to continue working closely, as appropriate, with United Nations country teams and regional special political missions as well as peacekeeping operations, in particular in promoting multilingualism and inclusivity. In conclusion, we wish to highlight that regional and subregional organizations can also play a cardinal role in promoting the meaningful role of women and youth in peace processes and in coordination with the Peacebuilding Commission. It is hoped that the OIF, like other regional, subregional and international organizations, will also contribute towards the ongoing review of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture.
