Mr. Terzi de Sant'Agata (Italy): I would like to
express the warmest congratulations of my delegation to
you, Sir, and to your country for having so successfully
presided over the intense work of the Council this month.
I would like to extend the same congratulations to your
predecessor, the Ambassador of Gabon.

I wish first of all to associate myself with the
statement made by the charge d'affaires of the United
Kingdom on behalf of the European Union. Italy fully
supports the European Union's position on the situation in
Kosovo and the common position adopted in Brussels on
19 March.

In early March, the Kosovo crisis broke out, giving
rise to acts of violence that we firmly condemn. The
international community has stepped up initiatives to
prevent this conflict from plunging the region into yet
another vicious cycle of ethnic bloodshed, which would
destroy the delicate balance that had brought some
measure of stability after years of civil war. Our concern
is that the Kosovo question will have repercussions on the
entire Balkans region, where the international community
has been engaged in a monumental effort to halt the
process of disintegration and foster the healing and
rehabilitation of the State institutions.

Italy is playing an active role in these efforts and has
made a substantial contribution through its leadership of
the multinational force in Albania last year, its support of
economic development cooperation in that country and in
the area, and its sizable participation in the peacekeeping
mission in Bosnia. Italy also takes active part in and will
continue to contribute to the decision-making process in
the Contact Group, the European Union, and here at the
United Nations.

In London, on 9 March, the Contact Group identified
the objectives that needed to be pursued to defuse the
crisis and the instruments required to achieve them. In
Bonn, on 25 March, it was acknowledged that some
progress had been made, but that some requests had not
been fulfilled.

A positive step was taken in Pristina on 23 March,
when the protocol for the application of the Education
Agreement was signed. In our opinion, the protocol
represents a clear confidence-building measure; it was
made possible by the decisive contribution of Monsignor
Vicenzo Paglia of the Comunita di' Sant'Egidio, to whom
Italy and other countries in the Contact Group afforded
the broadest support. For its part, Italy hopes that these
understandings can facilitate a solution that grants an
enhanced status of autonomy and respect to the cultural
identity of the Kosovar people, as they rightly expect.

In the meantime, we have kept up an intense
dialogue with the Belgrade authorities and the Kosovar
Albanian leadership in Pristina. We are convinced that the
international community must insist that Belgrade
implement all our requests. We must be equally steadfast

 

in urging the Pristina authorities to accept the offer to start
a political dialogue without setting conditions. A greater
degree of autonomy on the basis of the territorial integrity
of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia can be negotiated. At
the same time, the Kosovar Albanians must bear in mind
that the road to independence would only create new
conflicts and that any attempts at compromise would be
voided by a radical position.

Italy hopes that the start of a concrete, open-minded
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina will be inserted in
a process that, should it bear positive fruit, will improve the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia's prospects for full
participation in the international organizations. In this
perspective, Italy believes that talks should be pursued with
both parties and that we must urge Belgrade to fulfil the
requests made, including the unconditional start of political
dialogue, the complete withdrawal of the special police
forces, consent to a joint mission of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the
European Union, and access to Kosovo for humanitarian
organizations.

This is why today's resolution imposes an arms
embargo on the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia: to prevent
the aggravation of an already unstable situation and
weapons from prevailing over dialogue. I would like
underline that this resolution contains a firm condemnation
not only of all forms of violence, but also of terrorism,
which must be rejected without reservation. This is why we
take note of Dr. Rugova's commitment to non-violence and
hope that it will be explicitly shared by all the political
forces in Kosovo.

Today's decision completes the package of measures
adopted in London on 9 March. The Contact Group will
meet again in late April to verify progress in the political
dialogue and in the attitude of the parties. Until then, my
country will continue to do its utmost in Belgrade and
Pristina to foster a peaceful solution to the question, in the
spirit of the United Nations Charter, the Helsinki principles,
and the OSCE standards.

