Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank you, Sir, for convening this
meeting of the Security Council on the question of the
Sudan. I welcome Mr. Mbeki, Chairman of the African
Union High-Level Panel on Darfur, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Menkerios,
Joint Special Representative Gambari and Joint Chief
Mediator Bassole to today's meeting. I thank them for
their work to resolve the question of the Sudan.

The Security Council has devoted a great deal of
energy to the question of the Sudan. At this critical
moment in the peace process in the Sudan, I would like
to emphasize the following two points. First, the
question of the Sudan is complicated but progress has
been achieved. The Sudan is the largest country in
Africa. The maintenance of its peace and stability bears
on the overall situation of peace in its region and the
African continent. Thanks to the tireless efforts of the
international community, the framework arrangements

on the question of the Sudan have basically been
established and their implementation is proceeding.
Progress has been achieved in the peacekeeping
deployments and the political negotiation in the Darfur
region. The Sudan's national elections were held
successfully and preparations are under way for the
referendum in the South as the final step in the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA). These developments demonstrate
that the people of the Sudan want stability and that
there is strong public support for the political
settlement of the question of the Sudan.

However, the question of the Sudan is complex.
Its satisfactory resolution will test the political wisdom
of the parties concerned. In the coming months, the
challenges will be even more daunting. We believe
that, so long as the concerned parties prioritize peace
and stability in the Sudan and Africa, cooperate in
good faith and move towards each other, it will be
possible to successfully address the difficulties and
challenges in the final stage of the Sudan peace
process.

Secondly, it is necessary to fully exploit the
unique role of the African Union (AU) in the question
of the Sudan, as seen in the diplomatic practice of
recent years in Africa in the area of peace and security.
The AU's comprehensive involvement in the question
of the Sudan is unprecedented. The AU initiated the
peacekeeping operations in Darfur and played the role
of fire brigade in containing the conflict in Darfur. The
AU and the United Nations created the joint operations
peacekeeping model in Darfur. The Sudanese
Government, the African Union and the United Nations
trilateral mechanism has functioned effectively on
Darfur. In all this, the African Union has played the
role of bridge and link in the international process on
the question of the Sudan. This model of cooperation
has provided the international community with new
experience in handling regional hot spots.

Over the past year, the AU High-Level Panel on
Darfur, under Mr. Mbeki, has studied the question of
the Sudan in depth and made comprehensive and
practical proposals for achieving peace and
reconciliation through cooperation in the Sudan. We
expect the AU to continue to play an important role in
the next stage of the peace process in the Sudan. We
believe that the AU will enjoy further success in
maintaining peace and stability on the African
continent.
China has worked tirelessly to promote the proper
resolution of the question of the Sudan. We have
actively participated and promoted the dual-track
system and the trilateral mechanism so as to build a
framework of international cooperation on Darfur.
Chinese peacekeepers have always stood on the front
line of international peacekeeping in the Sudan. The
Government and private sector of China have made
practical contributions to the Sudan's economic
development and the improvement of people's lives.

We sincerely support the African Union's playing
an important role in the question of the Sudan in the
future. The Chinese Government will continue to act in
a responsible manner to actively promote the peace
process in the Sudan and to make its own contributions
to peace in Africa.

