It is my honour to deliver this statement on behalf of Indonesia and Viet Nam, member States of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations. At the outset, we would like to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Helen La Lime, for her insightful briefing, and all United Nations personnel for their dedication during this challenging time. I would also like to thank Mr. Jacques Letang for sharing information on the latest developments in Haiti. We are deeply saddened by the lack of progress in Haiti in many areas, as described in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/537). The failure of dialogue to yield a political agreement in February was a huge loss for the people of Haiti. On that note, I would like to bring the following three points to the attention of the Security Council. First, with regard to political stability, we believe that political uncertainty and polarization are the main causes of the instability and multifaceted difficulties in the country. A comprehensive national dialogue is therefore key. We support United Nations engagement with the Provisional Electoral Council to preserve the integrity of the electoral process and achieve the objective of a 30 per cent quota of women in elected posts. A Government that is not functioning for the people is without meaning. It is therefore important for all stakeholders in Haiti to practice dialogue and compromise in the interest of a better future for all Haitians. Haitian authorities bear a moral obligation to provide their citizens with the right to life ina peaceful and stable environment; it is their duty to make that happen. Secondly, with respect to security and economic and social challenges, we note that criminality, gang-related activity, violations and abuses of human rights continue to rise. The economic situation has suffered multiple concurrent shocks, with problems being exacerbated by the global economic slowdown. In addition, despite some progress, the Haitian National Police continues to face serious difficulties that can hamper its ability to operate. In this regard, we support the efforts of the United Nations system, including those of the Peacebuilding Fund, to implement a series of socioeconomic interventions in Haiti that promote stability and reduce community and gang violence. Haitian authorities need to take the necessary bold steps to address these problems, which flow from the political deadlock. Thirdly, with respect to the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), we believe that the pandemic and the measures undertaken to contain it have exacerbated an already acute socioeconomic and humanitarian situation. Basically, all six benchmarks have been severely affected by COVID-19. The disease has added significantly more challenges to the holding of elections in a timely manner, the opening of legal aid offices, the addressing of socioeconomic inequalities and the provision of access to health care. It has also disrupted the export of Haitian commodities. In this regard, we appreciate the engagement of the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH) in encouraging constructive relations between the executive and the opposition, and we urge multi-stakeholder efforts aimed at addressing the health emergency. While commending BINUH's work, particularly the inclusion of gender equality in its recruitment and activities, we call on the mission and United Nations country team to identify measures needed to address the urgent issues in the country. In conclusion, we would like to express our support for the Secretary-General's appeal to the international community, including, first and foremost, partners from the region, to increase technical and political support to Haiti during these challenging times. Indonesia and Viet Nam believe that the regional architecture can play an important role in shaping a new Haiti that comports with local wisdom and characteristics, while addressing the root causes of the various challenges. Regional resilience can be a good catalyst for expediting political and socioeconomic recovery in Haiti.
