Mr. Bishnoi (India): It is a pleasure to see you,
Mr. President, presiding over this meeting. The topic
of today's debate is interesting. It posits the concepts of
development and security together and seeks a greater
understanding of the root causes of conflict.

Most of us would agree that development and
peace are mutually supportive. Eradicating poverty,
providing basic human development and economic
opportunity will certainly strengthen the foundation
for peace and stability. It is true that grievances driven
by a sense of deprivation, which is often linked to the
absence of development, can at times lead to conflict,
in particular within countries. People who do not have
the means to shape their own destiny are susceptible to
being caught in a vicious cycle of hopelessness, despair
and anger. The recent adoption of the transformative
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/ 1) is both an acknowledgement
and a response by the international community that
ending poverty and achieving sustainable developing is
an urgent task.

That being said, the terrible events of last week,
in Beirut and Paris, and the downing of a Russian
airliner over Egypt last month demonstrate to us that
the greatest threat to peace and security comes from
violent extremism and religious fanaticism, not from
the absence of economic and social development. It
is the purveyors of hate and those who characterize
others as infidels who are responsible for the violence
that threaten our civilizational values. We need to also
acknowledge that it is the absence of State authority, or
weak State authority, that provides the breeding ground
for extremist organizations to operate.

Terrorism is evil, as is violent extremism. The
lack of economic and social development cannot
be a justification for either. Terrorism has to be
eliminated. The events of last week have shown
so tragically that there can be no alternative. All
terrorist organizations - Daesh and Al-Shabaab,
Lashkar-e-Tayyiba and Al-Qaida - have an ideological
basis that contradicts the basic tenets of humankind.
Ideology alone, however, is not enough to sustain
terrorists. They need financing and space to operate.
That is, unfortunately, provided to them, and that is
what needs to be addressed collectively.

The events oflast week also highlight our unfinished
business in the fight against terrorism. Leaders had,
at the 2005 World Summit, decided that expeditious
action would be taken to finalize the comprehensive
convention on international terrorism. That has not
happened. The price that we pay for procrastination
is often in human lives. That should not be allowed to
continue. Terrorism takes away the foremost of human
rights - the right to life. It is truly a crime against
humanity.

In conclusion, I refer to the tendency of the
Security Council to encroach on the jurisdiction of the
General Assembly. Just because the three pillars of the
United Nations - peace and security, development and
human rights - are interdependent, it does not ipso
facto mean that the Security Council must allocate
all these functions to itself. The Security Council is a
non-representative, limited member body with opaque
working methods. It cannot presume to prescribe policy
choices on issues of development and social inclusion
to the wider membership of the United Nations.

The Council will, however, have our full support in
its efforts to curb dangerous and extremist trends. The
consolidation ofpolitical processes and solutions, while
also building durable State institutions, will go a long
way in addressing extremism and radicalization. We
would encourage the Council to pursue such solutions.

