Mr. Frommelt (Liechtenstein): As a member of
the group of five small countries (S-5), we are grateful
for the Security Council's positive reaction to our
request to discuss the working methods of the Council
in an open debate. Our gratitude goes to you, in
particular, Mr. President, for preparing a concept paper
(S/2008/528, annex) as a basis for our discussion
today.

This is the first time since 1994 that the Council
has taken up this topic in an open format. The French
representative, on whose initiative that debate took
place, commented at the time that "there is a certain
uneasiness in relations between the Security Council
and Members of the United Nations" (S/PV3483, p. 2).
That could certainly also be said today, and it is our
hope that today's debate will help overcome some of
that uneasiness.

The 8-5 group established itself in early 2006,
after the 2005 World Summit had failed to take action
on Council reform. We took that step in light of two
developments. First, many States are less and less
likely to ever serve on the Council, or they will do so
only at very widely spaced intervals. Secondly, the
Council's work has an immediate impact on an ever-
increasing number of Member States, beyond those on
the agenda of the Council. We strongly believe that
improvements in the working methods of the Council
should take into account the changing nature of its
work. Such improvements are essential for the
Council's legitimacy and effectiveness, and they
should not be made conditional upon enlargement. The
Council responded by adopting the presidential note
contained in document S/2006/507. We welcomed that
note, while it fell short of our ideas and expectations.
The 2006 note is a good document, containing
numerous useful measures, but we have also noted that
application of those measures has been uneven and
inconsistent. Some Council members treated the
measures as an a la carte menu to choose from - an
approach that is contraindicated by the note itself. In
recent months, there has seemed to be less and less
awareness of the measures in the note among Council
members. The frequency of meetings of the Informal
Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions has decreased rapidly. We hope
that this debate will bring some of the previous
dynamic and energy back to the Working Group.

Our comments today will focus on measures in
the note relating to access. Access of non-members to
the work of the Council is crucial for the effectiveness
and legitimacy of its work. First, in that note, the
Council reaffirmed its commitment to increase
recourse to open meetings. It contains a useful
summary of the meeting formats available to the
Council. Public meetings can involve briefings,
following which only Council members deliver
statements, and provide a very useful format that
should be used more frequently. Under the current
practice, United Nations officials often brief the
Council in private meetings, even if non-members have
a strong interest in the matter under consideration. We
encourage the Council to conduct such briefings in an
open format, as a general rule. It is obviously the
Council's prerogative to meet thereafter in a closed
format for informal discussions.

Secondly, open debates are, in principle, a very
useful tool that should be applied regularly. At the
same time, the current practice has to a certain extent
become a ritual and has little or no impact on the
Council's decision-making. The timing of such debates
should be revised in order to allow non-members to
offer their input prior to the Council's decision-
making. Such meetings could also be held in a more
informal, interactive format, for example in the context
of an open briefing on the relevant report of the
Secretary-General. Seeking the views of the wider
membership is a necessary element of the Council's
mandate to carry out its functions on behalf of all
United Nations Member States. Such processes should,
therefore, be initiated more frequently, also by
non-members.

Thirdly, access by non-members to the sanctions
committees remains a crucial topic. While the note
states the requirements, the practice leaves room for
improvement. Earlier this year, we asked to meet with
the 1267 Committee, as part of a group of States, to
discuss relevant matters. However, the request was
only taken up after extensive consultations within the
Council. The meeting eventually took place, but there
was only limited substantive response from the
Committee, and there was no continuation of that
dialogue when the Council drafted resolution 1822
(2008). We believe that improved access to the
sanctions committees would benefit the Council and
the implementation of sanctions.

Finally, the Council could make greater use of
informal consultations with interested Member States,
as urged in the note. Informal consultations should
offer the opportunity for Council members to listen to
the views of such States, in particular when the States
are directly affected by a decision under consideration.

We appreciate the heavy workload and the time
constraints under which the Council is conducting its
work. We acknowledge the improvements that have
been made. Further measures to improve efficiency are
necessary to enable the Council successfully to carry
out all its tasks. Discussing issues in specific
configurations, such as in the Peacebuilding
Commission, could be an interesting format in the
future.

Our ideas on access are not meant to involve
greater consumption of time or to constitute an
additional burden for the Council. Instead, they are
straightforward and aimed at improving the quality of
the decision-making process. Our interest in improved
working methods is driven by our belief that the
Council's role must be further strengthened and that its
effectiveness can be improved. We appreciate the
willingness of the Council to meet in this format today
and hope that the dialogue on these issues can be
continued later this year.

