Mr. Saikal (Afghanistan): I congratulate Angola
on its successful leadership of the Security Council
this month. I would like to take this opportunity to
thank Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
for his briefing and for his outstanding leadership of
the United Nations work in Afghanistan. I thank the
Secretary-General for his recent report on the situation
in Afghanistan (S/20l6/218), which offers a lucid
overview of the situation prevailing in my country.
Since the Council's last deliberations on
Afghanistan in December 2015 (see S/PV.7591), we
have witnessed important gains in several key areas.
Enhanced regional and global cooperation has brought
renewed hope in our peace efforts with the armed
groups. The sustainability and enabling needs of our
security forces have received fresh attention, with
good deliveries from regional and global partners. Our
security forces have conducted large-scale operations
and flushed out terrorists and extremists in several
districts and villages across the country. Government
inclusiveness and social outreach has improved political
stability. The Government has met human rights
benchmarks through multiple pieces of progressive
legislation. Electoral reform is benefiting from fresh
momentum. A number of key senior appointments has
increased professionalism in governance. Measures to
increase revenue mobilization have brought results. An
increased rate in voluntary return of our nationals prove
that more people are coming back to Afghanistan. In
addition, there has been substantial reduction in opium
cultivation and production. With the Afghan New Year
just days away, these developments give hope for more
promising times for us.

The renewal of UNAMA's mandate is another
affirmation of the strong partnership between
Afghanistan and the United Nations. On this occasion,
we are grateful for the vital United Nations contributions
to our security, development and rehabilitation. We
welcome the reflection of the recommendations of the
Tripartite Review Commission in the renewed mandate
of UNAMA. Taking this opportunity, I would like to
thank Ambassador Roman Oyarzun Marchesi and his
entire team for doing a fantastic job as the penholder of
the UNAMA resolution to be adopted.

With preparations in progress for security, political

and development discussions on Afghanistan at the
forthcoming NATO Summit in Warsaw and the Brussels
Conference, there are clear signs that Afghanistan
is once again turning into a symbol of international
cooperation, with the National Unity Government as a
trusted partner for all. We look forward to continuing
our partnership with the international community
over the coming years and are confident that our joint
success in stabilizing the situation and achieving peace
and prosperity is inevitable.

We continue to face challenges from the Taliban,
Da'esh, Al-Qaida and other violent extremist and
terrorist groups. Their human rights violations persisted
during an unusual winter lull, resulting in high civilian
casualty rates, massive internal displacement and
increasing instability in different parts ofthe country. In
the face of mounting struggles, Afghans have remained
united in a commitment to thwart these groups.

Following last December's Ministerial Conference
of the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process in Islamabad
and its side meetings, increased efforts have aimed at
restoring peace talks. The Quadrilateral Coordination
Group, which consists of Afghanistan, Pakistan, China
and the United States, has met four times in two months,
in Islamabad and Kabul, and succeeded in finalizing
the road map for the next steps forward. Moreover, in
Afghanistan itself, the appointment of a new leadership
team for the High Peace Council has reinvigorated the
promotion of peace. We will spare no effort to grant
our citizens their fundamental right to live peaceful and
dignified lives.

Despite those important developments, we are
cognizant of the challenges ahead of us. So far, the
call of the Quadrilateral Coordination Group for peace
talks has received mixed reactions. Some groups
have expressed readiness to attend the talks, some
are weighing their options and some are attempting
to raise the stakes. Two weeks ago, Mr. Sartaj Aziz,
Foreign Ministry adviser to Pakistan's Prime Minister,
Nawaz Sharif, publicly stated that his Government
had influence on the Taliban because its leadership,
together with their families, lived in Pakistan.
Mr. Aziz's statement speaks volumes about the crucial
need for Pakistan to play its role in helping to facilitate
direct talks between authorized representatives of the
Taliban and the Afghan Government. We repeat our
call to the Taliban to engage in the peace talks and give
up violence. We assure them that they will be among
the first beneficiaries of the peace dividend. At the
same time, let me make it clear in no uncertain terms
that those elements that choose the path of violence and
terror will face the full might of our security forces and
will be held accountable, no matter whose protection
they enjoy.

We welcome the growing voice of reason within
Pakistan calling for a change in the right direction. In
the light of that, we want an immediate end to regular
incursions around the Durand Line, which cannot,
and will not, be tolerated by Afghanistan. In the past
three months alone, we have documented at least 56
instances of violation to the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Afghanistan across the Durand Line, in
breach of Article 24, paragraph 2, of the Charter of the
United Nations and contrary to resolution 2131 (2013).
That jeopardizes Afghanistan-Pakistan relations at a
time when making peace with Pakistan is essential to
making peace with the Taliban.

Despite our high ambitions and political will, we
have realistic expectations from the peace process.
Success depends on a number of factors at the national,
regional and international levels, including the adequate
handling of the spoilers of peace. At the national
level, violence must decrease so that we can win the
confidence of our people, especially women, in the
process. Ultimately, the peace process should further
unite Afghans, rather than divide us. Every effort must
be made to eliminate those elements of the armed groups
that oppose peace. We anticipate clear and decisive steps
towards that objective. At the regional and international
levels, we should aim at minimizing negative State
rivalries and maximizing cooperation. States have the
right to be concerned about their interests. However,
they do not have the right to pursue them through
violent means and proxies in others' territories. The
price of greatness to regional and global powers is
responsibility and better cooperation in the legitimate
interests of all. Given its sensitive geostrategic location
and its history of turmoil, as well as the fact of being
embroiled in global violent extremism and terrorism,
Afghanistan must continue to remain a symbol of
international cooperation.

While we deliberate here today, terrorists and
violent extremist groups, including Da'esh and
Al-Qaida, continue to threaten the foundations of our
society. Everything we cherish - equality, democracy,
justice and human rights - is under attack from the
daily onslaught of violence. We are in a constant
battle between legality and illegality, civilization and
darkness. For our part, we will continue our more
than two decades-long struggle against the menace of
terrorism. We will do so as a matter of national and
strategic priority. Moreover, ridding Afghanistan, our
region and beyond from this menace demands more
robust efforts regionally and globally by all States,
particularly those in which extremist groups originate.

The time is now to strengthen the overall international
architecture against terrorism. Afghanistan has long
advocated the conclusion of the draft comprehensive
convention on international terrorism. As we struggle
to reach a common definition of terrorism, we must
remind ourselves of the enormous pain and suffering
that extremism inflicts on the civilized world. Think
about the loved ones of the 146 people who either lost
their lives or were wounded in the terrorist attacks of
the past couple of days in Ankara and Cote d'Ivoire.
The Council should ensure that all States meet
their international obligations with respect to the
implementation of the relevant counter-terrorism and
sanctions regime resolutions of the General Assembly
and the Security Council, in particular resolutions
1373 (2001), 1624 (2005), 2178 (2014), 2253 (2015)
and 2255 (2015), and present genuine and regular
compliance reports.

While we press for the success ofthe peace process,
Afghanistan must be able to defend its sovereignty and
territorial integrity and to protect is citizens. While we
agree that there is no military solution to the security
problems imposed on us, we firmly believe that, without
an effective defence and security system, there will be
no solution. In the past three months, despite limited
resources, the initiative has very much remained in the
hands of our security forces. They have had success in
a number of provinces, including Nangarhar, Baghland,
Helmand, Badakhshan, Takhar and Faryab. In Helmand,
our forces have repelled sizeable enemy attacks, despite
sustaining heavy casualties. However, the cost of war
imposed upon us is massive, and way beyond our own
capacity. Sustainability, proper training, the right
enablers, reform and high morale among the Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces (ANDSF) are
crucial in facing the regional and global terror threat.
Lately, the United States, India, China and the Russian
Federation have contributed to the delivery of the
right enablers to the ANDSF. We look forward to the
NATO Warsaw Summit in July, where the long-term
sustainability of the ANDSF will be discussed.

Afghanistan continues to make strides in civilian
protection and the promotion ofhuman rights, especially
protecting the rights of our children, which has always
been our priority. We will continue to implement the
road map to compliance to prevent the recruitment of
child soldiers, having already endorsed the national
age assessment guidelines, to ensure we bring an end
to practices that put the lives and future of our children
at risk. The recent Afghanistan visit of Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, provided
an excellent opportunity for a first-hand assessment
of the situation. Our pledge to empower women and
ensure their equal rights is bearing fruit. Multiple
Government initiatives continue to encourage women's
participation in all sectors, while the strengthening
of existing laws on violence against women help to
create a just society. In the past three months, we have
witnessed multiple attacks on civilians, including the
slaying of a journalist of a populat television network.
Following that incident, President Ghani affirmed his
commitment to the freedom of expression by issuing a
decree to prevent the intimidation.

There is significant political will to consolidate
the progress made in the past years. However, the high
price paid by Afghans due to the imposed conflict pulls
us in a downward spiral. The Council must note that
our Government's policy is to protect civilians at any
cost. The Afghan National Security Forces operate
under strict rules of engagement based on principles
of justifiability and proportionality. They provide
compensation and support to victims of violence, and
never use any civilian facilities for military purposes.

Afghanistan is currently suffering a humanitarian
crisis of epic proportions. The number of internally
displaced people is at its highest since 2002, but the rate
of voluntary returns under the repatriation programme
has seen a significant increase since 2014. However, the
continuous flow of Afghans out of the country is a source
of concern, as they contribute to the migrant crisis in
Europe, constituting the second largest group of arrivals
via the Mediterranean Sea route. Compounding the
crisis, several European countries have started rejecting
Afghan asylum petitions. It is our Government's policy
to improve conditions in Afghanistan so that we can
create economic opportunities and strengthen security
to incentivize people to stay and contribute to their
nation. We call upon our friends from the international
community to work with us in achieving this goal.

Countering the menace of the narcotics trade and
breaking down the nexus of criminality and drugs are
key priorities for us. Our success is evident from the
findings of the Afghanistan Drug Report 2015, which
emphasizes significant reductions in opium cultivation
and production, and slight increases in drug seizures.
We will continue to work with the international
community to garner support on the Afghan national
drug action plan 2015-2019 to counter the threat of
illicit drugs.

No country can achieve self-reliance without
economic self-sufficiency, and Afghanistan has been
adopting concrete measures to move in that direction.
In line with the Sustainable Development Goals, we are
in the process of drafting a new national development
strategy, the guiding document on strategies for security,
governance, economic growth, poverty reduction and
employment. We are serious in dealing with corruption
because it negatively impacts economic growth. In
that regard, the Government has implemented multiple
anti-corruption strategies and has started programmes
that would ensure transparency of recruitment in public
service and prevent nepotism.

In October 2016, the ministerial conference on
Afghanistan, to be held in Brussels, is expectedto convey
a message of strong political support for our reform
and State-building process, to commit development
assistance in support of Afghanistan's reform process
within an updated mutual accountability framework,
and to create a political momentum of reinforced
regional cooperation. We invite Member States to take
an active part in this conference, as investing in Afghan
stability would create safety dividends worldwide.

