Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates the United States initiative to convene this
debate on the situation in the Great Lakes region. We
welcome Secretary of State Kerry in presiding over
today's meeting.

I thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, President
Jim Yong Kim of the World Bank and Special Envoy
Mary Robinson for their briefings. I listened attentively
to the statements of the African Union and the countries
of the region.

The Great Lakes region is situated at the centre
of the African continent and is endowed with natural
resources, a storied history and rich cultures. It
has unique development potential and advantages.
However, due to such factors as an unstable regional
security situation and protracted disputes and conflicts,
security and development in the Great Lakes region
have encountered constraints and difficulties.

It was encouraging that, thanks to the joint efforts
of the countries of the region and in particular to
the initiative of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
in February the countries of the region signed the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.
This marked an important step by countries of the
region towards resolving disputes by themselves and
achieving regional peace and development through
cooperation.
Peace and development in the Great Lakes region
have been offered an important opportunity. China
highly appreciates the efforts of the countries of the
region to implement the Framework. We hope that all
parties will proceed on the basis of their common and
long-term interests in safeguarding regional peace
and development, act with resolve, seek consensus,
implement their commitments in good faith, resolve
regional disputes and conflicts once and for all, and
embark on the path to lasting peace and sustainable
development as soon as possible. To that end, I should
like to stress the following four points.

First, it is crucial to pursue the positive momentun
in fully implementing the Framework. The urgent
task at hand is to ensure the complete cessation of
hostilities and to restore stability to the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Armed groups
should voice their grievances through dialogue and
negotiations and conclude agreements to end violence
with the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, so as to create conditions for easing the
humanitarian situation in the eastern part of the country.

Secondly, the support of the Government in
strengthening capacity-building and providing security
should be the focus in implementing the Framework.
China welcomes the Government's establishment
of a national oversight mechanism to implement the
Framework. The armed forces of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo should assume the primary
responsibility for safeguarding national security and
protecting civilians. The Intervention Brigade of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo should help
and support the country's armed forces in responding
to threats from armed groups, under the Security
Council's mandate.

Cooperation through dialogue and the rebuilding of
mutual trust among the countries of the Great Lakes
region is crucial to restoring peace and stability in the
region and achieving development. We hope that the
countries of the region will - on the basis of mutual
respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity and
through the 11-4 Framework oversight mechanism
and the International Conference of the Great Lakes
region joint verification mechanism - strengthen
communication and cooperation, participate actively in
the drafting of regional benchmarks for the Framework
and commit themselves to peace and development in
the region.

Fourthly, the international community should scale
up its support and assistance and contribute positively
to long-term peace and stability in the Great Lakes
region. We hope that the United Nations will work with
the African Union, the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region and other regional mechanisms,
strengthen coordination, foment synergy and push the
parties to honour their commitments to the Framework
by taking action. We also hope that the World Bank's
$1 billion to the Great Lakes region will be disbursed
quickly to support the countries of the region to develop
their national economies, improve people's livelihoods
and achieve lasting peace.

As stated by Chinese President Xi Jinping during his
recent visit to Africa in March, China is confident that
the setbacks and difficulties being experienced by some
African regions will by no means stop the continent's
steady progress towards peace, development and
progress. China remains Africa's steadfast friend and
partner. We will remain resolute in supporting African
States in their efforts to safeguard their sovereignty and
resolve African issues themselves.

I would like to reiterate here that we have all along
actively supported the countries of the Great Lakes
region in promoting peace. For many years, China has
been a participant in the United Nations peacekeeping
mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
have made tireless efforts to preserve security and
stability in that country. We are ready to work with
the international community and the countries of the
region to contribute positively to freeing the people of
the Great Lakes region from the suffering caused by
war and conflict, as well as to achieve peace, stability
and development at an early date.

