Mr. Swing: I want to come at this issue from the
angle that it is primarily about smugglers and making
money. We have been working over many years, since
the fall of Al-Qadhafi in February 2011, to try to take
people out of the detention centres, to improve the
detention centres and to clean up the matter in a manner
that would destroy the smugglers' business model. We
have been able to take 13,000 migrants home from the
detention centres this year - 8,000 from our centre in
Agadez, in the Niger - rather than have them cross
the Mediterranean.

It is all about saving life, and that, I think, is why we
are here today. We are not trying to stop Africans from
getting to Europe. We are working with the African
Union, the European Union and the Libyan authorities.
In my experience, it is rather rare to have all of the
elements of a solution come together at the same time.
Since the breaking of the story of the slave trade - in
fact, we broke the story in April and it has now been
carried forward in major media - it has all been about
breaking up the smugglers' business model.

We lost 5,000 people in the Mediterranean last
year, and have lost 3,000 this year. We put out a press
release on that yesterday. We are all under pressure:
the Libyans, the International Organization for
Migration (IOM), the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) - our
traditional partner - the African Union, the European
Union and the source countries. We all want and need a
solution, and I believe that, frankly, all of the elements
are there now. We have had good discussions with the
African Union Chairperson and the High Representative
of the European Union. Everybody seems to agree that
it can be done.

What we, the IOM. and its traditional partner,
the UNHCR, plan and hope to do is to empty the
30 Government-controlled detention centres, with
about 15,000 people still in them. We do not know
how many of the militia groups have centres; we know
they do, but let us focus on the Government effort now,

because we will need Libya's help. We believe that, in
very short order, if everybody is willing to help out and
compromise, what we will need from the Libyans is an
agreement that we can empty these centres. I think they
will agree to that. We need them to give us overflight
and landing clearances. We need to be able to bring
in large, non-Libyan aircraft. The Libyans have been
extremely helpful. We have used all Libyan aircraft
up to now, but they are too few and too small. We are
talking about large operations.

We would obviously need to have the support of
the African Union and the main source countries by
sending consular officers to Tripoli, in particular, to
help identify, register and provide travel documents to
everyone so that we can then take them home. There
will be some who will need a third country to go to
until they can be properly documented, but for the vast
majority - that is, those who want to go home, as we
will do only voluntary repatriations - it can be done.

We will need financing. I had good conversation
about that yesterday. I think that the European Union
trust fund that we are using for other purposes can also
be used for this. We have assurances in that respect,
and we can augment it as we go along. The key thing is
to come up with an agreement that we all believe is in
our common interest and where everybody comes out
a winner.

We will then need commitments on the part of the
source countries to help reintegrate these migrants.
They may come back with a little money in their
pockets to get life started again, but they will need the
commitment of their home countries to helping them
to reintegrate so that they do not have to take off on an
irregular migration route again.

The elements are there. We are ready to go.
Mr. Grandi and I have had conversations about it and
we think we can work together. The majority of the
people are probably economic migrants, but there will
be many refugees in there, too, probably from Eritrea
or maybe fleeing Boko Haram persecution in north-
eastern Nigeria. I believe that we can move ahead
with this plan rather quickly if we can get all of the
agreements I am talking about. We will need help from
Libya, and the Libyans have been very supportive on
this. We will need help from the African Union, whose
Chairperson has been very helpful. The European
Union has also been very helpful.

All of us feel the pressure, because this is an
enormous human tragedy. We can stop it if we talk
in practical terms and put into place the programme
that I have just described. I am happy to take questions
on it, but this is one, I believe, where the elements are
coming together in a rather favourable manner.
