Mr. Fowler (Canada): Mr. President, thank you
for organizing this open debate on a matter of
enormous importance to all Members of the
Organization. I would also like to warmly welcome
both Mr. Bildt and Mr. Solana to our meeting this
morning. Their presence and their remarks make a
vitally important contribution to the Security Council's
consideration ofthis difficult and complex matter.

This morning I would like to comment on a few
of the points which Mr. Bildt highlighted in his
briefing. We agree with his observation that the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia remains a key to sustainable
peace in the Balkans. It is a point which may sound
trite, but we believe it bears repeating. We have seen
time and time again that any possibility of constructive
engagement is blocked by the current regime in
Belgrade. We have seen no glimmer of recognition
from Belgrade of the need to re-examine the policies
that have created such hardship, instability and abuse
of people throughout the region over the last decade.

If anything, recent events in Yugoslavia provide
ample evidence that Belgrade has no intention of
putting an end to its repression of independent media,
political opposition and non-governmental
organizations, and that it has no intention of putting an
end to its systematic use of violence in pursuing its
political objectives.

It is crucial for the international community to
monitor Belgrade's performance closely and to act in a
coordinated fashion to promote broad democratic
development. The international community has a role
to play, despite the obstructionism in Belgrade. For
example, we should examine regionally based
measures to encourage Montenegro to continue to
pursue a prudent process of democratic and economic
reform. We can also take measures to support
independent, reform-minded voices in Serbia. We
would be interested in Mr. Bildt's thoughts on how best
to achieve these goals in the interest of stability
throughout the region.

A great part of that stability depends, in our view,
on the effective management of the situation in
Kosovo. However, Kosovo's final status cannot be
resolved until there are viable prospects for a genuine
and productive negotiation between a responsible
Government in Belgrade and democratically
accountable representatives in Pristina. It is important
for the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) to proceed with the interim
development of Kosovo's political institutions, as
foreseen in resolution 1244 (1999), including early,
free and fair elections at the municipal level, in which
we should be encouraging all parties to participate.

In order to implement resolution 1244 (1999)
fully, and to establish a climate conducive to
reconciliation, it is up to Belgrade to make constructive
gestures on such matters as war crimes prosecution,
facilitating the preparation for elections, including
allowing the participation of Kosovar Serbs in the
upcoming municipal elections in Kosovo, and
addressing the issue of missing and detained Kosovars.
We welcome UNMIK's lead in bringing these issues to
the forefront.

Turning to other parts of the region, Canada
strongly supports the three priorities- strengthening
common institutions, refugee returns and economic
development- set out by High Representative
Petritsch at the recent Bosnia Peace Implementation
Council ministerial meeting in Brussels. These areas
remain critical for accelerated implementation of the
Dayton Peace Agreement and for self-sustaining peace
to take root in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Further south, Canada is encouraged by the
efforts undertaken by the Government of the Former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia to reform its
economy and political structures and to maintain its
ethnic balance. In this regard, we are happy that
negotiations between the Former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and the European Union on its future status
as an associate member are progressing smoothly.

We welcome the recent granting of access to the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization's Partnership for
Peace to Croatia. It is a clear recognition of the recent
responsive attitude Croatia has adopted towards its
international obligations. The new Croatian authorities
are now making a real contribution to the peace-
building process in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as
to stability throughout the region, by reducing and
making more transparent its assistance to Bosnian
Croats and by undertaking initiatives aimed at fostering
refugee returns. This should be fully supported by the
Council for the important impetus it provides to peace
implementation elsewhere in the Balkans.

Lastly, we agree with Mr. Bildt that lasting peace
in the region can best be achieved by the integration of
the Balkans into European structures and through
continuing the cooperation and achieving the consensus
of the international community. In the latter task, the
Security Council has an important role to play.
Fortunately, there is wide, if not unanimous, agreement
within the Council that repression and obstructionism
must not be tolerated in the search for stability in the
Balkans.

