Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, allow me to thank the
delegation of the United Kingdom for having requested
the convening of this meeting. We would also like
to thank you, Madam President, for having granted
that request. We would also like to extend our thanks
to Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for his
detailed and informative briefing.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea is deeply
troubled by the ongoing hostilities in Yemen and the
harm that they have caused to the population and to
the country's infrastructure since the war began at the
end of the first quarter of 2015. It is unfortunate that,
to date, the city of Al-Hudaydah and its surroundings,
through which almost 70 per cent of the imports of food,
fuel and other essential supplies for the whole country
enter, continue to be the scene of fighting. To ease the
humanitarian crisis in the country, it is a priority to
achieve the security of that town so as to ensure the full
operation of its strategic port.

The vulnerability of the population continues to
be grounds for great concern, with 22.2 million people
needing some kind of humanitarian assistance or
protection. An estimated 17.8 million people lack food
security, 16 million lack access to safe drinking water
and sanitation and another 16.4 million lack access to
adequate health care according to a report prepared
by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs. Added to that is the worrisome general
economic situation facing the country, as described by
Mr. Lowcock.

The human cost and the humanitarian impact of
the conflict are unjustifiable. My delegation condemns
the indiscriminate attacks that have recently taken
place in public areas, where the United Nations
country team documented and confirmed the deaths of
21 minors - 13 boys and 8 girls - and the mutilation
of 82 minors - 51 boys and 31 girls - as well as four
attacks on schools and an attack on a hospital.

Since 12 September, armed clashes on the main road
between Al-Hudaydah and Sana'a have impeded the
delivery of 45,000 metric tons of grain that the Red Sea
Mills could process to feed more than 3 million people
for a month. We appeal to the parties for an immediate
cessation of hostilities in order to facilitate the delivery
of that humanitarian assistance to the population.

Cholera is another problem that afflicts the Yemeni
population. We regret the announcement on Monday
of the death of nine people, including seven children.
We are concerned about the condition of the thousands
of cases recorded in the country, bearing in mind that
more than 2,000 people have died of the disease since
April of last year. However, we commend the efforts of
the Water, Sanitation and Hygiene for All programme
and other resources to control the outbreak.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea encourages
all the parties to the conflict to support the efforts of
Mr. Martin Griffiths, who, since the meeting in Geneva
on 6 September, when he had an opportunity to talk
with the Government delegation, continues to set up
more separate meetings with the other groups in order
to find confidence-building measures to ensure future
negotiations between the warring parties, at which we
hope all the parties will be present without preconditions.

Finally, we acknowledge and support the efforts
made by the United Nations, and by the Council in
particular, to encourage the Yemeni parties to the
conflict to work together to end it. In that regard, I
call upon the international community, countries with
influence on the area and the Council to continue to
support the Yemeni people, who deserve a life of
dignity, to emerge from a war that has plunged the
country into a grave humanitarian crisis.

