Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2401
(2018), which demands that a cessation of hostilities be
established without delay throughout Syria, in order to
enable humanitarian personnel to evacuate the wounded
and to gain access to the population. The negotiations
were arduous. However, despite their differences
in approach, the members of the Security Council
managed to prevail in the name of the humanitarian
imperative. The resolution is vital in the true meaning
of that word, since halting the shelling and evacuating
the wounded are matters of life and death for thousands
of Syrian people, especially in eastern Ghouta, which
has been under siege by the Damascus regime for
days. I would like to thank the delegations of Kuwait
and Sweden - which introduced the resolution, with
our support - for their efforts, perseverance and
outstanding work in arriving at a robust text.

As by President Macron and the Secretary-General
forcefully recalled last Wednesday, it is imperative and
urgent to end the shelling of eastern Ghouta, Idlib and
the whole of Syrian territory immediately. That was the
thrust of yesterday's joint call by President Macron and
Chancellor Angela Merkel to President Putin during
their demanding and close conversation on the issue.
It is also the reason for our vote today. The resolution
is the outcome of our concerted efforts, as well as a
belated response to the violence unleashed against
civilians in eastern Ghouta and elsewhere.

Let us make no mistake: a cessation of hostilities
for an initial 30 days to enable humanitarian access to
meet vital urgent needs is only the very first step. It is
the minimal response to the repeated demands of both
the United Nations and humanitarian actors, which
have been conveyed for months by Council members,
in particular by France.

It is now up to the regime's supporters to ensure
full compliance with the cessation of hostilities
without delay and to respond to all requests for access
to humanitarian assistance and medical evacuations
in accordance with the text we have just adopted. We
specifically call on the guarantors ofthe Astana process
to assume their responsibilities and effectively ensure
that the Syrian regime immediately cease its hostilities
and ensure respect for the basic principles and rules of
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
It is urgent that humanitarian assistance reach without
delay the people who need it. Every minute counts
because every minute can lead to the loss of lives.

Nothing would be worse than to see this resolution
remain a dead letter. That is why France will be
extremely vigilant on all those points over the coming
hours and days.

We all know that a return to stability in Syria is the
only way to put a definitive end to the humanitarian
crisis, for which a political solution is required. More
than ever, therefore, we must redouble our efforts to
establish a neutral environment that will enable a
credible political process and elections to be held in
Syria, as part of the Geneva process and resolution 2254
(2015). France is ready to continue working tirelessly
with its partners to that end.

As we said yesterday in this forum, the elements
for a regional and potentially major international
confrontation have coalesced today. That is a risk that
must be taken very seriously. We must therefore come
together, as we have done today, to put an end to the
humanitarian catastrophe under way, prevent a spillover
of the conflict and seek an inclusive political solution in
Syria. These are three indissociable priorities, and our
generation will be judged on whether or not we are able
to put an end to the Syrian tragedy.

This text is a potentially important step, but it is
obviously not the end of the road. Let us be frank: the
hardest part has yet to be done. Therefore, on behalf of
France, I would like to launch a two-pronged appeal.

The first is a call for the resolution to be fully
and immediately implemented. We are all aware that
pitfalls and obstacles abound. This is a reflection of the
extent to which resolute and coordinated engagement
by all members of the Security Council is crucial to
ensuring that the provisions we have just adopted are
implemented on the ground without delay. To put it
even more clearly: if we do not put all our resources
and energy behind the full implementation of this
resolution, we know that it will not work. Above all,
that applies to Russia and the Astana guarantors.

The second call is to use this truce as leverage to
put an end to the spiral of violence in the Syrian tragedy
and create positive momentum towards an inclusive
political settlement in Syria. That must be our common
ambition. There is a glimmer of hope today in that
regard. Let us seize this fragile moment to begin to
reverse the course of events, despite the magnitude of
the difficulties ahead. As the Council knows, France is
fully committed to that goal.

