Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
too would like to thank the Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, , Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, for his
intervention.

Luxembourg welcomes the holding on 25 May of
the presidential election, during which the Ukrainian
people expressed their will. The election featured a high
voter turnout and a clear willingness on the part of the
authorities to organize a genuine election, conducted
largely in line with international commitments and
with respect for fundamental freedoms. In the vast
majority of the country's regions the election passed
off under good conditions. Despite the hostile security
climate, voting was held successfully in 9 of 22 and 2
of 12 electoral districts in the regions of Donetsk and
Luhansk respectively. Despite the situation in eastern
and southern Ukraine, including Crimea, participation
was generally high. The election observation mission
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), in which Luxembourg has been an
active participant, gave the conduct of the election an
initial generally positive assessment.

The success of this election is due first and
foremost to the citizens of Ukraine. Their choice was
clear. They voted for a united, stable Ukraine enjoying
full sovereignty and territorial integrity.

Luxembourg condemns the violence that has
gone on for several weeks, particularly in the Donetsk
and Luhansk regions, where several towns and
administrative buildings remain under the control
of separatist armed militias. We are concerned about
the numerous cases of killings, torture, beatings,
kidnappings - especially ofjournalists - committed
by well-armed and well-organized anti-Government
groups.

We also condemn in the strongest terms the
abduction of 15 observers deployed with the OSCE's
special observation mission in the Donetsk region. We
welcome the release today of the 11 observers who
had been arrested, but we remain concerned about
the fate of the four observers who have been missing
since Monday. They should be released safe and sound,
immediately and unconditionally.

At this crucial moment for democracy in Ukraine,
we call on Russia to translate into action its declarations
of respect for the will of the Ukrainian people. As the
Heads of State and Government of the European Union
said yesterday, we expect the Russian Federation to
cooperate with the new, legitimately elected President,
to continue withdrawing armed forces from the
Ukrainian border and to use its influence with the
armed separatists to calm the situation in eastern
Ukraine. Russia should give priority to preventing the
movement of separatists and arms in Ukraine.

Ukrainians have given a strong mandate to
President-elect Poroshenko, who must now commit
to resolving the crisis through the rule of law and
dialogue initiated by the Ukrainian Government. In
that context, we commend the holding of three round
tables organized by the Government, with OSCE
support, in Kyiv, Kharkiv and Mykolaiv. We encourage
the Ukrainian authorities to use the legitimacy of the
newly elected President to pursue this national dialogue
with the general public and civil society in every region
of Ukraine.

The Ukrainian Parliament's adoption on 20 May
of the memorandum for peace and harmony, which
identifies priorities in the area of decentralization
and guarantees of respect for the status of the Russian
language, is an important step in the right direction.
Prompt constitutional reform towards decentralization,
which should unite all parties, while benefiting from
the Council of Europe's expertise in that area, is a key
aspect of that process. The rights of national minorities
must be fully respected, in accordance with the rules in
force at the Council of Europe.
We reaffirm our commitment to the Geneva
statement of 17 April. We commend the role of the
OSCE special observer mission in contributing to the
implementation of that statement, as well as the efforts
of the Ukrainian authorities in that direction. We
again call on the Russian Federation to take steps to
fully implement the joint statement. We unreservedly
support the additional efforts of the OSCE and its
Chairman-in-Office, given that Ukrainians must have
ownership of the process.

We support the good offices of the Secretary-
General and his team. We strongly hope that, with
the consistent and joint support of the international
community, the holding of the presidential election
on 25 May and the selection of a new President with
unquestionable legitimacy will make it possible for
Ukraine to start afresh and emerge from a crisis that
has lasted too long. The citizens of Ukraine aspire to
democracy, the rule of law, peace and prosperity. Their
choice, like the sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity
and independence of Ukraine, must be respected.

