Mr. Kittikhoun (Lao People's Democratic Republic) (spoke in French): I would first like to
congratulate you most warmly, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month. My delegation expresses the hope that under
your competent guidance at this difficult time our
current deliberations will yield positive results. My
delegation would also like to thank Germany, which
presided so tactfully over the Council's work last
month.

My country, the Lao People's Democratic
Republic, has very closely followed the developments
in the situation in Iraq. At their summit meeting, held
on 24 and 25 February at Kuala Lumpur, the heads of
State or Government of the Non-Aligned Movement
welcomed the decision of the Government of Iraq to
authorize the unconditional return of United Nations
inspectors pursuant to the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council. In that regard, they encouraged Iraq
and the United Nations to intensify their efforts to find
a comprehensive, just and lasting solution to all
pending issues. They also emphasized that it was
urgently important to find a peaceful solution to the
question of Iraq in order to preserve the authority and
credibility of the Charter of the United Nations and of
international law, as well as to preserve peace and
stability in the region and throughout the world.

The question of Iraq affects peace, security,
cooperation and development in the crucial Middle
East region. My delegation believes that we should do
our utmost to ensure that this matter is resolved rapidly
and, above all, peacefully. In today's world, where
peace remains fragile, it is important that the
international community come out resolutely in favour
of settling disputes through peaceful means, however
complex those disputes may be. The use of force to
settle this conflict will cause material damage and great
loss of human life and leave deep scars for a long time
to come. In our opinion, we should do everything
possible to avoid the outbreak of war, which can only
cause greater suffering to the Iraqi people.

The work of United Nations inspectors began
after Iraq unconditionally agreed to Security Council
resolution 1441 (2002). Despite problems and
difficulties, we have seen from the latest reports of Mr.
Blix and Mr. ElBaradei that there has been some
progress and that some positive results have been
achieved. Like the majority of Member States of the
Organization, we think that the inspection work has
begun to bear fruit, and we are of the view that a
peaceful way to disarm Iraq can still be realized.

We have arrived at a crucial moment in history.
The Security Council, the major body responsible for
maintaining international peace and security, faces a
historic choice. Peoples throughout the world are
looking to us with great concern. In the light of the
fragility of world peace and the uncertainty over our
world's future that continues to hang over us, do we
not think that the peaceful settlement of disputes must
surely take first place in international relations?

Any solution to the problem through political
means and within the framework of the United Nations
prevents material damage, but also, and above all,
saves innocent human lives. The Iraqi people, which
has committed no crime, has already suffered too much
and does not deserve to suffer even more. Like all the
other peoples of this world, that long-suffering people
is entitled to peace - a condition in which it can
recover and prosper. The world will be doing a great
service to the Iraqi people by opting for a peaceful
settlement of the current crisis.

Those are some modest thoughts that my
delegation wished to share with this gathering.

