Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): Mr. President, I thank you
for convening this open debate, which constitutes an
excellent opportunity for delegations to hear from the
Chairs of key subsidiary bodies of the Security Council
and to provide input into their activities. I also wish to
commend the Chairs of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) and the Committees established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1540 (2004)
for their work and their briefings today.

Brazil's federal Constitution enshrines the
repudiation of terrorism as a guiding principle of our
foreign policy. We therefore condemn terrorism
unequivocally in all its forms and manifestations. Just
as importantly, we are committed to fighting it with
effective measures that prevent the planning,
preparation and execution of acts of terrorism and
other forms of transnational crime within our borders
and beyond. At the United Nations, Brazil has duly
submitted all the reports requested by the Committees.

My delegation has presented the Counter-
Terrorist Committee with a total of six reports, in
accordance with resolution 1373 (2001) and 1624
(2005). Furthermore, the Brazilian Government has
provided the CTC with additional information
09-60696
regarding the national implementation of resolution
1373 (2001), as requested. We were pleased to note the
positive remarks contained in the Preliminary
Implementation Assessment regarding the Brazilian
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).

My delegation welcomes the efforts exerted by
all three Committees to present and combat terrorism
while upholding relevant rules of international law,
including human rights law. With regards to the 1267
Committee, currently under your capable guidance,
Mr. President, it is encouraging to see that, despite
difficulties, the Committee is making progress in
addressing the key aspect of due process in the listing
and de-listing of individuals and entities.

We note with satisfaction the update of its
guidelines, the development of procedures for
reviewing all names contained in the consolidated list
and the preparation of narrative summaries giving the
reasoning for listing each entry. Those are fundamental
steps to enhance not only the transparency and
legitimacy of the sanctions regime, but also its
effectiveness worldwide. N0 victory over terrorism
will ever be truly sustainable if it comes at the expense
of the rule of law.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee, ably chaired
by His Excellency Ambassador Ranko Vilovie, has also
made significant progress in assessing the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) and
facilitating technical assistance. The Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate has played a valuable
role in gathering information from Governments and in
assisting them in that regard. The adoption of adequate
standards and criteria for determining implementation
by Member States is crucial to ensure consistency in
the work of the CTC and Committee's Executive
Directorate and, thereby, secure the continued support
of Governments.

Important activities are also under way in the
1540 Committee. Brazil has participated in and closely
follows the comprehensive review being carried out
under the able leadership of Ambassador Jorge Urbina.
The open session of the Committee, held from
30 September to 2 October, was an important step in
this process, inasmuch as it allowed all Member States
to express their views on an issue that directly affects
them all. As we progress towards the final document of
the review, we must continue to bear in mind the very
concrete difficulties faced by many countries in
3
fulfilling their obligations under the resolution. We
must make sure assistance is available to these
countries and guarantee that reporting requirements do
not represent an undue burden on them.

My delegation noted with interest the assessment
of the 1267 Committee with respect to the ninth report
elaborated by the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team, as contained in document
S/2009/427. We recognize that there have been
significant improvements in the implementation of the
sanctions regime established by resolution 1267
(1999).

However, the Committee could further enhance
its procedures, in particular with regard to transparency
and due process. Concrete ways must be found to
ensure that the views of individuals and entities listed
are taken into account to the largest extent possible. We
share the view that the 1267 Committee should take
into consideration, as appropriate, the opinion of a
national court that has evaluated the reasons for listing
presented by the Committee and undertaken its own
fact-finding procedures.

Another important aspect is the need to improve
the overall coordination among the different United
Nations bodies that fight terrorism. The Committees
and their respective subsidiary bodies should look at
additional ways to strengthen dialogue and
cooperation, not only among themselves, but also with
other entities, including those related to the promotion
and protection of human rights and fundamental
freedoms.

Further coordination among the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force of the General
Assembly and the three Security Council Committees
is necessary. Operating on several parallel tracks may
prove to be excessively burdensome, especially for
smaller States, and tends to lead to either duplication or
reduced effectiveness.

Working with determination and a sense of shared
responsibility, the Council has been able to improve
some of its sanctions regimes. I am sure that, in the
same spirit, it will make further progress, so that it can
better prevent and fight terrorism, while upholding
democratic principles and protecting human rights.
Brazil is ready to engage in such an endeavour.

