Mr. Ankourao (Niger) (spoke in French): Allow me to congratulate Belgium on its assumption of the presidency of the Security Council. As this is the first time I take the floor here, I wish to assure Belgium of my delegation's full support. I welcome the choice of theme for this open debate, which is particularly relevant due to the importance attached by the international community to transitional justice in conflict and post- conflict situations, especially in Africa. In his 2004 report on the rule of law and transitional justice, the former Secretary-General said that: "The notion of 'transitional justice' ... comprises the full range of processes and mechanisms associated with a society's attempts to come to terms with a legacy of large-scale past abuses, in order to ensure accountability, serve justice and achieve reconciliation." (S/2004/616, para. 8) In the same vein, I would like to recall the words of the current Secretary-General, Mr. Antonio Guterres, during an open debate last year: "Reconciliation cannot be a_ substitute for accountability or pave the way for amnesty for serious crimes under international law." (S/PV.8668, p. 3) That is why I remain convinced that, while it is necessary to promote reconciliation, it is equally important to break the cycle of impunity, especially in extreme situations characterized by mass atrocities. Therefore, the successful implementation of a just transition anda process of true reconciliation contributes to preventing the resurgence of conflicts and allows for their sustainable resolution. In that connection, the Niger supports the actions of the United Nations in the area of transitional justice, in particular those aimed directly at ensuring peacebuilding and peacekeeping. The Niger will always support the efforts of political missions and of the country offices of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights that aim to strengthen trust between populations and security forces and to consolidate peace in the wake of conflicts. Due to the conflict we are enduring with terrorist groups that are attacking our people along some of ourborders, the Niger has created the High Authority for Peacebuilding - an entity that has been tasked with the mission of ensuring that the essential needs of victims are met, preventing serious human rights violations, guaranteeing transitional justice and establishing a climate of trust between the population and the security forces. That entity, which has received strong support from the United Nations system and other partners, has achieved significant success, which I must commend. The Niger supports General Assembly resolution 70/262 and Security Council resolution 2282 (2016), which place particular emphasis on the critical importance of transitional justice in efforts to sustain peace. We also endorse the African Union's transitional justice policy adopted in February 2019. As pointed out by the Chairperson of the Commission, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, transitional justice is essential for the promotion of human rights and justice, peace and security, good governance and development. In that regard, the Niger notes that it is crucial for the African Union to have a frame of reference for authentic African transitional justice, based on its many progressive approaches and methodologies, that is rooted in African shared values, traditional African justice systems and African experiences.
