Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I would like to begin by welcoming our
new colleague, Ambassador Ma Zhaoxu, Permanent
Representative of the People's Republic of China.
Unfortunately, he is not here. Needless to say, our
greetings will be conveyed to him and we want to
congratulate him on his new appointment and wish him
every success in his work.

We would like to commend Mr. Martin for his very
interesting and in many ways very accurate briefing,
and to thank the delegation of Kuwait for organizing
today's meeting.

For many years now the Security Council been
discussing the question of its working methods in an
open format with the broad participation of States
Members of the United Nations. Taking a periodic
inventory of our working-methods arsenal helps us to
identify the various areas where there is room for the
improvement of the Council's working practices. We
would like to highlight last year's update of the note
by the President of the Security Council contained in
the annex to document S/2017/507, produced under the
leadership ofthe Japanese delegation, which chaired the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions. It is an important compendium
of the working practices of the Security Council
and extremely helpful for both the permanent and
non-permanent members. It is significant that today's
meeting is being presided over by the delegation that
now chairs the Informal Working Group. We are sure
that today's meeting will help to enrich this body's
activity with new ideas. Needless to say, that is on
the understanding that any steps to improve working
methods must be taken only by the Security Council
itself, in accordance with Article 30 of the Charter of
the United Nations.

The issue of the Council's working methods is a
very sensitive one. The purpose of making changes
to them should be to increase the Security Council's
effectiveness and efficiency in implementing its task
of maintaining international peace and security.
Embracing populism, including in the context of
the never-ending efforts to increase the level of
transparency in the Council's work, is not always
helpful. Transparency is important for ensuring that
United Nations Members and the world community
are broadly familiar with the Council's work, but it
should not become an obstacle to frank and substantive
discussions among Council members. We have serious
reservations about the practice of considering thematic
subjects in the Council, especially those that come
under the remit of the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council or other United Nations bodies, in
accordance with the Charter. It violates the established
division of labour and distracts the Security Council
from its priority tasks, on which it can and should take
concrete decisions. We support expanding the Council's
coordination with a wide range of Member States and
with those that can provide it with information vital
to decision-making. For that the Council has various
appropriate mechanisms in its arsenal, including
informal Arria Formula meetings and interactive
dialogues. However, we will not tolerate turning
such meetings into propaganda performances, and we
urge that they be used specifically to raise members'
awareness on issues on the Council's agenda.

We welcome the fact that the Kuwait presidency
has asked Member States for suggestions for further
modernizing and democratizing the Council's work. In
our View, we should take a closer look at the distribution
of responsibilities for the informal oversight of the
Council's various dossiers. Being a penholder is an
additional responsibility, and those carrying out that
function have to act impartially and respectfully,
keeping a constant finger on the pulse of the events in
the countries concerned. Inactivity on the part of some
penholders has often resulted in the serious deterioration
of situations and the emergence of so-called forgotten
crises. We should expand the circle of penholders and
do so particularly by using non-permanent members.
We would like to tackle this issue seriously within the
relevant working group.

The methodology for negotiating Security Council
resolutions needs improvement. Recent situations that
have arisen when work has been done in a high-pressure
atmosphere of artificial deadlines, precluding thorough
study of the relevant documents, are unacceptable. What
we end up with is half-baked documents that do not
take into account the concerns of all Council members,
who should be participants in the negotiation of draft
decisions and resolutions at every stage of the work.
Another issue of concern that the Working Group should
address is attempts to arbitrarily interpret the formats
for considering regional situations. In that regard we
should be guided not by national preferences - often
phobias, actually - but by the real state of affairs
in hotspots.

As we have already noted, we should be working
constantly to improve the Council's working methods.
However, those efforts can be genuinely effective only
when Council members reject politicized approaches
and choose concerted efforts on a basis of mutual
respect for each other's concerns and priorities. I
would also like to mention, since the subject has come
up, that the right to the veto does not come under the
category of the Council's working methods. It is rather
a cornerstone of the entire architecture of the Security
Council, not a privilege but an instrument pledging and
guaranteeing the Council's ability to reach balanced
decisions, which are the only decisions that have a high
likelihood of being fulfilled as effectively as possible.

