Mr. Spatafora (Italy): A very warm welcome
goes to Minister Nqakula for his very substantive
briefing and for the truly outstanding contribution that,
as Facilitator, he is making to the process. I also
welcome among us the Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General for Burundi and the Permanent
Representative of Burundi.

Allow me to begin by saying that all of us have
long felt that Burundi must be a success story for the
United Nations. We are committed to Burundi
becoming a success story. Therefore, the Peacebuilding
Commission chose Burundi, together with Sierra
Leone, as the first country cases to address
comprehensively. We cannot afford the luxury of losing
the challenge of making Burundi a success story.

I think, Mr. N qakula, that your work as
Facilitator truly does honour to South Africa and to you
personally. We are grateful for your role and, of course,
the role of the Regional Peace Initiative, in teamwork
with the African Union and with the United Nations
Integrated Office in Burundi (BINUB). There is a lot at
stake, and that is why we are so grateful.

I would like to touch upon one issue. You,
Mr. Nqakula, have stressed several times the need for
the support of the international community. First of all,
you will get that support after this meeting, because
you certainly need to have your hand strengthened in
your dealings and facilitation efforts. There is no doubt
about that.

Here I will not use my words, but those of the
draft presidential press statement - and I am very
grateful to the French delegation for preparing it. In
that statement, we will make clear today, to public
opinion and to the international community, that we

support the work of the Facilitator. We will urge the
PALIPEHUTU-FNL to return to the Joint Verification
and Monitoring Mechanism without delay or
preconditions, and we will call on both parties, as we
have heard previous speakers do, to refrain from any
action that might lead to a resumption of hostilities.

Here I want to ask you, Mr. Minister, whether,
beyond this, you have something in mind that you
expect, specifically, from this body? What else can we
as the Security Council be doing, for the moment, to
support you and the Regional Peace Initiative, to
strengthen your hand and ease the way forward in the
peace process, in order to prevent a relapse into
hostilities? Do you have something specific in mind
that we can do? Of course, we - the members sitting
around this table, who are also members of the
Peacebuilding Commission - will certainly encourage
the Commission to strongly involve itself in doing
everything possible to facilitate the peace process.

Again, my question is: do you have something
more in mind that we can do? Because, as I said, we
want Burundi to be a success story.

