Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to speak about the situation in Palestine.

The events we are discussing in this Chamber are
tragic. The Charter on which the Organization was
founded states that the peoples of the United Nations
are determined to save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war, which has brought untold sorrow to
mankind. The same Charter, which is quoted with such
grand eloquence in so many statements, says that the
Organization is based on the principle of the sovereign
equality of all its Members. However, this meeting and
the scourge afflicting the Palestinian people are clear
proof that the international order cannot save Palestine
from the untold suffering brought about by Israeli
aggression.

This meeting, this Council and the tragedy of
Palestine are clear proof that this principle - the
sovereign equality of all its Members - is not true.
What the Charter says is not true. Members in this
Organization are not equal. I will not speak about my
country, which is one of the 193 Members, but I shall
refer to the statement on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries, whereby 120 countries demand
that the Council stop the invasion into Gaza and put
an end to the repeated Israeli military attacks against
the Palestinian people. Many statements have been
made on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, which
brings together more than two thirds of the membership
of the Organization, calling for an end to the Israeli
occupation of the Palestinian territory.

We are not equal, as the Charter claims, because
only one of the five privileged members with the right
to veto can paralyse any initiative for action. A single
member has more power than two thirds of the Members
of the United Nations. That same permanent member
with the right to veto, which has justified those crimes
with the "right to self-defense" formula, is complicit
through action and inaction for those atrocities. Of
course, I am referring to the United States, the same
Member State that has hindered Palestine's recognition
as a full member of the Organization.

However, I do not believe that those considerations,
which are discussed in the grey corridors of international
diplomacy, went through the minds of any of the eight
members of the Abu Jarad family when an Israeli
missile struck their house in northern Gaza on 14 July,
killing all of them, including five children aged 15, 13,
12 and 3 years and 6 months.

While we will never forget the atrocities the Nazis
committed against the Jewish people, we also cannot
remain silent in the face of these tragic events. It
appears that in this story Goliath uses attack planes and
missile launchers, while David wears a scarf.

In that context, I want to devote the four minutes
that I have to the Palestinian people and to the Council.
I apologize to the Palestinian people, through their
representative and with our limited ability to reach them,
from the bottom of our souls as a human beings. I want
to apologize for the more than 600 Palestinians - men,
women, the elderly and girls and boys - who lost their
lives in the past few days. The international community,
of which we are part, has failed them. We are failing
them.

I want to apologize for the more than 3,500
Palestinian men, women, elderly and children who
have been wounded and may be permanently disabled
as a result of the Israeli aggression. The international
community is failing them.

I apologize for the nearly 100 schools and the
18 medical facilities destroyed by the Israeli attack.
The international community is failing them.

I apologize for the 72,000 children who will
require specialized psychological counselling after
these horrendous attacks. The international community
is failing them.

I want to apologize for the 1,500 homes that have
been totally or partially destroyed by the occupying
Power. The international community is failing them.

I want to apologize for 6,000 Palestinians detained
by the occupying Power. The international community
is failing them.

I want to apologize for the illegal settlements. I
want to apologize for the inhumane wall being built to
isolate them. The international community is failing
them.

I now want to address the Council - its 15 members
and the 5 that have a privilege that makes us unequal,
the right to veto - but above all the Government of
the United States. We well know that what the world
is witnessing today is the result of the illegal and
illegitimate Israeli occupation of Palestinian territory.
We have lost our innocence. We know that many of
the diplomatic efforts only give more time to Israel to
pursue its military objectives.

The Council has the power to stop that, and it does
not do it. It does not impose sanctions against Israel.
There will be no decisions taken to stop tose atrocities.
As President Evo Morales has said, we must put an
end to that genocide and prosecute those responsible.
Bolivia demands in the strongest terms that the
Council put an end to the Israeli military aggression
against Palestine. We call upon them to shoulder their
responsibility and put an end to the building ofthe wall.
We demand that an end be put to illegal settlements. We
demand that Palestinian prisoners be freed. We demand
compliance with the Geneva Conventions, human
rights conventions and the Rome Statute. We call for
a sanctions regime against Israel. We want aggression
and the occupation to end. The Palestinians must have
a free, sovereign and independent State.

I will conclude this statement by recalling the
words of Nelson Mandela, that great revolutionary who
took no half-measures but fought for the freedom of
peoples. He said: "We know too well that our freedom
is incomplete without the freedom of the Palestinians".

