Mr. Kasanda (Zambia): Allow me, Madam, to extend
to you my delegation's congratulations on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
February. May I also take this opportunity to convey my
delegation's appreciation to Sir John Weston, of the
delegation of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, who presided over the Security Council
during the month of January, for the able manner in which
he conducted the affairs of the Council.

The Security Council is meeting once again to discuss
progress in the implementation of the peace process in
Angola following the signing of the Lusaka Protocol on
20 November 1994 at Lusaka. The Secretary-General, Mr.
Boutros Boutros-Ghali, and his Special Representative, Mr.
Alioune Blondin Beye, deserve special thanks and
appreciation for their consistent show of interest and their
practical efforts in the peace process in Angola. Special
thanks and appreciation should also be extended to the three
observer States - Portugal, the Russian Federation and the
United States of America for their continued moral and
material support for the consolidation of the peace process
in Angola.

 

Madam President, my delegation has noted with
pleasure your recent fact-finding and working trip to Africa,
which took you to various flash points in Africa, including
Angola. This, we believe, will enable the Council to have
a deeper appreciation of the facts on the ground.

Although, unfortunately, slow progress has been
reported in the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol,
owing to numerous obstacles, my delegation remains
optimistic about achieving a lasting and peaceful solution
to the Angolan conflict. We believe that both parties to the
conflict are still committed to the Lusaka Protocol as a
fundamental basis for the peaceful solution of the Angolan
problem. The people of Angola are very weary of the
continuing conflict - more so than ever before. We also
believe that the international community is now in an era
which is characterized by cooperation rather than
confrontation, by interdependence and by the peaceful
solution of conflicts. The Angolan conflict cannot continue
to be an exception to this rule.

My delegation has taken note of the many positive
achievements on the part of the Angolan Government in the
consolidation of the Lusaka Protocol and in the process of
confidence-building. We hope that the Uniao Nacional
para a Independencia Total de Angola (UNITA) too will
adhere to the commitments made under the Lusaka
Protocol. Indeed, both parties must renew their energies
in order to remove the remaining obstacles to full
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol.

For peace to return to Angola, however, it is
incumbent upon the Government of Angola and UNITA
to have the political will to reconcile with each other and
to embrace peace rather than war. The onus for
establishing lasting peace in that country rests first and
foremost with the people of Angola and their leaders, as
peace cannot be imposed from outside Angola.

As the Secretary-General rightly observed in his
report,

"a deep-seated mistrust and a lack of political will to
take decisive measures has prevented the parties
from honouring their commitments". (S/1996/75,  para. 37)

This mistrust can be removed only by constant meetings
between the two parties. My delegation therefore strongly
welcomes and supports the establishment of a "conflict
prevention group" composed of high-ranking military
representatives of the two parties and the return to Luanda
on 11 January 1996 of the UNITA military delegation to
resume bilateral negotiations on the completion of the
formation of the joint armed forces. These meetings are
important because they contribute positively to
confidence-building. My delegation wishes to urge the
President of Angola and Mr. Savimbi of UNITA to meet
on a regular basis to resolve differences that impede
progress in the consolidation of peace. This will go a long
way towards fostering a climate of mutual trust and
confidence between the Government and UNITA.

In the regional context, my delegation supports the
View that all States, in particular those neighbouring
Angola, should facilitate the process of national
reconciliation in Angola and should take steps to ensure
that no actions contrary to the provisions of the Lusaka
Protocol are committed on their territory.

With regard to the slow movement of humanitarian
assistance, it is my delegation's hope that all parties
concerned will work tirelessly to guarantee the flow of
humanitarian assistance by removing all the difficulties
which obstruct the free movement of relief workers and
humanitarian aid. Many Angolans have died during the

 

war; every possible means must therefore be employed to
prevent more deaths resulting from starvation. The Angolan
people and the international community must

ensure that food reaches the people in need, on time and
on a regular basis.

Angola is relatively well endowed in natural
resources, but for Angola to be in a position to exploit its
resources, it needs peace. As is well known. peace is
indivisible and is a key to development efforts. Demining,
mine verification and the reconstruction of access roads
and bridges are essential components not only of the
peace process, but of the overall economic and social
development of the country. In this regard, my delegation
welcomes the Secretariat's mine action plan for Angola
aimed at developing a sustainable national mine-clearance
capability. In this regard, no effort should be spared in
allowing the South African mine verification company
MECHEM. to resume its operations and in guaranteeing
security for the company's personnel.

My delegation supports the call by the Secretary?
General to extend the mandate on Angola in order to deal
conclusively with the remaining obstacles.

