Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
We find ourselves at a crucial moment in the evolution
of the conflict in Ukraine. Spain voted in favour of
resolution 2202 (2015) not just because we fully agree
with its contents, but because we believe that the
Security Council, which has very closely followed the
conflict, could not remain on the sidelines, especially
now.

Since the Minsk protocol of 5 September, there
have been thousands of victims - 5,000, in fact, many
of them innocent civilians - owing to breakdowns
in the ceasefire. The human tragedy in Ukraine is
unsustainable, and it is essential to put an end to it.
Spain therefore appreciates and welcomes the step
taken by France and Germany, an initiative we firmly
support.

Last Thursday in Minsk, all the parties agreed
to give dialogue a new chance, aware of the fact that
the military option was not a solution to the crisis in
Ukraine. They therefore committed themselves in this
new agreement to put in place a ceasefire, along with
the other aspects of the peace process agreed in Minsk
last September - which have gone systematically
unfulfilled and violated.

As set out in the press statement made public a few

minutes ago (SC/11784), we also note with concern that,
having entered into force on 15 February, as agreed in
Minsk, the ceasefire is not being respected overall. We
are concerned in particular about the ongoing fighting
in Debaltseve. The parties must fully implement
the agreement reached last week, beginning with an
immediate ceasefire in line with the terms agreed. Of
course, the success of this new agreement will continue
in large measure to depend upon the willingness of the
parties. If we want peace, it must be implemented in
good faith and completely.

There is no need to recall the gravity ofthe conflict
to peace and stability in Europe. In that regard, I would
like to conclude by reiterating that the host of measures
agreed in Minsk on 12 February give a very important
role both to the European Union and the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe. As a member
of both organizations, Spain agrees that both bodies
have much to contribute to this process. Of course, we
will work responsibly and with determination to ensure
that happens.

