Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Alexander Konuzin for his excellent
presentation of the 90-day work programme of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and for his
efforts to enable the Committee to fulfil its mandate at
a time of transition, when the Executive Directorate is
being put into place. I take this opportunity once again
to extend our congratulations to Mr. Javier Ruperez on
his appointment as Executive Director and to assure
him of our full cooperation.

I would like briefly to underline a few elements
of the programme of work under consideration that I
consider to be important. First, we hope that the CTC
will be able to meet the deadline for adopting the
organizational plan of the Executive Directorate in
order to submit it to the Security Council for approval.
This will enable the new executive body to become
operational and to carry out the tasks entrusted to it.

We also believe that it is highly desirable to
maintain the cooperation between the CTC and the Al
Qaeda and Taliban Sanctions Committee and to
develop new forms of such cooperation, while fully
respecting the mandates of the two Committees.

We encourage the CTC to continue its work of
assessing the assistance needs of countries. The visits
of CTC experts to certain countries, with their consent
and in accordance with the provisions of resolution
1535 (2004), will help to strengthen monitoring of the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) and to
establish direct dialogue with the Governments of the
States concerned.

For that reason, we support and encourage the
CTC as it begins preparations for the first of its
intended visits. Those Visits require good preparation
and a clear and precise road map with respect to the
objectives to be achieved. They respond to the CTC's
wish to verify on the ground the implementation of the
provisions of resolution 1373 (2001) and should be
carried out without discrimination of any kind, in every
region, regardless of civilization, cultural or religious
background.

We note that 71 countries have failed to report in
a timely fashion. We urge those countries to fulfil their
obligations under resolution 1373 (2001), and we
encourage the Committee to explore all ways and
means of assisting those States so that they can submit
their reports. In particular, the Committee should
reflect on ways to communicate, engage in dialogue
and interact with Member States in order to ensure
their cooperation, rather then limiting interaction to the
mere exchange of correspondence, which is starting to
show its limitations.

We support the CTC in its preparatory efforts
with the League of Arab States for the meeting,
planned to be held in Cairo in December. The
successful holding of that meeting would certainly send
a strong signal from the international community with
respect to the fight against terrorism.

