Mr. Burian (Slovakia): At the outset, I would
like to join previous speakers in thanking Mr. Qazi for
his briefing and for introducing the current report of
the Secretary-General (S/2006/706). I wish to take this
opportunity to commend him in person, and to
commend all United Nations staff and United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq personnel for the
outstanding work they are carrying out in and for Iraq
under truly difficult circumstances. I also thank
Ambassador Bolton for his report on behalf of the
countries that make up the Multinational Force, among
them my own country, Slovakia.

As we heard in the briefing, the situation in Iraq
remains complex and requires thorough attention, as
well as the unconditional support and assistance of the
international community. This is crucial, particularly at
this critical time when the Iraqi people and their
leaders have arrived at an important crossroads that
could lead the country either to peace and prosperity
or, as a worst case scenario, towards dangerous State
breakdown and potential civil war.

During the past three years, the people and the
leaders of Iraq have clearly demonstrated their

commitment and support to their country's political
transition and have made many sacrifices to achieve
that goal. As a result, Iraq has successfully met the
benchmarks endorsed by resolution 1546 (2004), and
the first constitutionally elected Government is now in
place, complete and fully operational. Such an historic
achievement should not be wasted. We deem as top
priorities for the Government of Iraq the further
strengthening of democratic institutions; effective
implementation of governmental programmes, mainly
in the security and human rights areas; and the
adoption of concrete measures aimed at addressing the
basic needs, concerns and aspirations of all Iraq's
communities and constituencies and at the rapid
improvement of their welfare and basic living
conditions. Such steps towards stabilization are
urgently needed in order to foster the further successful
transition of Iraq. We remain convinced that a
sustained inter-communal and intra-communal
dialogue, national reconciliation, constitutional review
and implementation of the constitution represent
important confidence-building measures that can help
Iraq to tackle its many challenges.

Furthermore, the Secretary-General has
emphasized in his report that the Iraqi Government
must do everything possible to progressively foster an
environment conducive to the demobilization,
disarming and reintegration of militias. In our View,
strong United Nations involvement in Iraq's
transitional process remains instrumental. We therefore
welcome the recent initiative of the Government of
Iraq to launch the International Compact for a new
partnership with the international community, as well
as the United Nations decision to provide strong
support in developing it.

Along with the European Union, Slovakia
expresses its readiness to participate actively and
constructively in the process. We also stress the
importance of Iraqi ownership of the process of
developing the Compact and the broad involvement of
the international community and the active
participation of neighbours and partners in the region.
We also welcome and support the Secretary-General's
initiative to convene a meeting of the foreign ministers
of relevant parties in New York on 18 September to
engage in a strategy dialogue on the future of Iraq.

Regrettably, the level of violence and insecurity
continues to rise in many areas of Iraq, and the
mounting civilian casualties remain a source of our
constant concern. The tangible improvement of the
overall security situation in the country thus remains a
key objective.

Similarly, we remain deeply concerned about the
human rights situation in Iraq. The effects of the
ongoing insurgency, sectarian violence, revenge attacks
and militia activities are alarming. We feel that further
measures are needed to reinforce the justice and
security systems and to develop a robust human rights
agenda in order not only to protect the lives of innocent
civilians, but also to hold fully accountable those
responsible for violent acts. In that regard, we
welcome the ongoing efforts of the Government of Iraq
to take concrete measures to improve security, such as
the Baghdad security plan, as well as Prime Minister
Al-Maliki's decision to launch a National
Reconciliation Plan.

We also fully support and encourage effective
regional engagement between Iraq and its neighbours.
We welcome the continuing efforts and progress made
by the League of Arab States to convene a conference
on Iraqi national accord. Contributing to and
promoting durable peace and stability will benefit not
only that country, but also its immediate neighbours, as
well as the wider region. In that regard, we feel that
mainly Iraq's immediate neighbours could and should
play a more active role in promoting and supporting its
peace and stability, including by preventing the flow of
arms into Iraq and also by cutting off support for
various militias. We regard their contribution to the
success of Iraq's stabilization as instrumental and
decisive. Hence, we hope that Iraq will receive from its
neighbours the required cooperation and assistance,
and we encourage Iraq's neighbours to act in that
positive direction, which will ultimately be useful to
them as well as to the wider region.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate that Slovakia
remains fully committed to the political and economic
transition of Iraq. We are one of the troop-contributing
countries to the Multinational Force and we stand
ready to assist Iraq in financial and material ways and
means as well.

