Mr. Ryan (Ireland): I would like to thank the
Representative of the Secretary-General, Cheikh
Tidiane Sy, for briefing us today on developments in
the Central African Republic. I am also grateful to Mr.
Lyons of the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) and to Mr. Karlsson of the World Bank. Those
organizations are closely involved in the Central
African Republic, and their insight and experience are
a most useful guide to the Council. We are also grateful
to the Group of Friends ofthe Central African Republic
for their work. In addition, we welcome Mr. Mezode,
Minister for the Promotion of Civic Responsibility in
charge of relations with the Parliament of the Central
African Republic, and we thank him for joining us
today.

We welcome the progress that the Government of
the Central African Republic has made, as noted in the
Secretary-General's report, particularly towards
disarmament and the restructuring of the defence and
the security forces.

At the same time, however, the Secretary-
General's report presents an unsatisfactory picture of
the economic and political situation in the Central
African Republic. The consolidation of democratic
institutions and the promotion of national
reconciliation are prerequisites to political, economic
and social development. The absence of any dialogue
with the opposition parties is very regrettable.
However, we note that the Secretary-General
recognized that the opposition parties have themselves
often adopted a confrontational approach. We concur
with the Secretary-General's assessment that it is up to
the Central African people themselves to summon the
political will necessary and work towards national
reconciliation.

I would like at this point to acknowledge the
straight talking this morning by the Foreign Minister of
Mauritius, when, in a wider comment, he rooted
conflicts in some African countries in the absence of
good governance, non-respect for democratic
institutions, persistent violations of human rights and
lack of transparency.

The action taken by the Central African
Government in December to disperse an opposition
rally, which was followed by the arrest and trial of
parliamentarians, has only served to heighten tension.
We would urge all sides, Government and opposition,
to enter into a serious dialogue in order to preserve the
democratic institutions so recently established. We call
on the Government of the Central African Republic to
follow through on a number of confidence-building
measures, such as access to the State-run media, as was
promised by Prime Minister Anicet Georges Doleguele,
in order to help improve the relationship between the
sides.

On the human rights front, the report highlights a
number of serious violations, although the decrease in
the level of summary and extrajudicial executions is to
be welcomed. In particular, we deplore the violations
that have been taking place in the guise of
"neighbourhood justice", referred to earlier by
Representative Sy. We look forward to hearing
definitive confirmation of an end to these quite
unacceptable practices. The Government must take the
necessary and appropriate action in this regard. We
welcome the work that the United Nations Peace-
building Support Office in the Central African
Republic has done in training law enforcement officers.
This is a significant contribution towards increasing
confidence in State justice and law and order. We note
Representative Sy's comment that international donor
support is also needed in this area.

The serious economic situation in the country is
not helped by the conflict in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, and we share the Secretary-General's
assessment that without the restoration of peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, there can be no
lasting solution to the instability in the region.

We welcome the positive responses that the
Secretary General has received from the President of
the World Bank and from the International Monetary
Fund in response to his letters of November last year.
The approval of the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
(HIPC) Debt Initiative debt relief package should
enable the resumption of payment of salaries and a
gradual settlement of arrears in wages and help to
defuse what has been described as the serious and
explosive social situation in the country. Likewise,
structural reforms and poverty reduction programmes
of the Government will also benefit from the HIPC
package. Vice-President Karlsson's positive report this
morning regarding Prime Minister Doleguele's
commitment and that of his Government to defend
effectively their national economic interests both
internally and externally is heartening.

The international community has already invested
heavily in peace in the Central African Republic and
must be encouraged to continue to do so. However, the
necessary return on this investment can come only
through the restoration of political stability, which in
turn must come from the people and institutions of the
Central African Republic. We strongly support the
Secretary-General's call for the international financial
institutions to contribute constructively to a
collaborative effort with the Government of the Central
African Republic in helping to restore social and
political stability to the country.

Finally, may I express Ireland's support for the
proposed presidential statement.

