Mr. Milanovie (Serbia): Before I begin, I would
like to thank the High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin Inzko, for his report
(S/2017/922, annex).

Regional stability and the development of all-round
cooperation with its neighbours have always been
among Serbia's foreign policy priorities. A staunch
advocate of cooperation with all the countries of the
Western Balkans, my country has been very active in
promoting these priorities and made every effort to
realize concrete projects and lay lasting foundations
for a better future of the region. Clearly reflecting its
will, Serbia has recognized Bosnia and Herzegovina as
a natural, key partner in these endeavours.

We in the region are aware that enlargement may not
be among the priorities of the European Union (EU) in
the period of consolidation and multiple challenges. We
are heartened, however, by the recent message that the
continuation of the policy of enlargement to the Western
Balkans is a stable process and that EU membership of
its countries may take place even before 2025. Serbia
will make its own contribution to this process, carry
out reforms and promote mutual cooperation. After all,
the process is not only in the interest of Serbia, but of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, too, and of the entire region.

Conversely, each and every success of Bosnia and
Herzegovina is grist for Serbia's mill and gives us cause
to believe that we are a step closer to a common future
in the European family of nations. A candidate member,
Serbia has made considerable progress in the accession
process and we expect new chapters to be opened soon.
In that context, we are ready to make our experience
available to Bosnia and Herzegovina to help it promote
its own negotiation process.

Almost 22 years ago to the day, a peace agreement
was signed in Dayton, Ohio, ending the tragic conflict
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. A guarantor of the Dayton
Agreement, Serbia believes that the Agreement

continues to provide a basis for peace and stability and
that it is of crucial importance for reconciliation. That
reconciliation is sometimes hard to come by is evinced
by the persistence of different undertones in the
region. We must not turn a deaf ear to such discordant
messages, which add tension, return us unnecessarily
to the past and burden relations between Bosnia and
Herzegovina's entities and its constituent peoples. They
have a negative ripple effect on the entire region too. Its
countries' Governments must be vigilant and make sure
that conditions are created for genuine reconciliation.
Only in this way shall we be able to ensure progress
that will benefit us all.

There is another reason that makes us very
motivated to promote cooperation, strengthen relations
and build mutual trust with Bosnia and Herzegovina, as
well as with its entities. Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
Republika Srpska are home to a large number of Serbs,
and we believe that we can help them improve their
lives and succeed in their efforts to join the European
Union and thereby enjoy the fruits of common EU
membership in the near future.

The sovereignty and territorial integrity of States
are international standards and consistent respect
for them is of paramount importance in international
relations. The past that we experienced in the Western
Balkans is and should be a constant reminder of their
importance for peace, stability and mutual trust and
confidence. My country is firmly committed to the
preservation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina in accordance with the
provisions of the Dayton Agreement.

Today, I shall reiterate what I have already said in
my previous statements on this occasion - dialogue
and agreement are the safest and best ways to address
all outstanding issues between the entities and among
the constituent peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
This approach has proved its practical validity time and
again. If solutions are to be forward-looking and results-
oriented, they need to be acceptable and implementable
and promote the process of confidence-building in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The questions in respect
of which the entities have different views, such as
the judiciary or the Election Law, for instance, are,
in our opinion, internal questions of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. They call for active dialogue within the
country, which is the only way to achieve universally
acceptable solutions. Otherwise, the floodgates will
be open to unilateral acts, misunderstandings and
negative messages, to the detriment of the entities
and all citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina. All sides
should therefore work on building mutual trust and
strengthening transparency and, as the first major
political undertaking ahead, ensure a smooth holding
of the elections next year. After all, transparency and
responsibility are the all important building blocks of
Bosnia and Herzegovina's common institutions.

High-level dialogue and regular meetings are
instrumental in developing all-round bilateral relations
and closer cooperation between Serbia and Bosnia
and Herzegovina. President of Serbia Mr. Aleksandar
Vucie made his first official visit to Sarajevo in early
September. Open and constructive, his meetings and
other engagements during this visit reflected the need
for the two countries to create a new model of relations
and to invest additional efforts in promoting economic
cooperation and realizing infrastructure projects.
Chairman of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina
Mr. Dragan Covic' visited Belgrade recently. In his
meetings with President Vucic', it was again assessed
that the relations between Serbia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina are of key importance to the preservation
of regional peace and stability and for ensuring a better
life for all citizens.

The intensification of the dialogue between the
two countries is evinced by the preparation of the visit
of Bosnia and Herzegovina's Presidency to Belgrade
scheduled for December, and the invitation of Ana
Brnabie, Prime Minister of Serbia, extended to Denis
ZVizdic', Chairman ofthe Council ofMinisters ofBosnia
and Herzegovina, to a joint meeting of the Government
of Serbia and the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, to be held towards the end of 2017.

The promotion of economic cooperation with
Bosnia and Herzegovina is of the utmost importance
to Serbia and an almost a daily assignment of its
Government. Trade exchange between the two
countries is in ascendance, and with an investment
of over €900 million, Serbia is among the largest
investors in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The development
of cooperation in the fields of infrastructure, energy,
tourism and trade dominates the agendas of the
meetings between Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina's
officials. Projects that link us to Serbia's to-do list and
the participation of third countries in such projects
are welcome, especially in the construction of the
Belgrade-Sarajevo motorway.
At a time of great challenges facing the world
and significant changes taking place in Europe, we
must work harder to improve bilateral relations in
our region. Drawing upon the traditional bonds of
friendship between the people of Serbia and Bosnia
and Herzegovina, the two countries should make their
relations a role model for good-neighbourliness 7 all

the more so as wc continue to be committed to regional
development, mutual rapprochement and an ever»
quicker march towards the European Union. Open
questions from the past should be addressed through
dialogue as we proceed to realize our present
interests simultaneously.

The meeting rose at 12.20 pm.
