Mr. Rodriguez Parrilla (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): Barely one year ago at United Nations
Headquarters, more than 150 Governments and other
international actors committed to cooperating to
provide substantial aid for the recovery and
reconstruction of Haiti after the disaster caused by the
earthquake of 12 January of that year.

As a statement, it was a commendable show of
solidarity. Though insufficient, the total pledged for
reconstruction - $9 billion, of which $5 billion was to
be disbursed in the first two years, in addition to
valuable offers in kind - reflected an undeniable
willingness to help. The declared principle of directing
this aid with full adherence to the Haitian
Government's priorities, so as to strengthen the
authority of the State, showed universal respect for the
sovereignty of that beleaguered nation and its
governing authorities' prerogatives. There appeared to
be a universal desire to aid that heroic nation, the first
to break free of the colonial yoke and to abolish
slavery in the hemisphere of the Americas.

Unfortunately, what has happened since has not
been consistent with the spirit that ruled the conference
of 31 March 2010. Nevertheless, many of the self-
proclaimed principal donors have continued to dedicate
exorbitant resources to war and military intervention.
The sums pledged for financial and material aid,
however insufficient to the magnitude of the problem,
have not been disbursed. The will of the Haitian
Government has not been respected, and its priorities
have not been attended to. The reconstruction of Haiti,
to which we all committed, is a task that is still
pending.

In the months following the terrible earthquake,
Haiti seemed to be being torn apart by the
Governments of the most powerful and industrialized
countries, which distributed their aid in an arbitrary
and arrogant fashion through their voracious
companies and some of their wealthiest non-
governmental organizations. Even today, funds and
resources continue to be directed outside the
programmes and control of the Haitian Government,
leading to waste, corruption and the satisfaction of
very marginal or selective interests.

Cuba shares the concerns expressed by the Heads
of Government of the Caribbean Community in the
communique issued at their intersessional meeting on
26 February, in which they made critical references to
the working methods of the Haiti Reconstruction Fund
and the Interim Haiti Recovery Commission, to the
need to respect the Haitian Government's priorities,
and to the insufficient flow of pledged resources.

Cuba has concentrated its efforts in the area
where it can have the greatest impact - public health,
a key element in Haiti's social sustainability and
stability. In full coordination with the Bolivarian
Alliance for the Peoples of Our America, and following
the directions and priorities of the Haitian Government,
we have worked tirelessly to implement a programme
to rebuild the national health system, aimed essentially
at meeting the health needs of 75 per cent of the
neediest part of the population at minimum cost. Since
12 January 2010, almost 2 million patients have been
treated, more than 36,000 surgeries have been
performed and almost 8,500 babies have been
delivered. More than 465,000 patients have received
rehabilitation treatment. Services are being provided at
23 community referral hospitals, 30 rehabilitation
wards, 13 health centres, two eye surgery clinics and
the Public Health Laboratory. A comprehensive
programme for hygiene and epidemiology is being
developed in all 10 of the country's departments.

This Cuban cooperative programme has 1,117
health workers, of whom 923 are Cuban and 201 come
from the various countries educating and graduating
students in Cuba, including young Haitians. The
resources generously provided in solidarity by
President Hugo Chavez Frias of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela have been essential, and we
have worked closely with Brazil through a tripartite
agreement with Haiti.

Cuba has also received the backing of several
countries in carrying out this health programme.
Namibia, Norway, South Africa, Australia and Spain,
along with groups of individual donors, have
contributed just over $3.5 million. We are ready to
work, in a strictly humanitarian fashion and in respect
for and in full coordination with the Haitian
Government, with any and all countries and
organizations willing to take part in rebuilding and
developing Haiti's health system.

At the same time, Cuban doctors have confronted
a serious cholera epidemic. Sixty-seven units have
been set up to care for more than 73,000 patients, a
third of all the cases in the country. Of these, only 272
have died, for a death rate of 0.37 per cent, five times
lower than that of other institutions in Haiti. Caring for
these patients has required selflessness and a spirit of
sacrifice, especially at night. In the past 77 consecutive
days, our medical and nursing personnel have seen no
deaths from cholera. The creation of active survey
groups, known as Subcomuna Adentro, was a new
experiment that permitted the examination of almost
1.7 million people living in communities without
access to health care services, and the diagnosis of
more than 5,300 cholera cases in their own homes.

I mention these results in all the modesty of our
people merely to cite practical examples in support of
our conviction that what Haiti needs is substantial and
impartial aid, closely coordinated with the
Government, that contributes to its development and
helps overcome the immense socio-economic
difficulties and disparities affecting Haiti and hindering
its people's stability and progress.

Haiti does not need an army of occupation; it is
not and cannot become a United Nations protectorate.
The role of the United Nations is to support the
Government and people of Haiti in strengthening their
sovereignty and self-determination. The forces of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) have a very specific mandate to promote
stability in that country, and that should have been and
should still be rigorously respected. MINUSTAH does
not have the political prerogative to involve itself in
strictly internal Haitian affairs, nor should it do so. It is
not acceptable for it to participate in electoral choices
or to pressure sovereign authorities in any way. It also
has no right to speak on behalf of Haiti.

Cuba is firmly convinced that the humanitarian
situation in Haiti is a matter not for the Security
Council but for the General Assembly, whose authority
the Council frequently usurps. This is not an issue that
threatens international peace and security, and it cannot
be resolved by a military presence conceived for
peacekeeping operations. The serious consequences of
the omissions, excesses, double standards and anti-
democratic procedures of the Council are also well
known.

The problems of this sister nation are essentially
the result of centuries of colonial and neocolonial
pillage, underdevelopment, the imposition of one of the
longest and bloodiest dictatorships ever seen in our
region, and foreign intervention. The inalienable rights
of the Haitian people to independence and self-
determination should finally be respected.

Haiti needs resources for reconstruction and
development. It needs humanitarian commitment, and
not interference or political manipulation. It needs a
minimum of generosity, instead of so much egoism.

