Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Sir, for convening this
meeting and for your work at the helm of the Security
Council this month. I would also like to thank Special
Coordinator Robert Serry for his briefing this morning.

Today's date coincides with the deadline for
the signing of a framework agreement between the
Palestinians and Israelis. Despite the support and the
good offices of the United States of America, Israel
has not responded to international and Arab efforts.
That State is therefore responsible for the failure of
the negotiations as a result of a number of measures
undertaken by it and the fact that it has shown no
genuine desire to reach a solution. Those measurs
include the attempts to undermine the integrity
of Jerusalem, continued settlement activity in the
occupied Palestinian territories, the refusal to release
Palestinian prisoners and other arbitrary, illegal and
immoral activities.

The success of any agreement is precluded by
Israel's intransigent position, which jeopardizes the
very possibility of creating an independent and viable
sovereign Palestinian State. I reiterate our concerns
regarding the impact of continuing Israeli policies that
regrettably undermine any hope for peace, including
continued settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territories and East Jerusalem under the
threat or the use of force, the exploitation of water and
natural resources belonging to Palestine, the arrest of
Palestinians, the destruction of entire villages and the
demolition of buildings, and the continued aggression
against the Holy Al-Aqsa Mosque.
The State of Qatar has repeatedly stated its
attachment to the principles of the Arab Peace Initiative
to achieve a lasting and just peace in the region. Any
agreement must be clearly based on recognition of
the rights of the Palestinian people, including the end
of the occupation and the creation of an independent
Palestinian State on Palestinian territories occupied
since 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital, a
withdrawal from the occupied Syrian Golan, a
recognition of the right of return of refugees and the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people.

Israel's continued blockade of the Gaza Strip, its
prohibition on the building of a port or rebuilding the
airport, and its refusal to allow Gaza to import building
materials to repair destruction for which Israel itself
was responsible all create a situation of crisis. The
blockade must therefore be lifted and border crossings
reopened, pursuant to the agreement made in November
2005 by the various parties.

The State of Qatar has called for the end of the
split between the two parts of Palestine and for the
unification of all of Palestine and its children. We
therefore welcome the national reconciliation, which
we view as a significant step forward. We call on the
international community to support the reconciliation
process, which will enable us to achieve the peace we
all want to see.

The proclamation of this year as the International
Year of Solidarity with the Palestinian People was both
important and a logical precondition for achieving a
solution based on lasting, just and sustainable peace.
We would like to take this opportunity to reaffirm the
solidarity of Qatar with our Palestinian brothers in their
rightful struggle. We urge the international community
to do likewise.

The Syrian crisis is entering its fourth year.
Its disastrous impacts have reached horrendous
proportions. Syria has since the beginning of the
crisis been the theatre of war crimes, grave violations
of human rights, violations of international law
and violations of international humanitarian law. A
great deal of evidence clearly demonstrates that such
crimes and violations have taken place, including
crimes against humanity perpetrated in the regime's
prisons and elsewhere. We therefore doubt that it will
be possible to achieve the political solution that the
international community is calling for.

The State of Qatar participated in the second Geneva
Conference on Syria and has worked to convince the
Syrian opposition to take part in that Conference, given
the need for a political solution based on the Geneva
communique of the Action Group for Syria (S/2012/522, annex) of 30 June 2012, which was accepted by the
Security Council as the basis for any political solution.

However, the failure by the regime to demonstrate
its sincerity and its attempts to delay those negotiations
clearly show that they do not want a political solution.
The regime has gone even further and surprised the
international community by undertaking measures
aimed at scuttling the entire process. The Syrian
regime has not limited itself to causing the exodus of
millions of Syrians. It is also preventing the delivery
of humanitarian assistance and blocked the movement
of humanitarian actors by flouting administrative
processes. It has closed a number of medical and
surgical centres and prevented non-governmental
organizations from working with their partners on the
ground, including blocking their movement.

All that is quite clear from the second report of the
Secretary-General (S/2014/295) on the implementation
of resolution 2139 (2014), with which we agree. The
time for negotiations on humanitarian access is over.
Resolution 2139 (2014) was adopted two months ago
and has still not been implemented. The humanitarian
situation continues to deteriorate. The security situation
is doing likewise, as clearly shown by the report of the
Secretary-General.

The continuing violence, systematic and large-scale
killing and the use of heavy weaponry by the regime
in urban areas, in particular the use of barrel bombs,
is absolutely horrifying. We cannot remain silent in
the face of the even more disturbing information that
we have received regarding the use of toxic gases in
populated areas. That is a very serious development,
and we call for the setting up for a commission of
inquiry on the issue. The international community's
silence on that subject, in particular after the chemical
weapons attacks in Ghouta, is simply unacceptable. In
that respect, the Security Council must take swift and
effective measures to deal with those blatant violations
of the fundamental principles of international law and
protect civilians in Syria. We must also be diligent and
create a mechanism to bring to justice those who have
committed war crimes and crimes against humanity in
Syria.

