Mr. Corman (Turkey): We would like to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ould Abdallah, for his comprehensive briefing. We
would also like to thank Foreign Minister of Somalia
Mohamed Omaar and African Union Commissioner
Lamamra for their statements. We also welcome the
report (S/2009/373) of the Secretary-General.

Today's meeting on Somalia, the second in the
month of July, is a testament to the importance that the
Council attaches to developments in Somalia in
particular, and to peace and stability in the Horn of
Africa in general. Somalia is at a very delicate point.
Developments on the ground have not yet reached the
irreversible stage, insofar as the establishment of the
authority of the Transitional Federal Government
(TFG) in and around the capital is concerned.

We welcome the open-door policy pursued by the
TFG vis-a-vis opposition groups. We should insist in
our call to all groups in and outside Somalia that there
is no military solution to the Somali question and that
the Djibouti peace process is the only road towards a
peaceful future. Turkey fully supports the Transitional
Federal Government as the only legitimate authority in
Somalia. We reiterated that support to President Sheikh
Sharif Sheik Ahmed during his visit to Turkey last
April.

We commend the crucial role played by the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and
express our gratitude to the Governments of Uganda
and Burundi for their invaluable contributions to the
Mission. We encourage other African Union member
States to follow suit. Undoubtedly, AMISOM's
technical capacity should also be bolstered so that it
can effectively implement its mandate. To that end, the
expeditious deployment of the logistics support
package by the United Nations will be vital.

Equally important is the early transfer of funds
pledged to AMISOM. at the Brussels donors'
conference in April. I would like to say that Turkey has
already transferred half of its pledge to AMISOM. The
other part of our pledge, for the restructuring of the
transitional security institutions in Somalia, has also
been made available. As we have indicated on various
occasions, Turkey is prepared to train AMISOM
peacekeepers and Somali police officers in Turkey, in
cooperation with the United Nations.

We welcome the recent meeting in Mogadishu of
Somalia's Joint Security Committee. As Special
Representative Ould Abdallah has said, the revitalization
of the Committee marks an important step towards
reforming and improving security in Somalia.

We are closely following the Secretariat's work
on the plan for a future United Nations peacekeeping
operation to follow AMISOM, subject to a further
decision of the Security Council. In that regard, we
look forward to the report of the Secretary-General to
be issued in September 2009. We hope that the visit to
Mogadishu by a team from the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations takes place in advance of that
report, as planned.

Turkey fully supports the three-track approach of
the Secretary-General, as endorsed in resolution 1872
(2009).

We are also concerned about the deterioration of
the humanitarian situation in Somalia as a consequence
of intensified fighting. It is alarming to learn from the
report of the Secretary-General that some instances
amount to war crimes under international humanitarian
law. Here, the effective implementation of sanctions on
Somalia and the importance of preventing the entry of
foreign fighters into its territory come into the picture.

As for international efforts to combat piracy off
the coast of Somalia and in the Gulf of Aden, I am
pleased to report that Turkey's contribution to those
efforts, with the provision of two frigates, continues.
Moreover, we are actively taking part in the work of
the International Contact Group on Somalia and are
closely cooperating with countries of the region in that
context.

