Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I
congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for this month, and thank you for
your outstanding work.

I also thank the members of the Council for
their statements.

I have two brief comments to make. First of all,
the decision to refer the situation in Darfur to the
International Criminal Court (ICC) was not unanimous
or reached by consensus. Secondly, concerning the
question of whether genocide has taken place in Darfur,
I have the following comments to make.

In late 2015, the General Assembly adopted
resolution 69/323, commemorating the victims of
genocide. In our statement on that occasion (see A/69/PV.103), and in support of designating the
International Day of Commemoration and Dignity
of the Victims of the Crime of Genocide and of
the Prevention of This Crime, we recalled all the
international testimony that categorically refuted the
assertion that any act of genocide had taken place in
Darfur. In that statement, we also quoted the testimony
of former United States Secretary of State Colin Powell;
the former Secretary-General of the United Nations,
Mr. Kofi Annan; the President of the African Union
in 2004, former Nigerian President Olusegun Obasanjo;
the European Union, the African Union and the
League of Arab States; and Medecins Sans Frontieres,
which was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1999
for its role in ending the 1994 genocide in Rwanda.
Complementing all this testimony was the report of the
International Commission of Inquiry on Darfur, which
was submitted to the Council in early 2005, confirming
that no genocide had taken place in Darfur.

The International Criminal Court (ICC) and
its Prosecutor maintain their assaults and use of
inappropriate language that we in the United Nations
and the other organs of international standing are not
accustomed to hearing. In the absence of the necessary
restraint on the part of the Council, the ICC Prosecutor
continues to direct offensive language against His
Excellency the President of the Sudan and the Security
Council itself, the highest political authority of the
United Nations, by using such expressions as "the
failure of the Council" or "the loss of its credibility".
Concerning the President of the Republic of the Sudan,
the 2005 Transitional Constitution stipulates that the
President of the Republic is the symbol of the country
and its sovereignty. We do not accept any abuse from any
quarter, let alone from this defective kangaroo court.

I draw the Council's attention to the statement
made by the representative of the Russian Federation
in the Security Council to the effect that the reports of
the Prosecutor to the Council have started to resemble
those submitted by monitoring bodies. I refer Council
members to paragraphs 24 to 29 and 34 to 36 of the
report, which illustrate the lack of knowledge on the
part of the Prosecutor and her Office as to the presumed
judicial nature of the Court. It may be appropriate here
to recall the statement made by a former President of
the Assembly of States Parties to the ICC concerning
the ineffectiveness of the Prosecutor, to the effect that
the Prosecutor was not even capable of putting together
an indictment.

The sorry state of the ICC cannot be addressed
except by ignoring it and allowing to collapse from
within, which is indeed its inevitable fate. It is an
honour for the Sudan to be the country to draw the
greatest attention to the flaws in the statute of the
ICC that will inevitably bring it into conflict with the
irrefutable and imperative norms of international law,
such as the principle of equality; the principle that
international covenants and agreements are binding
only on the parties; and the moral principle of nullarn
crimen sine Zege, which stipulates that there is no crime
without law.

The ICC, and especially its first Prosecutor and
now the current Prosecutor, who is the former Deputy
Prosecutor, have treated my country cavalierly and are
now tasting the fruits of their overreach, confusion,
relentlessness and politicization. Since the jurisdiction
of the ICC covers individuals or citizens of States
parties to its statute, it is sufficient for us to demonstrate
that about 60 per cent of the world's people belong
to States that recognize neither the authority nor the
jurisdiction of the Court. These include China, Russia,
the United States, Egypt, India, Pakistan and Indonesia,
whose populations constitute no less than half of the
inhabitants of planet, and perhaps more.

The incoherence of the report before the Council
today is but the result of the earlier sin establishing a
political organ called the ICC to discharge a judicial
task - or, if you prefer, the creation of a judicial organ
to carry out a political mission. It is no coincidence that
the ICC focuses all its investigations and prosecutions
on Africa, because it believes that Africa is an easier
political mark than others. This disparity goes beyond
the prosecutors and the judges; it affects the statute and
the very idea of international criminal justice, which
are concerned primarily with individuals. Thus, every
time His Excellency the President of the Republic of the
Sudan responds to an invitation from a State Member
of the United Nations or a regional organization, the
ICC finds itself in the same predicament. We seek
a solid international legal system that invokes the
Charter of the United Nations as its primary authority
and accords it precedence in terms of commitment
and implementation.

Here we are dealing with State commitments under
the Charter of the United Nations and the immunity of
Presidents and representatives of States, and with the
commitments of States to international organizations
such as the African Union and other political groups
such as the League of Arab States, the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation or the Non-Aligned Movement.

We can only conclude that the ICC has given rise
to contradictions and conflicts in connection with two
long-standing aspects of the international system. The
first aspect involves the clashes and the conflicts that
the ICC, by its very existence, tries to provoke between
the various norms of international law. The second is
the conflict it creates between the principles ofjustice
and peace. What is astonishing here is that the person
who wrote this report makes reference to the need to
take into account the root causes of the conflict, without
understanding that that means seeking to conclude a
negotiated peace agreement, which is indeed what took
place in Doha in July 2011.

Since 2002, it has become evident that failure in
terms of implementation has completed a full cycle of
failure, since the very beginning, when the ICC was
founded. The result of implementation, 15 years after
the entry into force of the Statute of the ICC, is sad and
disappointing. How many cases have been ruled on by
the ICC? How much has been spent to date? What is the
cost of one single trial, if we divide the budget of the
ICC over 15 years by the number of trials that have been
held? I defy the Prosecutor to answer those questions.

Also, supporters ofthe concept ofthe ICC have said
that the ad hoc or temporary tribunals created by the
Security Council lack the element of deterrence, while
the ICC does not, as it is a permanent tribunal. The
question here is, to what extent has the ICC succeeded in
creating an appropriate level of deterrence for violations
of human rights, the rule of law and human rights
worldwide, and what is the capacity of the Security
Council to ensure the equitable implementation of
article 13 of the Statute? Does the Court operate on the
basis of equality between all the States that have agreed
to be parties to the Statute? Those are the difficult and
important questions that the Court must answer, and
they must be answered precisely.

We believe that it will be impossible for the ICC
and its supporters to answer those questions. But what
is important to us at this meeting is the fact that all
those discrepancies and shortcomings can be covered
up by the Prosecutor only by politicizing her work,
inventing evidence or bribing witnesses.

The Office of the Prosecutor sidestepped its
judicial and legal task as stipulated in the Statute of
the Court and devoted the greater part of the report to
elements that are against the Government of the Sudan.
This deep desire to condemn the Government of the
Sudan warrants only disdain and contempt, because
the Prosecutor overlooked the principal task assigned
to her.

To our surprise, and I think that most members
of the Security Council were equally surprised, the
report welcomes the extension of the mandate of the
Panel of Experts created by the Security Council under
resolution 2340 (2017). We were surprised also to see
that the ICC has asked the Government of the Sudan to
ensure continued and unfettered access to the various
areas of Darfur, even though the report spoke about
addressing the root causes of the conflict in Darfur,
as if it were thinking of itself as the Security Council.
The report states also that unless the root causes of
the conflict are addressed, the situation in Darfur will
remain unstable and unpredictable.

The catastrophe lies not only in the ineffectiveness
of the Prosecutor and her Office; it goes beyond that,
given the absence of honesty or any spirit of equity or
justice, or even balance, in stating the facts. For a very
long time, the Prosecutor and her Office have agreed
to play a political role or the role of a monitoring
mechanism. It would have been far worthier of them to
indicate that resolution 2340 (2017), for the first time
since 2005, the year in which the referral decision was
taken, states that the situation is largely back to normal
in all five states of Darfur, which are equivalent in area
to that of France or Iraq, except for a very small part of
one of the provinces of Darfur.

The report also avoids mentioning the explicit
condemnation in resolution 2340 (2017) of armed
movements that use civilian installations as shields,
which poses a threat to civilians, especially internally
displaced persons. It is the very same report that has
never, ever failed to mention paragraph 28, saying that
civilians are still in danger.

Finally, we would like to voice our appreciation
to the Secretariat, which has distanced itself from the
aims of the ICC, which sought to involve it so as to
make the ICC appear to be part of the United Nations
system when it is not. We wish also to commend the
positions of those countries that did not fall for the
instigation carried out by the Office of the Prosecutor,
as well as the firm position of the Security Council
in lending assistance aimed at definitely ending the
conflict in Darfur, supporting a political settlement and
rejecting the possibility ofa protracted conflict. We are
optimistic that together and with firm steps we will
move towards attaining our common goal of security
and peace.

The meeting rose at 4.50p.m.
