Mr. Castro Cordoba (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): Costa Rica congratulates you, Mr. President,
and all your team on your work in the Security Council
presidency and on having proposed three important
debates during your term. Holding an open debate on the
purposes and principles of our Charter helps us return
to our roots and the basic criteria of our Organization,
and to confirm that, yesterday as today, they remain
relevant. We, the peoples of the United Nations, must
redesign the institutional architecture on the basis of
those building blocks in order to address the challenges
of the new millennium.

Let me refer to two aspects of the purposes and
principles of the Charter that Costa Rica considers
important and can help the ongoing discussion.

The first is the relationship between the principle
of non-intervention and the responsibility to protect.
Costa Rica, as a small country with no military that has
placed its security and the defence of its sovereignty
in the hands of the international multilateral system,
upholds the principle of non-intervention. That principle,
however, is not unlimited, not only in situations that call
for the implementation of Chapter VII of the Charter
but also when States should be responsible and the
guarantors of the security and welfare of their citizens.
Sovereignty confers responsibility.

That is why our country upholds another principle
that has evolved on the basis of the need to take action in
the event of grave human rights violations and violations
of international humanitarian law. I refer here to the
responsibility to protect and its application in situations
of genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes and
ethnic cleansing. In cases where States lack sufficient
capacity to exercise their responsibility to protect, the
action of the international community is paramount.
Intrinsic human dignity and fundamental rights are not
dependent solely on States, whose legitimacy should
be based on their service to and protection of their
people. In that sense, the protection of human dignity is
a legitimate universal concern that transcends borders
and calls on the international community to act.

While important progress has been made in the
past decade in terms of that principle in reports and
resolutions of the bodies of the United Nations, it is
important to continue stepping up efforts to enhance
its recognition, development and implementation in
the proceedings of the Organization. It is vital to move
forward as an Organization to assist States in fulfilling
their responsibility to protect, as well as in efforts to
help the international community to respond effectively
and rapidly, in a timely and adequate manner, when
collective action to protect is called for.

The second aspect that we wish to address has to
do with the provisions of Article 99 of the Charter.
This Article authorizes the Secretary-General to draw
the attention of the Security Council to any matter that
may threaten the maintenance of international peace
and security. Obviously, it refers to new cases that are
not currently being discussed and have not been placed
on the agenda by any other country. As the Secretary-
General clearly indicated this morning, unfortunately
this toolhas beenused onlyin exceptionalcircumstances
over the past 70 years. That mechanism is a vital tool
for conflict prevention and entails an independent
political role given to the Secretary-General that he
himself must exercise when circumstances require it.
Through that mechanism, the Secretary-General can
intervene in a timely manner to seek respect for the
purposes and principles of the Charter, especially with
a view to preventing conflicts and eliminating threats to
international peace and security. But that early warning
prerogative granted by the Charter is also an obligation
and a responsibility. The Secretary-General has access
to privileged information, such as that provided by
observers in the field and the personnel necessary for
carrying out political analyses that are required. He is
therefore placed in a strategic position to make make
those warnings in a timely manner so that the Security
Council can take the take appropriate measures, and
preferably preventive measures, which can also play an
important role to ensure the responsibility to protect.

Given the very complex landscape that we face in
terms of new conflicts and unprecedented humanitarian
crises, we must use of existing mechanisms such as
early warning, as well as new principles such as the
responsibility to protect, so that we can take preventive
action to safeguard international peace and human
rights.

