At the outset, allow me to thank Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for the quality of his briefing. The political climate in Bosnia and Herzegovina remains a major source of concern, in part due to disagreements over the overall State budget and the appointment of the members of the Central Election Commission, which led to the postponement of the local elections, originally scheduled for October, to 15 November. In addition, the lack of funding has considerably undermined the smooth functioning of the institutions and their capacity to cope with the urgent needs arising from the coronavirus disease pandemic. In that context, it is necessary that the relevant actors fulfil their obligations under national and international legal instruments relating to elections, including the 17 June agreement on the holding of elections in the city of Mostar. The rule of law is crucial to democratic stability and progress. To that end, we urge the parties to work to strengthen the rule of law, including through adherence to the constitutional and legal requirements and respect for the independence of the judiciary. I would like to commend the efforts made by regional and international actors to ensure that the rule of law takes root in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina has made the return of refugees and displaced persons a crucial element of its implementation. According to the agreement, it is the responsibility of all parties to create the conditions for the voluntary return and reintegration of displaced persons and refugees. Despite the tireless efforts of the international community, the implementation of the General Framework Agreement for Peace remains ineffective. To that end, it is important to refrain from rhetoric and behaviour that undermine the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and challenge the powers of its main institutions. The presence of the European Union military mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina Operation Althea remains an important factor for security and stability, as demonstrated by its essential role in maintaining a safe and secure environment. In conclusion, my delegation calls for the constructive political engagement and ownership of the General Framework Agreement for Peace by the parties.
