Ms. King (Australia): I thank you, Mr. President, for
dedicating the Council's time this morning to this vital
issue. We thank the briefers for eloquently reminding
us today that millions of civilians are under threat,
caught up in humanitarian crises and directly attacked
in conflicts. Without the assistance of humanitarian
workers, their suffering would be indescribably worse.
The world is experiencing the greatest number of
simultaneous major crises in decades. At the end of
2013, more than 50 million people were displaced, either
internally or as refugees. Every one of those people
required some form of protection and assistance. As
an international community, we rely on humanitarian
workers to deliver vital assistance in dangerous places
and, as Mr. Maurer has emphasized, they rely on the
humanitarian principles to protect them.

As we commemorate today the tragic bombing
of the United Nations headquarters in Baghdad and
honour those who have given their lives in the service
of humankind, we also pay tribute to all humanitarian
workers currently working tirelessly and unarmed in
some of the world's most volatile conflict and disaster
zones.

Humanitarian workers are more essential, and
yet more vulnerable, than ever before. The deliberate
targeting of humanitarian personnel has become
a sickening hallmark of conflict. Violence against
aid workers sank to new depths in 2013. The figures
recalled this morning are shocking. We mention in
particular the impact on national staff, who risk their
own safety, even while their families may be under
threat, in order to save lives in their own countries and
communities. The vast majority of attacks in 2013 were
against national staff, as we have heard this morning,
and we know that the statistics tell only part of the
story. It is an outrage that those who work to save lives
become targets themselves for that very reason. That is
a security challenge that must be confronted.

Under international law, the protection of civilians,
including humanitarian workers, is the responsibility of
all parties to conflict. International humanitarian law
provides protection for relief and medical personnel.
Those rules must be respected. United Nations
premises must also be inviolable. Schools and hospitals
must remain sanctuaries. The Convention on the Safety
of United Nations and Associated Personnel and its
Optional Protocol aim to protect such personnel and
to prevent impunity for attacks on United Nations
personnel or property. We urge all States to accede to
those instruments.

The work of the humanitarian community is
inextricably linked to the work of the Council in
maintaining international peace and security. The
majority of attacks against aid workers occur in situations
on our agenda. Civilians and civilian infrastructure
are increasingly targeted in armed conflicts. In some
cases, that is part of a deliberate military strategy. As
a result, the denial of humanitarian assistance for those
civilians, including attacks on humanitarians trying to
help them, has become more systematic. Put simply,
such actions have become an element of conflict. The
situation in Syria is a striking example, which is why,
faced with the magnitude of human suffering there, the
Council unanimously adopted resolutions 2139 (2014)
and 2165 (2014) in support of the humanitarian effort.

The Council has long recognized that the protection
of civilians is central to our work. In order to protect
civilians, we must safeguard humanitarians and ensure
access for them. It is incumbent upon the Council
to use all of the tools at its disposal to do so. In that
connection, there are things we should do.

First, we should ensure that resolution 1502 (2003),
on the protection of humanitarian personnel, is fully
implemented. But, given the increasing attacks on
humanitarian personnel, the Council should now build
upon that resolution.

Secondly, we should continue to mandate
peacekeeping missions aimed at establishing enabling
conditions for principled humanitarian action where
appropriate, as we have done in South Sudan. That can
range from support to peace processes, to reporting
on access challenges, as well as security actions to
protect humanitarian and United Nations personnel
and facilities and keep access routes open. In all cases,
humanitarian principles must be paramount.

Thirdly, where there is a sanctions regime in place,
we should apply sanctions against those who obstruct
the delivery of humanitarian assistance.

Fourthly, the Council must work to end impunity
for attacks on humanitarians. Perpetrators should be
brought to justice before a court of law, whether domestic
or international. The Council should make clear its
expectation that attacks on civilian humanitarian
workers will be fully investigated. Where a State is
unwilling or unable to carry out such investigations,
the creation of United Nations fact-finding missions
can be appropriate. It is incumbent upon the Council
to support the prosecution of attacks on humanitarian
personnel. We welcome the fact that the International
Criminal Court is currently trying Abdallah Banda
Abakaer Nourain for an alleged attack on the African
Union Mission in the Sudan, for example, as the result
of a referral by the Council. It is incumbent upon the
Council to support such processes.

Finally, the proliferation of non-State armed groups
poses unique challenges. We applaud the work of
organizations such as Geneva Call and the International
Committee of the Red Cross aimed at promoting
compliance by those groups with their obligations. The
Council should continue to explore creative ways of
promoting compliance by such groups, as we have done
in dealing with the issue of children in armed conflict.

Humanitarian operations remain a crucial part of
the collective commitment to international peace and
security. We will not accept attacks on humanitarian
workers as an inevitable consequence of conflict. Very
often, humanitarians are the ones protecting civilians.
The Council must act to protect them.

