Mr. Jurica (Croatia): At the outset, allow me to
thank the Vietnamese presidency of the Security
Council for organizing this open debate on children
and armed conflict. I would like to thank you, Sir, for
personally chairing it.

Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by our French colleague on behalf of the
European Union. I would like to make some comments
in my national capacity.

Croatia welcomes the strengthened engagement
of the Security Council in addressing violations against
children in armed conflict. The establishment of the
monitoring and reporting mechanisms pursuant to
resolution 1612 (2005) and the creation of the Working
Group of the Security Council on Children and Armed
Conflict have raised the profile of children affected by
armed conflict to the international level and have
undoubtedly contributed to the reduction in the
recruitment of children by parties to conflict. We
commend the efforts and achievements of the Working
Group, which is efficiently chaired by French
Ambassador Ripert.

However, resolution 1612 (2005) also deals with
a further five grave violations against children that
have not been adequately addressed in the mechanisms
to which I have referred. There needs to be an
extension of the application of the monitoring and
reporting mechanisms to include all six grave

violations in all situations identified in both annexes
contained in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2007/757).

Another positive development was the recent
adoption of resolution 1820 (2008), which demands the
immediate and complete cessation by all parties to
armed conflict of all acts of sexual violence against
civilians, with immediate effect. That resolution should
contribute significantly to the safety of children in
armed conflict. The scope of its impact will be evident
by 30 June 2009, by which time the Secretary-General
has been requested to submit a report to the Council on
its implementation.

In spite of the positive achievements by the
United Nations system and the international
community as a whole, the situation on the ground
demands continued and stronger Security Council
action in order to ensure that all parties to armed
conflict act in compliance with the relevant resolutions
of the Council and other international instruments
developed to protect children in armed conflict.

In order to contribute to a long-term and
sustained solution to the issues of children in armed
conflict, the United Nations and the international
community at large must ensure that adequate
resources and funding are available to support national
strategies or action plans in the area of child protection
and welfare, as well as community-based programmes.
As reported by various non-governmental
organizations, the latter is the key to the successful
rehabilitation and reintegration of former child
soldiers.

Successful reintegration requires long-term,
adequate and sufficient funding of community-based
programmes in order to prevent recruitment, child
prostitution, stigma, discrimination and involvement in
criminal activities. Moreover, children should be
allowed access to benefits without having to identify
themselves as ex-child soldiers, since many children
are associated with armed forces and groups in other
equally harmful ways.

By giving children education and skills training
in the areas that a community needs, we will help them
to become constructive members of those communities,
which will hopefully more readily accept and value
them in the future. By giving all children affected by
armed conflict access to those beneficial programmes,
there will be less likelihood of resentment against
former child soldiers and those associated with armed
forces and groups.

Croatia strongly supports the work of child
protection advisers throughout all Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and Department for Political
Affairs missions, as well as United Nations mission
personnel guarding camps for displaced persons. As the
report of the Secretary-General points out, it has
become evident that such camps have become
recruiting grounds for child soldiers.

The Principles and Guidelines on Children
Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups
represent the latest policy on that issue. Croatia
believes that they in particular deserve to be
internationally recognized and universally applied. We
urge all parties to armed conflict to stop using child
soldiers and to start acting in compliance with
international humanitarian and human rights law,
including the Paris Principles.

We urge Governments to end impunity for
perpetrators accused of committing Violations against
children in armed conflict. We believe that there is a
need to refer those violations to the International
Criminal Court in cases where national systems fail to
address them, as proposed by the Secretary-General.

In order to ensure the long-term sustainability
and success of the programmatic response to the
release, rehabilitation and reintegration of all children
associated with armed forces and armed groups, the
Security Council and the international community as a
whole need to adopt a broad strategy of conflict
prevention that addresses the root cause of armed
conflict in a comprehensive manner. By promoting
sustainable development, poverty eradication, national
reconciliation, good governance, democracy, the rule
of law and respect for and protection of human rights,
we will ensure the protection of children on a long-
term basis. We will ensure that they have a future.

