Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to congratulate you, Madam, on
your country's assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council this month. I would also like to thank
you for convening today's debate. We commend the
Foreign Minister of Uruguay, who also presided over
the meeting. We would also like to thank the Secretary-
General.

Resolution 2286 (2016) is ofparticular importance,
given the outbreak of wars and conflict in many parts of
the world, including in our region. Unfortunately, those
conflicts have often disregarded the inviolability of
medical professionals and their work, the wounded and
the sick. We commend the efforts undertaken to assist
medical personnel, the wounded and humanitarian
workers. They carry out their duties as medical
professionals in hospitals and medical centres and
provide equipment. The perpetrators of violations must
be held accountable. That is the best way to strengthen
protection under international humanitarian law.

We can tolerate no delay in the effective
implementation of resolution 2286 (2016), because
targeting health-care staff and facilities represents a
violation of international humanitarian law that has
grave repercussions on the ground. The cost is always
paid by innocent civilians. In that regard, I would like
to note what we have seen every day, which has been
documented in reports of the United Nations, namely,
the demolition and destruction of hospitals and health-
care facilities in Syria by the Syrian Armed Forces, as
well other acts of violence, attacks and threats against
medical and humanitarian actors. The Syrian Armed
Forces have also targeted convoys carrying medical
equipment, which has led to the destruction of hospitals
and the deaths of many doctors and humanitarian actors,
as well as the sick and wounded. Such actions certainly
constitute a grave breach of international humanitarian
law. Many Syrian health-care facilities are unable
to function now, which constitutes a grave threat to
thousands of civilians. It is therefore necessary for the
international community to act and adopt preventive,
practical measures in order to end such violations.
They constitute flagrant violations of international
humanitarian law.

We also need to adopt measures to ensure
accountability for the perpetrators of such crimes,
who must be brought to justice. They must not enjoy
impunity. We believe in the importance of the rule of
law, both internationally and domestically, as well as
of ensuring accountability in cases of mass atrocities
and violations of human rights. That is all necessary
in order to reinforce peace and ensure stability on the
ground in countries riddled with conflict.

We worked with our partners to ensure that
the General Assembly adopted resolution 71/248,
establishing the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011. That
resolution is of great importance for setting up and
implementing resolution 2286 (2016) in Syria.

The State of Qatar is committed to providing
humanitarian assistance. Much of that assistance
is geared towards the alleviation of the suffering
of civilians, who are those most affected by armed
conflicts. In that regard, we support the provision of
medical and health-care support. For example, we
provided $1.6 billion for the alleviation of suffering
both in Syria and outside of Syria through international
humanitarian organizations and donor conferences.
Furthermore, a significant portion of that assistance to
the region, which has been ravaged by conflict, includes
assistance for the health-care sphere. I would also like
to mention international humanitarian organizations
operating in Qatar, which are working hard to remedy the
situation on the ground. If the international community
hopes to succeed in protecting civilians during armed
conflicts, it is necessary to work hand-in-hand to find
just solutions to the conflicts. My country stands ready
to work tirelessly to support any Security Council
initiatives to establish international peace and security
in the region and in the world.

