The President: I thank Mr. Mladenov for
his briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Chief of Cabinet of the President of Poland.

At the outset, I would like to thank Special
Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his informative
briefing. I also want to take this opportunity to
commend Mr. Mladenov for his relentless efforts to
restore peace and stability in the Middle East. I can
assure him that Poland highly values his role in the
process of the stabilization of one of the most crucial
regions to the world's security.

Regrettably, for yet another month, we have
witnessed the fading of the prospect for peace between
the Israelis and the Palestinians. The situation on
the ground continues to deteriorate, deepening the
atmosphere of mutual distrust. Only a couple of days
ago, rockets were fired once again from Gaza towards
southern Israel. Fragments of one of them struck a
home in the town of Sderot earlier this month. Light
was shed on worrisome reports of several incidents of
infiltration into Israeli territory by armed Palestinians
from the Gaza Strip, which were followed by exchanges
of fire.

I want to reiterate that Poland strongly condemns
such acts, as well as all instances of terrorism and
incitement. Five years have passed since the previous
full-Scale conflict in the Gaza Strip. It is imperative
that all parties take the necessary actions to stop another
wave of hideous violence and engage in good faith in
efforts aimed at achieving lasting de-escalation.
Poland is also concerned about any unilateral actions
taken by Israel in the West Bank and East Jerusalem. We
deem the settlement policy in the occupied territories
illegal under international law and a formidable obstacle
to peace that undermines the chances for establishing
a viable Palestinian State. Reaching a breakthrough on
intra-Palestinian reconciliation remains a prerequisite
to peace. Poland calls on the Palestinian factions to
engage in the reconciliation process and commends
Egypt on its role in facilitating it. There is a pressing
need to restore a consensual political atmosphere for a
meaningful peace process to be delivered. A failure to
do so could result in reaching a point of no return.

All parties must demonstrate their commitment
to peace through actions and policies. Poland remains
a proponent of a negotiated two-State solution, based
on the internationally agreed-upon parameters, which
should lead to Israel living side-by-side, in peace and
security, with a sovereign, neighbouring and democratic
Palestine. We support all international efforts aimed
at breaking the current impasse in the peace process.
We commend the United States for its commitment to
that end. Nevertheless, without the far-sighted vision
of the leadership of both sides and their readiness to
compromise, as was the case at Camp David in 1978,
reaching lasting peace will be impossible.

We furthermore believe that, without respect for
the basic rules of international law, including those
pertaining to the protection of civilians, there can be
no lasting peace in the Middle East. Poland continues
to actively advocate for compliance with international
humanitarian law, which constitutes the fundamental
means of protecting civilian populations.

As we heard during the Special Coordinator's
briefing, last weekend we witnessed air strikes in
Lebanon near the Syrian border. Those followed the
crash of two drones in the southern suburbs of Beirut
during the weekend. We have underlined many times
that increased instability in one country may quickly
further destabilize an already violent region. We
therefore call on all sides to exercise maximum restraint,
as the situation in the region remains very tense.

In that context, I also want to underline that
Poland remains firmly committed to supporting the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East. We consider it to be a
major contributor of vital services to those in need.
Supporting the Agency's work is an act of humanity
that makes a tangible difference in the lives of those
directly affected by conflict.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.

