Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation thanks the Nigerian presidency
for convening this meeting. I thank Deputy Secretary-
General Eliasson for his briefing. I also listened
attentively to Mr. Keating's statement.

Twenty years ago, the people of Rwanda were
subjected to unprecedented carnage in which hundreds
of thousands of civilians were killed. That was a
dark page in the annals of humankind and should
be remembered forever. Over the past 20 years, the
Government and people of Rwanda have spared no effort
in promoting national reconciliation, safeguarding
national stability and restoring economic and social
development. Remarkable results have been achieved.
China expresses sincere best wishes to the Government
and people of Rwanda for continuing to achieve new
results on the path of national reconstruction.

Over the past 20 years, the international community
has continued to reflect on the lessons learned from
the Rwandan genocide and has spared no effort in
preventing the recurrence of a similar tragedy. As the
core mechanism for collective security, the Security
Council has engaged actively in recent years in various
actions to prevent and resolve conflicts, and played an
important positive role in the maintenance of regional
peace and security.

Regarding ways to promptly prevent and effectively
respond to various conflicts and potential crises
involving new situations so as to prevent the recurrence
of genocide, I wish to stress the following three points.

First, preventing and containing conflicts is
the most effective fundamental manner by which to
prevent genocide. Ethnic and religious disputes, lack of
development and weak capacities, among other factors,
can potentially generate ethnic tensions, aggravate
social conflicts and even lead to bloody conflict.
In order to contain and eliminate the root causes of
conflict, it is necessary to take integrated measures
to treat symptoms and root causes alike by promoting
inclusive political dialogue and national reconciliation
and creating a peaceful environment that is conducive
to ethnic harmony and unity. In a pluralistic society
of diverse ethnicities and religions, it is all the more
necessary to promote dialogue among different ethnic
groups, advocate peace, harmony and inclusiveness,
strengthen social cohesion, enhance understanding and
trust, and prevent discrimination and confrontation.

Secondly, in order to effectively prevent genocide,
countries and their Governments should fulfil their
duties and obligations. Governments bear the primary
responsibility in protecting their civilians. Governments
and parties to conflicts should all abide by international
humanitarian law and the Convention on the Prevention
and Punishment ofthe Crime of Genocide, among other
international obligations, and spare no effort to protect
civilians from genocide.

The international community should respect the
lead role of the countries concerned and, in accordance
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations, provide constructive support.
Regional organizations have a deeper understanding
of the situation on the ground and the root causes of
conflicts and tensions. They also enjoy closer ties with
the parties concerned. The United Nations and regional
organizations should strengthen coordination and
cooperation in order to take full advantage of synergies
aimed at actively supporting the efforts of the countries
concerned in the protection of civilians. The legal
systems of the countries concerned should constitute
the main channels for ensuring due process and justice
for the victims of genocide, based on full respect for
their legal traditions and genuine needs.

Thirdly, the international community should
prioritize assistance to the countries concerned in
achieving economic growth and social progress in order
to eliminate economic and social causes of conflict.
The international community should use dialogue, good
offices and mediation, among other tools, to promote
the settlement of disputes and differences to prevent
and contain the escalation of conflict and halt genocide
and other crimes against humanity at the source.

In parallel, the international financial institutions
and development agencies should strengthen their
efforts in African and other developing countries to
fulfil all oftheir commitments in terms of assistance and
debt reduction and in raising the resources necessary
for Africa's comprehensive development, strengthening
capacity-building and providing political, financial and
technical support.

The events of the past should be recalled as lessons
for the future. The tragedy of Rwanda 20 years ago has
left a permanent scar on the memory of humankind. The
international community should draw profound lessons
from those events and dedicate itself to maintaining
peace, enhancing common development, eliminating
the root causes of conflict, promoting harmony and
coexistence among various ethnic groups, and pooll
their efforts in building a harmonious world of lasting
peace and common prosperity.

