Ms. Menendez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union.
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary,
Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and
Slovenia, Cyprus, Malta, Turkey, Iceland and
Liechtenstein align themselves with this statement.

Let me first of all thank Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno for his briefing today. The European Union
supports the determination with which the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Steiner, is
implementing his benchmark policy to measure
progress in the establishment of a multi-ethnic,
politically stable and economically sustainable Kosovo.

Achieving a culture based on the rule of law,
tackling crime and violence and ensuring economic
progress are the priorities on which all efforts need to
be concentrated before considering issues pertaining to
the status of Kosovo. We are encouraged to see that the
priorities set out in the draft programme submitted by
the provisional Government to the Kosovo Assembly
point in the same direction as the benchmarks.

We welcome the fact that the representatives of
the Povratak coalition have taken up the positions
assigned to them in the provisional Government and in
the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General. The full participation of the Serb
community, and indeed of all minorities in Kosovo,
remains paramount for the good functioning of the
provisional institutions, as well as for ensuring that
their interests are fully taken into account and
defended. It will also prove crucial to foster the return
process and to promote reconciliation and inter-
communal confidence-building.

We support the emphasis of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
on minority return and expect that the new Inter-
Ministerial Coordinator on Returns and the Senior
Adviser in the Office of Returns and Communities will
play an important role in helping to shape policies
aimed at facilitating sustainable returns and integrating
non-majority communities into mainstream Kosovo
society.

More than one million people are still displaced
around the region as a legacy of the conflict. The past
few years have shown that, when conditions are
established on the ground, especially for minority
returns, progress can be achieved quickly. All regional
actors must spare no effort in putting into place the
appropriate security and legislative conditions for
return and in allocating the resources to ensure its
sustainability.

The European Union remains concerned over the
situation in the northern part of Kosovo and calls on
the authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to
encourage and contribute to unconditional respect for
UNMIK's authority throughout Kosovo. Support for
parallel structures in Mitrovica must end, and the city
must be reunited under the full authority of UNMIK
and the elected representatives of the population. The
benchmark policy that is now being applied in Kosovo
should also be fully applied to Mitrovica. Progress
needs to be made now, with the full commitment of all
parties involved, so that the October municipal
elections can bring about the necessary administrative
normalization.

We support all efforts by UNMIK in this respect,
including the joint patrolling with the Kosovo Force
(KFOR) recently initiated in the northern part of
Mitrovica, as well as the establishment of working
groups to provide confidence-building measures.

The European Union has already expressed its
full support for the decision of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Steiner, to
declare null and void the 23 May Kosovo Assembly
resolution on "the territorial integrity of Kosovo" and
has urged the Kosovo provisional institutions to
discharge their duties within the remit defined by
resolution 1244 (1999) and the Constitutional
Framework, and to concentrate their efforts on
strengthening the rule of law, on improving the
economic situation, including the creation of jobs, and
on contributing to a secure environment, thus
encouraging the return of refugees and internally
displaced persons.
We reaffirm our full support for the border
agreement of 23 February 2001 between the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, and encourage UNMIK and
the Government of the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia to rapidly agree to and implement practical
solutions to the problems faced by the affected
population. We are concerned about the increasing rate
of incidents along the border between Kosovo and the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.

Special Representative Steiner has rightly made
tackling crime and violence and ensuring freedom of
movement priority issues. Violence and crime prevent
democracy from taking root and harm prospects for
investment and economic growth. We support Mr.
Steiner's policy of zero tolerance and commend him
for the measures that he is taking and the regulations
that he is introducing to enhance UNMIK's capabilities
to effectively combat crime, terrorism, extremism and
Violence. We also welcome the agreement reached with
the authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
and Serbia on police cooperation.

Finally, I would like to comment on the
Stabilization and Association Process - a long-term
policy approach in support of sustainable and EU-
compatible reform aimed at helping the countries of the
region to prepare for integration into the European
Union. It has become a driving force for political,
democratic and economic reform within each of the
countries, as well as for strengthening the regional
dimension and reinforcing regional cooperation, which
go hand in hand with forging a closer relationship with
the European Union.

We urge Belgrade and UNMIK, together with the
provisional institutions a self-government of Kosovo,
to work resolutely, within the framework of Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999), the Constitutional
Framework and the Common Document, towards the
objectives of the Stabilization and Association Process.

