President Sleiman (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to express my appreciation to you, Sir,
for convening this summit-level. Such an initiative
makes perfect sense in the light of Turkey's pivotal
role. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his valuable preliminary remarks.

In the first year of this century, the world
witnessed a devastating terrorist attack on the World
Trade Center in this city, which is host to the United
Nations. In its eighth year, the world faced a global
financial crisis. Despite their severity, these crises did
not lead to a general economic collapse. Nor did they
portend the outbreak of a world war, as had been the
case at the start of the twentieth century. In large part
that is thanks to the fact that the international
community agreed on common approaches to
addressing those global crises through mechanisms for
action and solidarity that were based on institutions for
joint action on the regional and international levels,
most prominently the United Nations and its
specialized agencies.

Nevertheless, the successive political and
economic have revealed flaws and shortcomings in this
international system. For one thing, the United Nations
in general, and the Security Council in particular,
require reform. The global financial system too must
be improved.

Nuclear deterrence and the balance of terror
between the two super-Powers prevented global
confrontation after 1945. They did not, however,
prevent the outbreak of small, unjust and lethal wars
which led to the occupation of territories, the division
of States, the displacement of peoples and the death of
millions. Among the most salient of these unjust and
painful crises is the tragedy of Palestine, which is at
the core of the conflict in the Middle East.

Indeed, Israel continues to occupy the Arab
territories by force and deprive the Palestinian people
of their inalienable rights, to carry on with the
Judaization of Jerusalem and the blockade on Gaza and
to cling to its nuclear arsenal. Israel maintains its
occupation of Lebanese territories, violating Lebanon's
national sovereignty. It persists in its threats,
implanting spy networks and agents. That calls for a
firm and deterrent position from the international
community.

The Security Council can settle disputes
peacefully, in accordance with Chapter VI of the
Charter, including through preventive diplomacy and
peacebuilding. Improving performance requires a
transition from a reactive mode to a proactive mode,
notably by trying to address the root causes of
oppression and poverty-induced conflicts, and
preventing aggressor States from achieving their
covetous designs on the territories and resources of
others.

Such efforts should include consolidating
democracy, spreading enlightened and moderate
thinking and promoting an environment conducive to
good governance, far from fanaticism, racism and
arrogance. They should also involve maintaining
initiatives to promote dialogue between and
rapprochement among civilizations, cultures and
religions. Lebanon wishes to become an international
centre for the management of such dialogue.

We must mention the fact that there are tasks that
require only adequate pressure by the international
community and the Security Council in particular. Such
is the case in south Lebanon, where Israeli forces must
withdraw from all Lebanese territories still under their
occupation, without any conditions, in accordance with
relevant resolutions of the United Nations, particularly
Security Council resolution 1701 (2006). In this
context, I would like to commend the efforts and
sacrifices in south Lebanon by the troops of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon. Lebanon will
always be keen to mobilize all its national capabilities
in order to defend its sovereignty, independence and
safety and to protect its land and waters and its marine
resources.

Having participated in the 1991 Madrid Peace
Conference, Lebanon still looks forward to a just and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East, on all tracks,
based on the Madrid terms of reference, the relevant
resolutions of international legitimacy and the Arab
Peace Initiative, in all its provisions. These all preserve
Lebanon's right to regain all its occupied territories
without conditions.

While Lebanon closely follows initiatives
undertaken to reach partial solutions, or beginnings of
solutions, made outside the aforementioned
comprehensive approaches, it reiterates that it would
not agree to any solution for the Middle East cause in
which it does not participate or which contradicts its
high national interests, particularly its sovereign right
to oppose any form of resettlement of Palestinian
refugees in its territories. Such resettlement would
actually contradict the refugees' legitimate and human
rights. It would run counter to the Taif Accord, which
was approved by the Security Council, and to the
preamble of the Lebanese Constitution and the Arab
Peace Initiative. Furthermore, it would lead to an
unjust and tense situation, fuel Violence and undermine
stability in Lebanon and the Middle East.

We should also recall that the international
community assumes a huge responsibility to increase
the budget of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), which was established in 1949 to address
humanitarian issues and aspects of daily life for
Palestinian refugees.

The Security Council can adopt coercive
measures such as sanctions and the use of force when it
acts within the framework of Chapter VI of the Charter.
However, most oppressed peoples often complain
about the Council's inability to enforce its own
resolutions or about its double standards that depict
Israel, for example, as a State beyond accountability
and above international law. They also depict the
United Nations as incapable and paralysed. That
requires effective consideration of the causes of such a
negative perception and how it might be redressed so
as to reactivate the Council's role and gain the peoples'
confidence it its ability to champion them and bring
about justice in a way that dissuades them from
resorting to resistance as a legitimate means of self-
defence.

What we share as nations is the obligation to
respect the rules of international law and the spirit of
justice. We do believe that the rule that maintains
international peace and security and ensures equality
and respect for human rights is the force of law and
justice rather than the law of force and fait accompli.

