I thank you, Sir, for presiding over this meeting. I also thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres and Mr. Pierre Buyoya, African Union High Representative for Mali and the Sahel, for their briefings. We are happy to see the continued positive developments in the political situation in Mali. As an important outcome of the national inclusive dialogue, the legislative elections were successfully held early this year, the reconstituted units of national armed forces were redeployed to northern Mali and the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali was further implemented. We are encouraged to see such progress, and commend the efforts made by the Malian Government and its people in this regard. At the same time, we also noticed that the security situation in northern and central Mali faced increasing challenges arising from frequent terrorist activities and intercommunal violence, which made the humanitarian situation more severe. Such a situation seriously hinders the peace and development process in Mali. Having read the Secretary-General's report (S/2020/476) and listened to the briefings, I wish to share the following points. First, the current positive political momentum should be consolidated. We hope all parties in Mali will take the progress in national dialogue and legislative elections as an opportunity to consolidate the positive momentum, strengthen mutual trust and work together for peace and development in Mali. China welcomes the redeployment of reconstituted units of the national armed forces to northern Mali and notes that the process is facing some difficulties. We hope relevant parties can resolve their differences through dialogue and continue to implement the Peace Agreement. The international community should assist Mali in enhancing its ability for independent development and governance, while respecting its independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity. Secondly, greater effort and investment should be made in countering terrorism in the region. Terrorism is a serious challenge facing Mali and other countries in the Sahel. It is for this reason that the Security Council in March held a debate (see S/PV.8743) and adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2020/5) on countering terrorism in Africa. The outcome should be implemented. We hope the international community will continue to support the Malian Government in improving its counter- terrorism capacity, advancing regional cooperation, promoting poverty-reduction and combating terrorism through an integrated approach. In this regard, it is essential to provide support to the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel. China has provided ¥300 million to the Joint Force and counter-terrorism operations in the Sahel. We commend the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) for providing important logistical support to the Joint Force and thank the Secretary-General for recommending three options for further improving the support model. We will actively participate in the discussions of the Security Council in this regard. Thirdly, continued efforts should be made to eliminate the root causes of instability through sustainable development. The international community should continue to help Mali improve its economic foundation and swiftly achieve sustainable development on its own. Such efforts will help eliminate the root causes of many problems in Mali. We welcome the announcement by the Prime Minister of Mali, during his visit to northern Mali in March, of a series of infrastructure projects aiming to promote the Northern Development Zone. We hope further efforts will be made to follow through on those projects and provide basic services to the people in the north and improve their livelihoods. Fourthly, MINUSMA should continue to be provided the support it needs. MINUSMA has played an important role in maintaining peace and stability and promoting the reconciliation process in Mali. China supports the extension of MINUSMA's mandate for one year, as recommended by the Secretary-General. As a major troop-contributing country to MINUSMA, China has dispatched seven batches of peacekeepers to MINUSMA, and 426 Chinese peacekeepers are currently undertaking various tasks in the Mission. We support the MINUSMA adaptation plan and have pledged to actively consider dispatching an unmanned aircraft system unit. We sincerely hope MINUSMA will actively implement resolution 2518 (2020), on the safety of peacekeepers, adopted in March, to effectively protect the safety and security of peacekeepers and ensure that necessary security supplies are in place. The African continent is facing the unprecedented challenge of the coronavirus disease pandemic. As President Xi Jinping stressed in his speech to the seventy-third World Health Assembly, helping developing countries, especially African countries, in the battle against the pandemic should be the top priority of the international community. The international community should provide more material, technical and personnel support to African countries. China has delivered a large amount of medical aid to more than 50 African countries, including Mali and the African Union, and sent 148 medical experts to 11 African countries. We will establish a cooperation mechanism for our hospitals to pair up with 30 African hospitals, accelerate the construction of the headquarters of the Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention and help African countries improve their capabilities in disease prevention and control. Once a vaccine is available in China, we will make it a global public good and make sure African and other developing countries are among the first to benefit. We sincerely hope that, with joint efforts by us all, Africa will defeat the pandemic and restore hope across the continent.
