Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this open briefing
today on the situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We would also like to express our appreciation to
Under-Secretary-General Miyet for his briefing and
updating on the subject. We are pleased that this open
briefing, which follows closely the discussion that we had
last Friday on the situation in Sierra Leone, is now
becoming a regular feature of the work of the Council,
demonstrating the increasing transparency of the Council,
which is very much welcomed by the larger membership of
the Organization.

Yesterday, the Council had a frank and fruitful
exchange of views on the situation in Africa as a whole and
on how best we could enhance the partnership between the
United Nations and the Organization of African Unity in
efforts to manage or prevent conflicts in Africa. We have
noted that in virtually every intervention, particular
reference was made to the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the importance of the Council's
responding promptly and effectively to manage the conflict
there. Indeed, the point was made that the Democratic
Republic of the Congo would be the litmus test of the
commitment of the Council to be engaged in African
conflicts as a whole. Comparisons were made between the
Council's hesitancy in responding to conflict situations in
Africa, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
particular, and the promptness of its response to other
situations, such as in Kosovo and East Timor. It is time
the Council addressed this issue by demonstrating its
commitment and resolve to carry out its responsibility vis-
a-vis the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

We have been reminded time and time again about
the fragility of the Lusaka process, which, if not
adequately supported by the international community and
this Council in particular, might run the real risk of being
unravelled. I am afraid that time may not be on our side,
and we have been forewarned.

The situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo presents the Organization with one of its most
daunting challenges, given the nature and complexity of
the conflict there, as well as the country's sheer size. We
must therefore be prepared to mount a major
peacekeeping mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, which could well be the biggest operation
undertaken in the history of the Organization thus far.
However, for it to be successful, the mission must be
provided with all the necessary financial and logistical
assistance from the international community. We cannot
afford to have a failed mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

It is in this connection that my delegation strongly
supports early action on the part of the Council to deploy
an observer mission to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo as an important step in that direction. Council
resolution 1279 (1999) sent a clear political message to
the signatories of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement that
the Council continues to be fully committed in assisting
them in the implementation of the Agreement. More
importantly, the resolution should enable the Secretariat
to immediately begin preparations in anticipation of a
possible deployment of a substantial United Nations
observer force in early 2000. In this regard, we look
forward to the assessment of the technical survey team,
whose recommendations will have an important bearing
on any decision regarding the eventual deployment of
observers.

In conclusion, Mr. President, my delegation would
like to reiterate once again its strong and continued

 

support for a peaceful resolution of the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We consider the Lusaka
Peace Agreement process critical and crucial for the
restoration of peace and stability in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and for the Great Lakes region as a
whole. If peace is to take root, all the signatories to the
Lusaka Agreement must comply with its provisions.
Nothing short of this commitment will suffice. It is in this
connection that my delegation notes with concern the recent
ceasefire violations in some parts of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which only serve to further
jeopardize the still fragile situation there. We are equally
concerned by the serious humanitarian situation precipitated
by the ceasefire violations. It is imperative that the parties
carry out their responsibilities under the Agreement to help
the international community play its role in supporting the
peace process effectively.

Malaysia warmly welcomes the decision of the
Organization of African Unity to nominate former President
Masire of Botswana as the mediator in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo crisis. I would also like to take this
opportunity to welcome the recent appointment of
Mr. Kamel Morjane as the Secretary-General's Special
Representative for the Democratic Republic of the Congo;
he will be serving as the head of the United Nations
presence in the subregion and will be assisting in the
implementation of the Agreement. We wish him every
success.

