Mr. Hoang Chi Trung (Viet Nam): At the outset,
I wish to thank to Mr. Honwana for his briefing to the
Council this afternoon. My delegation also wishes to
welcome the participation of His Excellency the Prime
Minister of Djibouti, as well as the presence of the
Permanent Representative of Eritrea and the
representatives of the African Union and the League of
Arab States at the Council's meeting today.

My delegation notes with concern the escalation
of tension on the border between Eritrea and Djibouti,
most notably the serious incidents that occurred on 10
June 2008 along the frontier between the two countries.
We wish to underline the fundamental principle to be
applied to such situations, namely that the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of States must be fully
respected and that every dispute and conflict should be
resolved through peaceful negotiations in a manner
consistent with international law and with the United
Nations Charter. We therefore call upon the two parties
to show utmost restraint, to refrain from any threat or
use of force, to strengthen the current ceasefire and to
intensify dialogue to de-escalate the tension.

It goes without saying that the primary
responsibility to resolve the conflict rests with the two
parties themselves. Viet Nam, however, commends the
efforts undertaken by the African Union, the Arab
League and the Organization of the Islamic Conference
to facilitate the settlement of the dispute. In that
connection, we welcome the decision made by the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union at its
136th meeting, held on 12 June 2008, on the situation
on the border between Djibouti and Eritrea, as well as
on the development in relations between the two
countries.

My delegation also wishes to encourage the
Secretary-General, in coordination with regional
efforts, to use his good offices and to reach out to both
parties to promote dialogue on arrangements for the
immediate return to the situation prevailing at the
common border between the two countries before the
incidents leading to the current tension, including the
withdrawal from the border of all forces that have been
positioned there since February 2008, and for the
development of confidence-building measures to
resolve their bilateral dispute in a peaceful manner.

