Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretaries-General DiCarlo and Lowcock for
their deeply concerning briefings today.

The United States believes that the September 2018
ceasefire agreement between the Russian Federation
and Turkey in Idlib and neighbouring areas is
absolutely essential to maintaining international peace
and security. Millions of civilian lives are in jeopardy
due to increased hostilities by Russia and the regime
over the past two weeks in Idlib and Hama governorates.

These intensified military operations continue
to destabilize the region. The escalation has killed
or injured at least 100 people and driven more than
180,000 from their homes, as we have heard - some
for the third or fourth time in eight years of war, fleeing
the Al-Assad regime's barrel bombs and Russian and
regime air strikes. Recent fighting has forced civilians
to seek safety closer to the border of our NATO ally
Turkey, and the new wave of displaced persons has
overwhelmed the capacity of camps for internally
displaced persons in the area. The offensive has put aid
workers and humanitarian facilities in danger. Turkish
military forces on the ground to monitor and implement
the ceasefire agreement are also in danger, with some
having already been injured, as we have heard.

For a year, the United Nations and many in this
Council have issued grave warnings about the scope of
the tragedy that would result from a military offensive
in Idlib. The Secretary-General was crystal clear in
September 2018 when he said that a military assault
on Idlib would unleash "a humanitarian nightmare
unlike any seen in the blood-soaked Syrian conflict".
Under-Secretary-General Lowcock has been equally
clear in the past and again today about the scale of
the humanitarian catastrophe that would result from a
military assault on Idlib.

The Russian Federation, on behalf of the Astana
group, has assured the Security Council, as well as
my country bilaterally at the highest levels, that it is
committed to maintaining its own ceasefire. However,
Russia and the regime justify their attacks on civilians
and hospitals as counter-terrorism. The strikes have
destroyed 18 health facilities. Most alarming is the fact
that several ofthese facilities were on deconfliction lists
set up by the Russian Federation and the United Nations
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.

The Syrian people are in grave risk of a catastrophic
humanitarian crisis if Russia and the Al-Assad regime
do not immediately halt their escalation and immediately
recommit to the ceasefire. The United States reiterates
that any escalation in violence in north-western Syria
would destabilize the region, and we call on the Russian
Federation to take the following steps with immediate
effect, in recognition of its ability to influence the
behaviour of the Al-Assad regime.

First, it must ensure the de-escalation of all
military activity in the Idlib demilitarized zone and
recommitment to the full implementation of the
17 September 2018 Sochi agreement. This means a full
cessation of all hostilities in the area - full stop.

Secondly, it must ensure that United Nations
cross-border humanitarian aid deliveries authorized by
resolution 2449 (2018) continue to reach populations in
Idlib, including in the demilitarized zone, with regular,
sustained and unimpeded access.

Thirdly, it must encourage Damascus to take all
steps necessary to ensure the safe and unhindered
access of relief personnel to the affected areas in Idlib.

Fourthly, it must finally ensure that the Syrian
regime does not deploy chemical weapons in Idlib.

The United States strongly supports Turkey's
efforts to de-escalate the situation and preserve the
Sochi ceasefire agreement. The United States is not
alone in its calls for Russia and the regime to live up
to their commitments to maintaining the ceasefire. We
echo the important statement by the Turkish Foreign
Minister this week, calling on the regime to stop its
military aggression in Idlib, as well as similar calls by
our European partners. The United States" resolve to
hold the Al-Assad regime accountable for any further
use of chemical weapons is unwavering, and we remind
the regime and its allies that any use of chemical
weapons, including chlorine gas, will be met by a
strong, swift response.

Russia's involvement in this offensive is deeply
concerning because the violence threatens the
opportunity that we believe has arisen in recent days
thanks to the diplomatic push by the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Geir Pedersen, to
jump-start the political process through the creation of
a constitutional committee. The 6 May announcement
by the Al-Assad regime of a ground offensive is
incompatible with the Special Envoy's goal of achieving
a political solution to the conflict. The United States
fully supports Special Envoy Pedersen's efforts to form
the constitutional committee as soon as possible.

With agreement on the constitutional committee
within reach, Russia and the regime's decision to launch
air strikes, fire heavy artillery and drop barrel bombs
sends a terrible signal of disregard towards the United
Nations political process. Today, we want to send a
clear signal to the Al-Assad regime and its supporters,
Russia and Iran, that there is no military solution to
the Syrian conflict. The only solution is a political
transition, as outlined in resolution 2254 (2015), namely,
a ceasefire; the establishment of credible, inclusive,
non-sectarian governance that respects the rights of the
Syrian people; constitutional revision; and free and fair
elections pursuant to the new constitution, supervised
by the United Nations, with the participation of all
Syrians, including members of the diaspora.

Russia has repeatedly claimed to agree that there
is no military solution to the conflict in Syria. A
peaceful and lasting political resolution of this crisis
must begin with the protection of civilian populations
from violence. The United States is therefore concerned
that the recent military escalation may be an attempt
by the Al-Assad regime to stall the formation of the
constitutional committee and the United Nations-led
political process and undercut pragmatic efforts to make
progress on a trajectory to the political resolution ofthe
conflict. This is precisely the wrong course to pursue.

Finally, I have outlined what is the only solution to
the conflict endorsed by the international community
and every single member of the Security Council. The
United States remains firmly committed to Special
Envoy Pedersen's efforts on the United Nations-led
political process in Geneva and to resolution 2254
(2015). Millions oflives depend on it.

