Sir John Weston (United Kingdom): Allow me first,
Sir, to express on behalf of the United Kingdom our
welcome, and our pleasure in seeing you preside over this
important meeting today.

Seven years ago this Council established the United
Nations Special Commission to destroy or render harmless
Iraq's weapons of mass destruction as an integral part of
the conditions for the ceasefire which ended the Gulf War.
The fact that the Executive Chairman of the Special
Commission and his staff, for all their hard work and
professionalism, have still not completed their task is the
direct result of Iraqi deceit, obstruction and concealment.
The crisis which led the Secretary-General to fly to
Baghdad in a last-ditch effort to find a diplomatic solution
is just the latest and the most serious in a series of Iraqi
provocations.

The Secretary-General deserves great credit for what
he achieved in Baghdad. As the British Prime Minister said
in the British Parliament on the day the Secretary-General
returned to New York,

"I am delighted that Kofi Annan, for whom I have the
greatest respect and admiration, has succeeded in this
mission and has brought back a signed agreement".

But, as the Secretary-General has himself
acknowledged - and has indeed repeated this evening -
this was not a success for diplomacy alone but a success
for diplomacy firmly backed by the willingness to use force
if diplomacy should fail. Does anyone seriously imagine
that the same result would have been obtained without this?

Welcome though the agreement is, it is by itself not
enough. Whether this crisis is over and the Special
Commission is able to complete its work depends on
whether the Iraqi regime now implements in practice what
it has signed on paper. We are not prepared to see a repeat
of the Iraqi behaviour which led to the present crisis. It is
for this reason that the United Kingdom, with the able and
welcome additional sponsorship of Japan, proposed and
sponsored the draft resolution on which the Council is
about to vote.

The draft resolution is short and to the point. It sends
two important messages: first, that the Security Council is
giving its full support to the Secretary-General and to the
Memorandum of Understanding which makes clear that
Iraq is bound by all the relevant resolutions and is obliged
to provide immediate, unconditional and unrestricted
access to the Special Commission anywhere in Iraq, not
just in the eight so-called presidential sites which have up
to now been the pretext for so much delay and
obstruction.

The second message is that the Iraqi regime has a
choice. If it fulfils its commitments under the
Memorandum of Understanding and complies with its
obligations under the relevant Security Council
resolutions, the way will be open for the lifting of
sanctions. There should be a time, to which the
beleaguered Iraqi people can look forward, when Iraq is
able to return to the respectable company of nations. If,
on the other hand, Iraq fails to comply, continues to
obstruct the Special Commission's work and fails to
honour the agreement it has signed with the Secretary-
General, the draft resolution is again absolutely clear: this
will not be tolerated. The Council is determined that any
Violation will result in the severest consequences. This is,
at the very least, a statement of the facts which should by
now be self-evident, as I explained in greater detail
during the Council's earlier consultations. It is a statement
of the facts, but it bears solemnly repeating in this draft
resolution, since there are none so blind as those who will
not see. If the Iraqi regime doubts the will of the
international community to make good on that warning,
it will, not for the first time, be making a grave mistake.

There is a great need at such moments to face up
with courage and intellectual honesty to unpalatable
truths. Regional security, the future of non-proliferation
under international auspices, and the authority of the
United Nations and its Secretary-General are all involved,
and are all at stake, in our collective efforts to get the
case of Iraq right. The sponsors draw encouragement
from the Council's unity in backing the Secretary-
General. Iraq must draw the lesson.

