Mr. Kalomoh: On behalf of the Secretary-
General, who is away from Headquarters, I am greatly
honoured to convey to the members of the Council his
best wishes for the success of this important meeting. I
also wish to welcome to New York the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs who have travelled from their capitals
to participate in these deliberations on strengthening
cooperation between the United Nations system and the
Central African region in the maintenance of peace and
security. I should also like to recognize the central and
most commendable role played by your country,
Cameroon, and by you personally, Mr. President, as
President of the Security Council for the month of
October in initiating this crucially important event.

Members of the Council have before them an
information note prepared by the Secretariat on the
occasion of this meeting. Member States are also aware
of the report recently submitted to the fifty-seventh
session of the General Assembly on cooperation
between the United Nations and the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS). Given
that we are here today specifically to examine the issue
of cooperation in the maintenance of peace and
security in Central Africa, I should like to highlight the
following specific points in that domain.

The United Nations has long been committed, and
remains actively involved, in assisting Central African
States to realize their goals to promote sustainable
peace and development. To that end, the various
departments, offices, bodies, programmes and agencies
of the United Nations system are working closely with
Central African States, both individually and jointly, as
indicated in our information note.

The current political, social, economic, security
and humanitarian situation in several countries in the
subregion is a source of serious concern. Several of the
11 member States of the Economic Community of
Central African States have been afflicted by armed
conflicts, cross-border tensions and armed incursions
resulting in the deaths of innocent people, the wanton
destruction of infrastructure and millions of refugees,
returnees and displaced persons. The dire consequences
of those conflicts have seriously undermined Central
Africa's efforts to ensure sustainable stability, peace
and development for its peoples. Troubling violations
of human rights have also been widely reported in the
subregion, contributing to a climate of tension.

Critical cross-cutting issues, such as those
relating to ethnic tension, the cross-border circulation
of weapons, the movement of armed groups, bandits
and refugees, the absence of national dialogue, disputes
over citizenship and land and inadequate economic
resources, are common to the region. These cross-
cutting issues need to be addressed in earnest in the
search for peace, security and development in both
individual countries and the subregion as a whole. The
high costs of these cross-border threats, including the
rapid spread of the HIV/AIDS pandemic and the
persistence of other deadly diseases, represent
additional destabilizing factors.

Intensive efforts have been made at the national,
subregional, regional and international levels to help
stabilize the situation in the Central African subregion
and to lay the foundations for durable peace and
stability. But a lot more needs to be done. The United
Nations has responded in many ways to the peace and
security challenges facing the subregion. In particular,
it has sought to promote the development and
enhancement of the subregion's capabilities for early
warning and prevention, as well as peace consolidation
over the long term.

The Secretary-General has also, from time to
time, dispatched Special Envoys to the subregion, and
the Security Council, in its wisdom, has authorized the
development of peacekeeping and peace-building
operations in various parts of the subregion in response
to specific situations. For instance, the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC), as part of its mandate authorized
by the Security Council, is in the process of
implementing a programme of disarmament,
demobilization and repatriation of foreign armed
groups, which affects not only the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, but also Rwanda, Burundi,
Uganda and the Sudan.

The success of our initiatives depends primarily
on the political will of the countries of the subregion
and the cooperation of the international community as
a whole, which, in particular, must provide the
necessary funds to support concrete projects. This is
the case, for instance, with the programmes of
demobilization and reintegration. Unless adequate
resources are made available, ex-combatants are
unlikely to be successfully reintegrated into their home
communities.

The reintegration issue is especially relevant in
the consolidating of peace agreements reached in the
subregion. Successful reintegration packages require a
comprehensive approach by the entire United Nations
system, working hand in hand with the World Bank.
This approach should address the security and human
rights aspects, as well as the economic and
developmental aspects, of reintegration into society.

The United Nations contribution to the peace and
security concerns of the Central Africa subregion
included the creation in May 1992 of the Standing
Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central
Africa, which has as its mission the promotion of arms
limitation, disarmament and confidence-building
measures among States of the subregion.

Despite these various efforts, however, Central
Africa continues to encounter tremendous pressure in
the political, economic, social and security areas that
perpetuates the political and military crises in the
countries directly affected and beyond. Many of the
crises and their consequences frequently affect or
otherwise threaten to spill over into neighbouring
countries.

As indicated in our information note, we believe
that the restoration and consolidation of lasting peace
in the countries of the Central Africa subregion remain
the primary responsibility of the Governments and
peoples concerned. The United Nations and the rest of
the international community can only offer assistance.
We therefore hope that today's meeting will offer the
opportunity to Central African States to reaffirm their
commitment to the peaceful solution of conflicts
between and among them and to policies that promote
inclusive and participatory governance based on
democratic principles, respect for human rights and the
rule of law.

At the same time, we call upon the international
community to continue to support the efforts of the
Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) countries so as to promote sustainable peace
and development and curb the widespread proliferation
of weapons and mercenaries in the subregion. In this
connection, the Security Council's continued interest in
and attention given to developments in the Central
Africa subregion, which has contributed significantly
to the creation of greater awareness of the need for
immediate and effective action to stabilize the situation
in Central Africa, is very essential.

It would be important that the international
community undertake the economic stabilization of
Central African countries that are emerging from
conflicts and embarking on democratic reforms. As
stressed in our note, we strongly believe that policies
promoting human rights and the rule of law and the
development of inclusive and responsive governance
would facilitate the consolidation of peace and the
stabilization of the countries of the subregion.

The Central Africa region is richly endowed with
human and natural resources. A climate of sustainable
peace backed by constructive national and regional
policies and supportive international cooperation would
help direct these resources to the improvement of
conditions in the subregion. Important steps have been
taken to that end but much remains to be done. I wish
to reassure the participants gathered here today, that the
United Nations will continue to work with the
countries and the peoples of Central Africa to help
them build a more peaceful and prosperous subregion.

