Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me, first of all, to congratulate you,
Mr. President, and wish you every success as you and
your country assume the presidency of the Security
Council this month. I would also like to thank the
representative of Gabon, our good friend Ambassador
Nelson Messone, who conducted our work last month
with great equanimity and seriousness.

I would like to welcome and thank Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), and to thank him
for his very comprehensive and serious presentation,
which very clearly illustrated the various aspects of the
current situation in Afghanistan, the reality factors that
should be closely borne in mind in the future and the
outlook on the process of transition and future
consolidation. I would also like to welcome
Ambassador Zahir Tanin.

I would like to highlight the very important
contribution of UNAMA in improving the stabilization
and democratization process, as well as its
determination to work in coordination with the
Government in order to lay the foundations for
sustainable peace and development in Afghanistan. We
consider it appropriate that, in accordance with its
mandate, UNAMA continues to focus on supporting
the Government in critical areas such as facilitating the
political process for peace and reconciliation, security,
governance, economic development and regional
cooperation.

My delegation deeply regrets the increase in the
number of security incidents, most especially the
attacks on United Nations personnel and facilities that
took place on 1 April. We welcome and support the
activities conducted by the Special Representative to
improve the safety of staff and the Government's
commitment to continuing to support UNAMA.
Nevertheless, of major concern is the increased
frequency of public demonstrations against the
international civilian and military presence. The
greatest of attention should be paid to this situation.

Along the same lines, we commend the efforts
geared to a transition towards greater Afghan
responsibility and leadership and to continue to work
in accordance with the timetable for Afghan forces to
take the lead in security matters by the year 2014. That
goal should be guided by progress on the ground. In
that regard, the efforts of the International Security
Assistance Force and of the NATO Training Mission-
Afghanistan are an important contribution to the
creation of conditions that will enable national
authorities to gradually assume responsibility for
security and governance. We endorse continuing to
build relationships with local authorities and
community leaders that allow, as indicated by Special
Representative De Mistura, the establishment of
inclusive dialogue processes to facilitate reconciliation
with all segments of the population.

The adoption of resolution 1988 (2011), by which
the Security Council established an independent
sanctions regime for individuals and entities associated
with the Taliban and recognized a central role for the

Government in delisting requests, was a decision that
undoubtedly will contribute to the reconciliation
process in Afghanistan and will help to build
confidence between the parties.

Afghanistan faces many problems that could
threaten the sustainability of the progress made so far.
Violence remains one of the main factors, affecting
progress and resulting in increased humanitarian needs
and a number of civilian casualties and internally
displaced persons. We reiterate our call on all parties to
the conflict to fulfil their obligations under
international humanitarian and human rights law and to
take all necessary measures in order to ensure the
protection of civilians.

We emphasize the importance of the joint
regional initiatives taken to combat the various aspects
of the world drug problem that affect Afghanistan and
the region. Constructive and ongoing participation by
various actors, within and outside the region, involved
in the implementation of common strategies in the
fight against the world drug problem in all its aspects
under the principle of shared responsibility and in a
balanced manner contributes to stabilization and the
promotion of mutual trust between neighbouring
countries and beyond the region. My country,
Colombia, reiterates its readiness to strengthen
bilateral cooperation with Afghanistan in order to
address this and other manifestations of organized
crime.

Security is an essential condition for
strengthening the rule of law, the exercise of
fundamental freedoms and the establishment of
foundations for economic development. Accordingly,
the strengthening of the integrated strategic framework
in order to achieve greater coherence in the
Organization's efforts and in the implementation of
programmes in support of the Kabul Process is a
positive step forward to ensure unity in the United
Nations and in the international community's actions in
order to contribute to the exercise of Afghan
sovereignty in all aspects of the future of its people.

