Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, let me congratulate you, Mr. President, for taking
up your functions as President of the Security Council
and assure you of the support and cooperation of the
mission of Panama. I would also like to thank
Ambassador Verbeke for having led our mission to
Kosovo in the transparent and efficient way he did. I
also thank him for the report, which thoroughly reflects
our experiences during the mission. I cannot fail to
thank Ambassador Churkin for having had the
excellent idea of a visit to Kosovo. I think it enabled
us - some of us, at least - to have a much clearer
vision of the realities in that region.

Since taking up this post in the Security Council,
I have constantly been impressed by the power and
authority that the Security Council of the United
Nations has. We sit here, discuss and decide on the fate
of territories and of human beings. The decision we
have to take today is particularly significant because it
is about just that - a matter of discussing the political
integrity and identity of a people and a territory. In
voicing opinions on this topic, we are doing so with the
respect and deep reflection that this reality requires of
us.

Everyone is well familiar with the political
process that took place over the past five years - the
situation of conflict and genocide in Kosovo - which
we called catastrophic at certain times. We are also
familiar with the efforts by the European Union and
NATO to create institutions of government and to
pacify the region, in accordance with the instructions
of the United Nations.

Nevertheless, today we are at a complex, difficult
crossroads. Everyone agrees or affirms that the status
quo is Kosovo is not sustainable. Some think that it is
up to the Security Council to take action immediately
and adopt a position in this respect, and they believe
that the way to do so is to support to the programme
presented by President Ahtisaari. Others feel that the
negotiations have not run their course, that there has
not yet been enough discussion of the status issue, and
that a more expansive process of discussion will be
required. But everyone agrees that an agreement
between the parties - forgive me for being
redundant - would be preferable to any other solution.

Faced with this reality, I ask that we take into
consideration the possibility that this Council adopt,
now, President Ahtisaari's government programme for
Kosovo, but I propose as well that this decision not
come into force right away - in other words, that
there be a six-month waiting period, and that during
those six months we resume negotiations to ensure that
both Serbia and Kosovo can come to an agreement,
which in my opinion can be far better than what we
have in hand today.

If I were asked what interest the Kosovar
Albanian authorities could have in reaching an
agreement if they know that they can ultimately attain
independence, my sole answer would be that, in my
View, they - as well as the European Union and the
rest of the world, I should think - understand that an

agreement between the parties would be better than an
imposed solution. And if I were asked what interest the
Serbs could have in a negotiating process if they know
that the outcome has been predetermined, I would
respond in a similar way: In my opinion, it is
preferable for the Serbs - as well as for the entire
region and for the Kosovars - to put an end to the
problem through an agreement between the parties than
through an imposed solution.

It would be regrettable if the Council were
divided when it took a final decision. It would be
regrettable too if the Council, even though possessing
the necessary majority, were unable to adopt a decision
owing to the veto power of one or more permanent
members. I call upon my fellow members to rethink
this process, to consider all the available options and to
take every reasonable - and I stress "reasonable" -
opportunity to ensure that Serbs and Kosovars alike
can reach an agreement on their future, an agreement
that has not been imposed from on high.

