I would like to thank today's briefers. We welcome this discussion as a way to highlight how important it is to reform a country's security sector to help bring about sustainable peace, development and good governance. Effective security sector governance is vital to any nation's long-term growth, stability and security. Additionally, successful security sector reform must encompass all elements of a country's security sector, including the military, police, border security and justice systems. We have seen that effective security sector reform strengthens institutions, which leads to increased transparency and accountability. On the other hand, we have seen that corruption and insufficient political will undermine reform efforts, especially at the strategic level. It is essential that national leaders show their commitment to long-term security sector reform and the transparency and accountability that are tied to it. While the United Nations can and does play an important role in promoting security sector governance and reform, we believe that national and local-level ownership of the process is essential. Local Governments, civil society and non- governmental organizations provide key contributions to both initial reforms and to successful long-term governance. We would also like to underscore that effective security sector reform requires dedicated resources and follow through. It is important that nations not only express verbal support for improved security sector governance and reform but align national resources with the promises they make. Without national ownership and sustained financial commitments, security sector reform can falter. We have seen that when a Government's commitment is consistent and clear, success inevitably follows. The United States is deeply committed to the inclusion of security sector governance and reform in justice and accountability. A good example is Liberia, which, after recovering from 14 years of civil war, has resisted a return to conflict and is continuing to make progress in rebuilding an accountable, impartial and functional security sector. The United States has provided more than $4 billion in assistance to support Liberian stabilization and development over the past 20 years. The United States will continue to support Liberia and other States enacting security sector reforms and will continue to use our voice on the Security Council to push for strong security sectors that are responsive to their people and to help build long- term peace. I will end by highlighting the essential role that women play in security sector governance and reform. The United States appreciates all efforts to ensure women's participation in security sector reform dialogues, which is critical to ensuring successful and sustainable security sector reform.
