Mr. Taula (New Zealand): We also thank
Ms. Bensouda. New Zealand appreciates this
opportunity to engage with the Prosecutor on the
situation in Libya.

We share the deep concern expressed about the
continued violence and political crisis in the country,
and the impact of the crisis on Libya's neighbours, the
States of the Sahel and the wider region. The Prosecutor
has highlighted that atrocities continue unabated. We
also share the Prosecutor's deep concern about grave
crimes against civilians in Libya committed in the name
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. The Security
Council has spoken as one about its commitment to
work with Libya to combat this terrorist threat and to
hold those responsible for such attacks accountable.

While the urgent political and security challenges
in Libya are uppermost in the Security Council's mind,
we pursue them with a longer-term vision. A successful
conclusion to the United Nations-led political process
is central to creating the conditions necessary for a
lasting peace in Libya. To ensure sustainable peace,
the international community must partner with Libya
and support it in rebuilding justice institutions and
strengthening the rule of law. As Ambassador Dabbashi
has recognized repeatedly, accountability for past
crimes and effective transitional justice are central to
these efforts.

The present violence and absence of State control
in Libya makes the pursuit of justice particularly
difficult. We recognize the enormous strain this puts
on the Libyan authorities, which is why it is important
for the Council and the United Nations - through the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Leon - to
work with the Libyan authorities to support their efforts.

Despite the aforementioned challenges, we are
pleased that the Prosecutor continues to receive
cooperation from the Libyan Prosecutor-General and
that the memorandum of understanding is still being
implemented. This groundwork should help to ensure
that the cases against Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and
Abdullah Al-Senussi proceed as quickly as possible
and to support Libya in meeting its obligations under
the Rome Statute and resolution 1970 (2011). It is
important - not only for meeting Libya's obligations,
but for the credibility of the final judgment - that
domestic proceedings against Al-Senussi progress
expeditiously and in line with due process requirements.
As for SaifAl-Qadhafi, we note the Pre-Trial Chamber's
finding on non-compliance in December and join
the Prosecutor in encouraging Libya to reach out to
the Court to resolve any issues that prevent it from
surrendering Al-Qadhafi.

We appreciate the Prosecutor's consistent raising of
the plight of internally displaced persons, in particular
the acute situation of the Tawerghans, who have not
yet been able to return to their land. We welcome the
framework agreement struck between the municipalities
of Misrata and Tawergha on the margins of the United
Nations-facilitated talks. A lasting agreement that
assists the return of the Tawerghans to their land after
four years would send an important message to other
groups in Libya that reconciliation, including at a
national level, is achievable.

We recognize that the ability of the Prosecutor
to expand investigations into other alleged crimes is
hampered not only by the security situation but also
by a lack of resources. The Council needs to think
seriously about what it can do to support the mandates
it gives to the Court.

The Security Council should not approach these
biannual briefings as simply a compliance exercise.
It is a chance to share constructive, concrete ideas for
ways the Council, the wider United Nations system and
international partners can support Libya's efforts to
bring justice to victims. In this regard, we appreciate
the Prosecutor's suggestion that a judicial contact
group be established to better coordinate the provision
of material and legal support to the Libyan authorities.

I wish to end by again recognizing the presence
here today of the Libyan Permanent Representative,
which we view as a testament to Libya's determination
to maintain a positive dialogue with the Court.

