Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I want to begin by
thanking the three briefers - notjust for their briefings
but for all of their hard work on our collective behalf in
chairing the Committees.

It has been a decade since the General Assembly
unanimously adopted the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, and in that time the United
Nations has developed a comprehensive architecture to
counter terrorism. At our disposal we have sanctions
and analysis, we have coordination from the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force, and we have
project delivery by the United Nations Centre for
Counter-Terrorism.

But in that decade, the threat has changed. The
spectre of Da'esh now hangs over so many of the crises
that we deal with in this Chamber. Groups like Boko
Haram terrorize some of the world's poorest people,
and the Al-Qaida network has spread to fragile regions
across the globe. I therefore hope that we can use the
10-year anniversary of the United Nations Strategy to
adapt to this new reality, to refresh the framework and
to lay the foundations for another decade of effective
support to Member States as we tackle this scourge
together. I should like to touch in particular on two
aspects of the current threat.

First, as many colleagues have noted, Da'esh remains
a major threat to international peace and security. The
United Kingdom is taking action against that group
within the Global Coalition to Counter Da'esh and other
forums. Significant gains have been made. Da'esh is
now less able to finance its hatred, less able to carry
out its terror and less able to recruit followers to its sick
cause. We must sustain that pressure. United Nations
bodies play a vital supporting role in that effort. The
Da'esh and Al-Qaida sanctions regime is tightening
the noose on Da'esh finance, and United Nations panel
assessments offer timely recommendations for States
to address gaps in their national systems. We look
to all States to fulfil their obligations under United
Nations sanctions.

On foreign terrorist fighters, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate is helping to map
and understanding recruitment flows. We share and
welcome the assessment that the flow ofpeople traveling
to fight for Da'esh has slowed, but new trends are now
emerging. These include increased numbers ofreturnees
and, as Ambassador Van Bohemen said, so-called
broken travel - traveling with multiple documents
via multiple destinations to circumvent security. These
shifts show that we cannot be complacent. The United
Nations must facilitate the sharing of best practice and
lessons learned in this area.

The second threat I want to touch on is proliferation
to non-State actors, especially terrorists. Resolution
1540 (2004) is all about preventing the worst-case
scenario - toxic, poisonous or radioactive materials
falling into the hands of terrorists. Full, universal
implementation of the resolution by all States would
go quite some way towards preventing such deadly
proliferation, but that universal ideal is being challenged.
Continued allegations of chemical weapons use in Syria
and Iraq are exactly what resolution 1540 (2004) and the
Chemical Weapons Convention were designed to stop.
These are horrific crimes, and all investigations aimed
at bringing to justice those responsible for acquisition,
development, manufacture or use of chemical weapons
must be pursued rigourously.

Ultimately, prohibited chemical weapons cannot
fall into terrorist hands if they have been destroyed, in
line with international law. That is why all Governments
in the region should join the Chemical Weapons
Convention without delay and all existing signatories
must unequivocally fulfil their obligations, including
full cooperation with the assessments and fact-finding
missions of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons.

Looking forward, the comprehensive review
of resolution 1540 (2004) this summer will be an
opportunity to strengthen our collective security on
this issue. We should be bold. Areas for improvement
could include strengthened regional cooperation,
as neighbouring States are best placed to help each
other; greater understanding of emerging proliferation
challenges, because we need to keep pace with
new technology; and well-resourced and structured
Secretariat support so that the Committee can fulfil
its mandate until 2021 and beyond. We hope that all
States will engage with these ideas at the 1540 (2004)
conference this summer.

Countering Da'esh, stopping foreign terrorist
fighters, strengthening non-proliferation, preventing
violent extremism - those are all major challenges that
require a unified response and coherent support from
the United Nations. United Nations counter-terrorism
structures must be fit for purpose; that is why the
United Kingdom supports an ambitious review of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. To
close, I have two key recommendations for that review.

First, we need to ensure that the concepts of
prevention and an all-of-United-Nations approach, as
outlined in the Secretary-General's Plan of Action to
Prevent Violent Extremism, are incorporated into the
United Nations system. Secondly, we must strengthen
the strategic-level guidance, communications and
coordination of all United Nations counter-terrorism
bodies to get the most value from our resources. The
United Kingdom looks forward to engaging with all
States in the coming months to achieve those aims.

