Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): Italy endorses the statement
made by the observer of the European Union and would
like to add a few remarks in its national capacity.

We welcome the extension of the mandate of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and we fully support the Mission's
fundamental role in contributing to the stabilization
and development of Afghanistan. We praise the
generous efforts of the women and men of UNAMA,
who work to assist the Afghan people, often in trying
circumstances, under the commendable leadership of
the Secretary-General and his Special Representative
for Afghanistan. UNAMA is a fundamental pillar of
the international civilian presence in the country and
contributes substantially to helping Afghanistan to
achieve meaningful results in fields such as economic
and social development, enhancing respect for human
rights and strengthening institutions.

Afghanistan is entering a period of critical
importance to its long-term stabilization. The last
two phases of the transition are starting and should
be completed in less than two years. Presidential
and political elections are approaching, and the
recent developments are fuelling optimism for the
reconciliation process. All those processes focus
on a single purpose: the gradual assumption of full
responsibility by the Afghan people and Government
for their country.

The international community has given assurances
that it will stand by Afghanistan through the transition
process and beyond, in the transformation decade.
The Conference held in Tokyo last July defined the
framework of mutual commitments that should shape
the long-term relationship between Afghanistan and its
partners. Now is the time to make the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework operational and to take full
advantage of its potential as a driving force for the
sustainable development of Afghanistan. For donor
countries such as Italy to fully honour their pledges, it
is particularly important that Afghanistan make further
tangible progress in areas such as democratic reforms,
electoral processes, good governance, anti-corruption
measures and the protection and promotion of human
rights. In particular, the Italian Government, in
accordance with our public opinion, will continue to
monitor the situation of women, which we consider to
be of paramount importance.

The upcoming presidential elections are a major
opportunity for the Afghan authorities to translate
their commitments into concrete achievements. In
order for Afghanistan to pursue stability and infuse
new optimism into the prospects for the post-2014
scenario, there must be a credible, transparent and
inclusive electoral process. We encourage the Afghan
Government, in partnership with the international
community and UNAMA, to lay a solid foundation
for elections and to spare no effort to achieve the
broadest possible consensus on the rules of the game by
reaching out to opposition groups, civil society and all
the relevant stakeholders. That is the only way to foster
voter participation, make the process more inclusive
and ensure the legitimacy of its outcome.

The elections are closely connected to the political
process to promote national reconciliation under
Afghan leadership and ownership. We welcome the
recent encouraging developments, including the more
constructive attitude in the relationship between
Afghanistan and Pakistan. Successful national
reconciliation, based on the shared principles of the
Afghan Government and the international community,
could be a milestone towards ensuring peace and
prosperity as long as it is not accompanied by reversals
in civil liberties, human rights and the democratic
achievements. To avoid such a development, due
consideration must be given to the concerns of women
and civil society.

The destiny of Afghanistan is in the hands of its
people and its institutions. However, strengthened
regional cooperation is crucial to fostering economic
development and to tackling common threats.
Many initiatives are under way, but there is still
room for greater engagement. We appreciate the
dynamism of the Istanbul Process and encourage the
participating countries to remain fully committed to
it. Italy is ready to contribute to a genuine regional
ownership of the process by participating actively in
confidence-building measures on counter-narcotics
and regional infrastructure.

Progress in the transition process and the gradual
downsizing of the international military coalition
will test the governance and development capacity of
Afghanistan at the national and subnational levels. At
this delicate juncture, we are convinced that UNAMA
has a crucial role to play by leading and coordinating
the international community's civilian efforts. That will
contribute to the smooth completion of the transition
and, looking beyond 2014, to the strengthening of
Afghan institutions and the economy. We therefore
reiterate Italy's support for the extension of UNAMA's
mandate, with the recommendation that the Mission be
provided with the resources needed to fulfil it.

