Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Africa represents the conscience of the world
and its promising future. Africa stands for purity; it is
the symbol of giving. On its vast land numerous races
have come together, and through the determined efforts
of its peoples it has helped to enrich the human
heritage. On the basis of that understanding, my
delegation extends its profound gratitude to you,
Mr. President, and to your brotherly delegation, for
having convened this important meeting. We would
also like to thank Mr. Ibrahim Gambari, the Special
Adviser to the Secretary-General, for his important
statement.

We are deeply saddened to see a number of the
States of Africa plagued by conflicts, many of which
have been imposed upon them. Some of those conflicts
have been raging for many years and have had
unprecedented repercussions at the political, security,
economic, social and humanitarian levels. Peace and
security for the continent and its States are long
overdue; Africa should no longer be punished for its
rich endowment with natural resources and for its
racial and ethnic diversity.

In spite of efforts made at a number of levels to
resolve the problems faced by Africa, the desired
results have not been achieved. We would like from the
outset to reaffirm our belief that the international
community should pay greater attention to Africa and
should make a concerted effort to assist it in its
development and to rehabilitate it after the destruction
of the past few decades.

In recent years, the Security Council has spared
no effort in trying to tackle the crises that have
engulfed certain African countries. In an attempt to
deal with these crises, the Council has established 12
missions to support or establish peace in various States
on that continent. The Council's adoption this morning
of a resolution to dispatch a multinational emergency
force to the Ituri region of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is further evidence of its active follow-up of
the developments in the countries of that continent.

Such attention on the part of the Council can be
placed within the context of interest shown by the other
bodies of the United Nations. The General Assembly
has made a notable effort, in particular by adopting the
New Partnership for Africa's Development. The
Economic and Social Council has also made a
significant effort, and we must not forget the very
important role played by Secretary-General Kofi
Annan personally or through his special envoys and
personal representatives in the region, to try to
reconcile differing points of view and put an end to
conflict and military confrontation with a view to
enabling the parties to implement the accords arrived at
and the resolutions of the Council.
Despite such measures to resolve conflict and
build peace, we believe that the international effort
must be given further impetus. The Security Council
recently dispatched missions to several States,
including in southern Africa, East Africa and the Great
Lakes region. The positive results of those missions
have been reflected in the subsequent development of
events. In this regard, we hope that the two
forthcoming Council missions to Central and West
Africa will be able to discharge the mandates assigned
to them so that the desired results can be achieved.

Direct meetings between the members of the two
missions and the leaders of about 12 States suffering
from, or directly or indirectly involved in, such
conflicts will be beneficial. The leaders of those States
and the leaders of rival organizations must heed the
call of the international community to end all forms of
destruction and to all hostilities. This will be especially
beneficial if accompanied by a firm stance with regard
to those who circumvent the resolutions of
international legitimacy or are reluctant to implement
such resolutions.

Syria welcomed the establishment of the African
Union and the start of work by its subsidiary bodies. It
also supports the efforts being made by the Union to
settle conflicts in Africa. We acknowledge in particular
the role of the presidency of the African Union, South
Africa, in this regard. We also welcome regional and
subregional efforts to resolve conflicts in the States of
that continent, especially the efforts of the Economic
Community of West African States, as well as those of
other regional organizations, such as the Economic and
Monetary Community of Central Africa and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development.

Syria calls upon the international community to
enhance the material capabilities of African regional
organizations so that they can effectively discharge
their mandates. Experience has shown that we need to
deal with African conflicts holistically and on a broad
regional basis, given the fact that most neighbouring
States are involved in the causes of the conflicts and
need to be involved in the solutions. In this regard, we
welcome the significant role played by the leaders of
the African States to organize and mediate meetings
with the goal of settling conflicts peacefully and of
rebuilding mutual confidence and relations among
States.

We reaffirm the need to deal with the root causes
of conflict in Africa. We greatly appreciate the
importance of the work of the Council's Ad Hoc
Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution
in Africa and the need to put its recommendations into
effect. A vital role should also be played by the
international donor bodies and organizations, whose
assistance in the reconstruction in Africa is of great
importance.

As a member of the Security Council, Syria has
sought to focus close attention on the problems facing
Africa. Syria has called upon the international
community in the past, and calls upon it today, to spare
no effort to put an end to the conflicts ravaging
numerous African States. We earnestly hope that,
together, we will manage to fulfil the promise we made
to Africa to help it to overcome its difficulties and
continue to enrich human civilization and human
progress.

