Mr. Braun (Germany): I would like to start by
thanking Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his comprehensive
briefing today and for his dedicated work. I would
also like to acknowledge Ambassador Zahir Tanin's
presence in the Security Council today.

Afghanistan's Government of national unity has
embarked upon a comprehensive reform strategy that
was presented by President Ghani and Chief Executive
Officer Abdullah to Afghanistan's international
partners at the London Conference on Afghanistan in
December. Under the motto "Realizing Self-reliance",
their agenda sets out an ambitious programme of
reforms in many key areas, among them fighting
corruption, promoting good governance, restoring
fiscal sustainability and promoting economic growth
and private-sector investment, as well as strengthening
the rule of law and protecting and promoting human
rights, particularly women's rights.

The reform agenda will build on the achievements
made during the past decade. Life expectancy has
increased from 45 to 60, and maternal mortality has
been almost halved. Today, of a total of 9 million
students attending school, almost 4 million are girls.
Thousands of kilometres of roads have been built,
access to electricity has doubled and many Afghans
communicate by mobile phone. A vibrant civil society
has assumed the role of guardian of hard-earned
freedoms and rights. Those are only a few examples of
the real progress the Afghan people have seen.

At the same time, tremendous challenges remain.
The Afghan Government will have to pursue further
economic reforms and fiscal sustainability on the
one hand, and protect and promote human rights and
strengthen the rule of law, on the other. Refreshing
the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework is a
cornerstone of that process. The Government of
Afghanistan is currently engaged with its partners
in setting out new priorities that can put Afghanistan
firmly on a path of self-reliance. That process must
continue. Germany, which assists Afghanistan to the
tune of almost half a billion dollars annually, is one
of its largest donors and will continue to contribute
actively to that process. One result is already certain,
however. The international community, including
Germany, will stay the course and continue to support
Afghanistan during its transformation decade.

Swiftly forming a new Cabinet will be a pivotal
first step in successfully addressing the reform backlog
that has built up over the past few months. Germany
therefore urges that Afghanistan finalize the process
as soon as possible, while at the same time ensuring
that women are adequately represented in the Cabinet.
In that context, Germany commends the Afghan
leadership's efforts to strengthen links and cooperation
with its regional neighbours, including within the
framework of the Heart of Asia process. Progress in
economic and security cooperation will be mutually
beneficial. Germany therefore calls on all stakeholders
to redouble their efforts to make the transformation
decade a success story for Afghanistan, the region and
beyond.

A continued strong role for the United Nations
Assistance Mission (UNAMA) will be critical to
bringing about success. Germany therefore welcomes
the extension of the mission's mandate for another
12 months. The mandate sets the right priorities and
will enable the close and trusting cooperation that
exists between the Government of Afghanistan, the
Mission and the international community to continue.
Protecting and promoting human rights, strengthening
the coordination and efficiency of the international
community's support to Afghanistan, and support to the
Afghan authorities in implementing their commitments
under the Tokyo Framework require a strong United
Nations Mission with adequate resources and a presence
throughout the country.

In conclusion, I would like to express my sincere
gratitude for the work of the Special Representative
and his team. Under difficult circumstances, the United
Nations continues to do great work in the service of
the Afghan people. Germany will continue to support
UNAMA in its fulfilment of its mandate.

