Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to express my
appreciation to France for its initiative in convening
today's debate. I thank the briefers for their briefings. I
am especially indebted to Mr. Mubin Shaikh for sharing
with us his own experience and insights.

Japan associates itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Canada on behalf of
the Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict.

The latest report (S/2017/821) of the Secretary-
General states that the situation of children in armed
conflicts continues to be grim. According to the report,
in 2016 there were at least 4,000 verified Violations
affecting children by Government forces, and more
than 11,500 verified Violations by a range of non-State
armed groups. Those numbers would be much greater
if we were to count unverified cases. Japan is of
the strong belief that the monitoring and reporting
mechanism established in accordance with resolution
1612 (2005) is key to improving the situation. Without
the analysis of the information by the Office of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Member States are prevented
from understanding the situation on the ground and
taking the appropriate measures. Japan will continue
to support the activities of the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the child
protection officers in the field.

Ten years ago, 58 countries, including Japan,
adopted the Paris Principles under the initiative of
France, showing our collective commitment to end child
recruitment, release child soldiers and bring former
child soldiers back into society. Today, regrettably, we
still see children fighting on the front lines of armed
conflicts. In fact, the number of child soldiers is
increasing due to the rise of Violent extremism and of
non-State armed groups.

Children can never recover the time they spent as
soldiers. It is a regrettable reality that the reintegration
of former child soldiers into society is difficult due
to social stigma, as children who have been forced to
participate in fighting are often treated as perpetrators.
Those children often lack the psychosocial support they
need to successfully reintegrate themselves into society.
Programmes to support those children must address
their unique needs, as such vulnerable children often
lack the knowledge and experience to make appropriate
decisions on their own. In most cases, it is difficult to
expect the States affected by armed conflicts to cope
with the reintegration of children by themselves. It is
indispensable that the international community support
conflict-affected States through funding and sharing
good practices.

In that context, Japan has been contributing to
international organizations working in Africa, the
Middle East and Asia to support the social reintegration
of child soldiers and to protect and empower children.
In the Central African Republic, for instance,
approximately 6,000 to 10,000 children were part of
the armed forces in 2013. By 2016, thanks to the efforts
of UNICEF, 4,000 child soldiers had been liberated.
Japan provided $2 million in 2015 to provide assistance
to those children. Employment training was provided
to approximately 1,000 former child soldiers, and about
10,000 children affected by conflicts have undergone
psychological therapy. A campaign to stop sexual
violence against children was carried out as well.

In the past 20 years, since the mandate ofthe Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict was set, various frameworks
and guidelines have been established to improve the
situations of children affected by armed conflicts and
to protect Children from the influence of conflicts. It is
with great regret that I am obliged once again to stress
the importance of implementation on the ground. No
child should live in fear of attacks; nor should they
fight on the front lines of armed conflicts. Together
with other Member States, international organizations
and civil society, Japan will continue to make efforts to
implement the commitments, to the betterment of the
future of children all over the world.

