Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), and
Ms. Aisha Khurram, Afghan Youth Representative
to the United Nations, for their comprehensive and
valuable briefings. I would like to echo those who
have spoken before me and express our gratitude to
Mr. Yamamoto for his work as Head of UNAMA. We
appreciate his vital role and dynamic efforts aimed at
supporting the Afghan people in particularly complex
political circumstances that have witnessed many
historic accomplishments.

As we meet here, three months after the presidential
elections in Afghanistan, I would like to commend
the Government and the people of Afghanistan for
successfully holding those historic elections. The
people of Afghanistan have written one of the most
beautiful and courageous pages in confronting all
challenges, threats and acts of violence by showing up
at the polling stations to select the President of their
country. We also salute the efforts of UNAMA and the
Independent Election Commission to monitor the voting
process and count the votes in those historic elections.

The end of the year is near and there are many
issues of concern in Afghanistan that we need to
tackle, in particular the peace process and the national
reconciliation efforts, in order to put an end to 40
years of unstable and challenging security and political
situations that have negatively impacted the lives of
Afghans. We call on all Afghans to engage in a frank
dialogue that supersedes any personal, confessional or
partisan differences. The priority in that regard should
be given to the interests of Afghanistan and its citizens
in order to put an end to armed confrontation once and
for all. The Security Council must continue to step up
efforts in support of the political process and call all
countries in the region to create favourable conditions
for peace in Afghanistan and the region.

In terms of the security situation, we share the
concerns of the Secretary-General about the instability
in Afghanistan, especially in the light of the ongoing
armed fighting in most of the country. Security-related
attacks have increased by 13 per cent as compared
to last year. In addition, UNAMA recorded 6,654
security incidents between 9 August and 7 November.
According to the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/935), those security incidents are generated
by armed clashes, which represent 55 per cent of the
violent incidents in Afghanistan, in addition to suicide
attacks, which represent 24 per cent of such incidents.
Those horrible figures demonstrate the magnitude of
challenges and responsibilities facing Afghanistan, the
countries of the region and the international community
as a whole. That demonstrates the need to achieve
an Afghan peace agreement that is supported at the
regional and international levels in order to put an end
to the violence once and for all.

Despite the challenges facing Afghanistan,
we appreciate the concrete steps that the Afghan
Government recently took to continue its efforts to
combat the scourge of drugs and terrorism in order to
re-establish its control and sovereignty over the entire
country. Afghanistan has also continued to seek to
amend and improve national legislation to put an end
to violence against Afghan women. We have noted with
satisfaction the continued engagement ofAfghanistan in
dialogues with neighbouring countries and countries of
the region throughout various meetings and conferences,
which have led to continued cooperation with the aim of
achieving peace and stability in the region, enhancing
security cooperation and combating terrorism.

As this is the last time that I take the floor on
this item of the agenda, I would like, in conclusion,
to reiterate the solidarity of the State of Kuwait with
the Government and the people of Afghanistan in
supporting them in all the challenges they are facing.
We support their efforts towards national reconciliation
on the way to achieving lasting peace and stability
through a negotiated political settlement that ensures
security, development and prosperity for the brotherly
Afghan people.

