The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Chad in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Adoum
(Chad) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Arabic): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council expresses its grave
concern regarding the increase in military
activities of armed groups in eastern Chad.

"The Security Council strongly condemns
all attempts at destabilization by force, including
the recent offensive carried out by these groups in
the Biltine and the Ouaddei, and supports the
statement of the President of the Commission of
the African Union that those attacks against Chad
are blatant violations of the principles stated in
the Constitutive Act of the African Union,
including respect for the territorial integrity and
unity of Member States. The Security Council
reaffirms that any attempt to seize power by force
is unacceptable. It recalls the importance of an
open political dialogue based on constitutional
provisions to foster national reconciliation and
durable peace in the country.

"The Security Council expresses its concern
regarding the threat that the increase in military
the

activities of armed groups in eastern Chad poses
for the safety of the civilian population and of
humanitarian personnel and the maintenance of
their operations in the eastern part of the country.
It reiterates that the presence of a large number of
refugees places a heavy burden on the host
country and on the local communities, and
emphasizes the need for humanitarian aid to
continue reaching the people in need of assistance
without any hindrance. It calls on the
Government of Chad to do all it can to protect its
civilian population.

"The Security Council reaffirms its deep
concern about the worsening security situation in
Darfur. It stresses that a peaceful settlement to the
conflict in Darfur, in accordance with the Darfur
Peace Agreement and relevant Security Council
resolutions, will contribute to restoring security
and stability in the region, in particular in Chad
and the Central African Republic, and reaffirms
its commitment to the sovereignty, unity,
independence and territorial integrity of all States
in the region.

"The Security Council expresses its concern
over the continuing tensions between Chad and
the Sudan, urges the two States to abide fully by
the obligations they assumed with regard to
respect for and securing of their common border
in the 8 February 2006 Tripoli Agreement and in
subsequent agreements concluded between them,
and once again urges the States of the region to
cooperate with a View to ensuring their common
stability.

"The Security Council recalls that it looks
forward to a prompt report of the Secretary-
General with recommendations, as requested in
previous relevant Security Council resolutions,
focusing on ways of improving security
conditions on the Chad side of the border with the
Sudan and the monitoring of trans-border
activities between Chad, the Sudan and the
Central African Republic, bearing in mind the
need to foster regional peace and stability."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2006/53.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 5 p.m.
06-66379

