Mrs. Haley (United States of America): In a world
in which the Council's time and attention could be
productively devoted to 100 different things, Russia is
wasting our time. Conflicts are raging. Outlaw States
are acquiring nuclear weapons. The human dignity of
millions is violated every day. Brutal regimes are using
chemical weapons on their own people.

All the members of the Council and their staff have
worked for months on preserving and strengthening the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-
United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM).
We have worked knowing that lives were at stake. We
have worked knowing that the international chemical
weapons non-proliferation regime was also at stake.
And all that time - hundreds of hours - has been for
nothing.

As we have long suspected, Russia does not
now and has never had any intention of making this
time productive for the Council and the international
community. Russia's veto - its second in 24
hours - shows us that Russia has no interest in finding
common ground with the rest of the Council to save the
JIM. Russia will not agree to any mechanism that might
shine a spotlight on the use of chemical weapons by its
ally, the Syrian regime. It is as simple and shameful as
that.

Japan's draft resolution (S/2017970) - a short-
term measure to buy us more time to find a way
forward - was a stop-gap measure. But it was our last,
best chance to stay united. The adoption of the draft
resolution would have shown the world that the Council
will always try to overcome our differences, especially
when confronted by the most serious threats to peace
and security.

In recent weeks, all Council members have professed
an interest in credible, impartial investigations of
chemical-weapons use in Syria, and all Council
members have underscored the need for the JIM. to
employ high standards and present credible evidence.
Japan's draft resolution tried to build on these points
of agreement. Russia was one of the voices calling
for an independent and impartial JIM. In the draft
resolution it offered yesterday (S/2017/968), it called
on the Secretary-General to solicit recommendations
from Council members to strengthen the JIM. As a sign
of their willingness to compromise and their openness
to addressing Russia's concerns, the Japanese included
in their draft resolution a provision that is virtually
identical to the Russian language.

I invite my colleagues to examine the two draft
resolutions side by side. The language in the draft
resolution just vetoed by our Russian friends was
virtually the same as the text in their own resolution,
and still they saw fit to waste our time. Russia's
actions - today and in recent weeks - have been
designed to delay, to distract and ultimately to defeat
the effort to secure accountability for chemical weapons
attacks in Syria. Russia never invited Council members
to provide input on its own draft resolution - a text
that yesterday received only four votes in favour. And
Russia declined to propose any textual edits to the
United States draft. We even incorporated elements
of the Russian draft into our own in the hope that
they would engage with us. Indeed, from the very
beginning, Russia has not negotiated with any of us.
Russia has just dictated and demanded. That is not how
the Security Council is supposed to work. That is not
how the Security Council can work.

I want to extend the sincere thanks of the United
States to those Council members that worked so
hard ~ and gave Russia a second, third, fourth and
fifth chance - to protect innocent civilians from
chemical attacks. It is a credit to them and a win for
the cause of the non-proliferation of chemical weapons
that the draft resolution received such broad support.

There remains overwhelming international
support for investigating chemical weapons attacks
in Syria and for holding accountable the perpetrators.
To the families of the victims of chemical weapons in
Syria - and to the Syrian children, women and men
who may be victims of future attacks - I extend our
most sincere apologies. They should know that the
United States, along with the rest of the Council, will
not give up on seeking justice for their lost loved ones
and protection for their families. They should know
that Russia can obstruct the Council but that it cannot
obstruct the truth. With the unity of the Council, or
alone and unrestrained by Russia's obstructionism, we
will continue to fight for justice and accountability in
Syria.

