Mr. Mansour (Palestine): We thank the
Secretary-General for being with us this morning.
Mr. President, on behalf of Palestine, I warmly
congratulate you and your friendly country China on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council and on your wise stewardship of the Council
this month. We express appreciation as well to Burkina
Faso for its skilled guidance of the Council's agenda in
December.

On this occasion, I also extend Palestine's
sincerest congratulations to the new members of the
Security Council: the friendly, fraternal countries of
Lebanon, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Gabon and
Nigeria. We express full confidence in their
commitment to the Charter and to international law and
the resolutions of the Council, and we wish them all
success in upholding their responsibilities and
fulfilling their duties on the Council over the next two
years. Likewise, I wish to express Palestine's deep
appreciation to those members of the Council whose
terms ended in December: the friendly, fraternal
countries of Libya, Burkina Faso, Costa Rica, Croatia
and Viet Nam. They served with consummate
dedication, ability and an unwavering commitment to
the pursuit of peace and security, including with regard
to their efforts to address the question of Palestine in
the Council.

Before proceeding, I also express appreciation to
Assistant Secretary-General Oscar Fernandez-Taranco
for his briefing about recent developments and the
situation on the ground, which regrettably remains
critical, with worsening humanitarian conditions and a
continued freeze of the peace process.
The Palestinian Government has declared that
today, 27 January, is the day of solidarity with our
prisoners, and from this Chamber I would like to salute
the thousands of our heroic prisoners in Israeli jails.
We hope that the day of their freedom is not very far
away.

The Palestinian people have begun yet another
year facing formidable challenges and hardships. The
situation on all fronts is critical due to ongoing Israeli
violations of international law in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. Israel's
impunity and intransigence have deepened the
population's distress and thwarted efforts over the past
year to restart the peace process. The situation in the
Gaza Strip remains grave, and the precarious situation
in occupied East Jerusalem threatens to further inflame
tensions and destabilize the fragile situation in the area
and throughout the region.

We continue to Witness unbearable human
suffering in the Gaza Strip. More than a year later, the
population remains traumatized by the Israeli military
aggression of last winter and the brutal crimes,
including war crimes, perpetrated by the occupying
Power during that aggression. The ongoing illegal
Israeli blockade of Gaza has only intensified the
impact of the massive losses and destruction on the
population, which has been prevented from recovering
by Israel's deliberate obstruction of reconstruction. The
humanitarian, socio-economic and psychological
conditions of the Palestinian civilian population,
especially of children, the infirm and elderly, remain
dire and cause for great concern.

The perpetuation of this unjust, absurd situation
confirms beyond a reasonable doubt that this blockade
is aimed at collectively punishing and debilitating the
population, young and old. This man-made disaster has
impoverished the population, with abject poverty and
near-total aid dependency affecting more than 75 per
cent of the population. It has caused the near collapse
of civilian infrastructure, including that of the rapidly
decaying health, water and sanitation systems; it has
caused extreme socio-economic distress in all sectors
and has sown the seeds of deep despair and
hopelessness, with far-reaching consequences for the
Palestinian people now and in the future.

How can the world's conscience bear to continue
witnessing the suffocation and deprivation of an entire
people? What can justify forcing families to live in the

ruins and disaster intentionally imposed upon them?
How can the international community bear to allow the
continued obstruction of the great quantity of aid that
has been so generously pledged to help the Palestinian
people recover and rebuild and to restore their
communities and some sense of human dignity to their
lives?

These are questions we pose to the Council today
and that we will continue to ask as we persist in pursuit
of accountability and justice, including in the follow-up
of the Goldstone report (A/HRC/ 12/48), for the war
crimes committed against our people. Our common
humanity and humanitarian instinct - so proudly and
vividly on display when the members of the
international community rise together to assist those
afflicted by disaster, tragedy and human rights violations
around the world with speed and compassion - demand
that we not remain silent in the face of this deplorable,
immoral situation.

More than a year after Israel's aggression against
Gaza and nearly three years after imposition of the
blockade, the Palestinian people and their leadership
once again call upon - appeal to - the international
community to take whatever steps are necessary to
break the blockade and to compel Israel to immediately
open Gaza's border crossings for the regular, sustained
movement of persons and goods. This is essential for
allowing the reconstruction of Gaza and economic and
social recovery to finally begin, including the
implementation of the Secretary-General's proposal for
jump-starting reconstruction through United Nations
civilian infrastructure projects, which Israel shamefully
continues to reject. We reiterate in this regard that
international humanitarian law, particularly the Fourth
Geneva Convention, and United Nations resolutions,
including Security Council resolution 1860 (2009),
must be respected.

Simultaneously, in the West Bank, the Palestinian
people continue to witness and suffer from Israel's
ongoing illegal seizure and colonization of their land,
particularly in and around the heart of the Palestinian
territory: occupied East Jerusalem. Israeli settlement
and wall construction, confiscation of Palestinian land,
home demolitions, provocations against holy sites,
settler terror and lawlessness against Palestinian
civilians and property, often upon the incitement of
officials and religious leaders and including the
desecration of mosques and cemeteries, and the
imposition of obstructions to freedom of movement
continue unabated.

Official Israeli declarations regarding the
construction of new settlement units continue to be
made regularly, in defiance of repeated international
calls for Israel to cease all of its settlement activities in
the occupied Palestinian territory and to comply with
international law, United Nations resolutions and its
Road Map obligations.

East Jerusalem remains the target of an
aggressive and illegal Israeli policy aimed at altering
its demographic composition, status and distinctly
Palestinian character and identity, and at severing the
city from the rest of the territory. In addition to
settlement construction and the transfer of even more
settlers to East Jerusalem, this unlawful agenda is
being pursued via the expulsion or forced displacement
of the indigenous Palestinian population through the
demolition of homes, evictions and the revocation of
the residency rights of thousands of the city's
Palestinian inhabitants. In 2008 alone, Israel revoked
the Jerusalem residency rights of nearly 5,000
Palestinians, forbidding them to live in the city that for
thousands of them is their place of birth. The fact that
this is the highest number of revocations in a one-year
period since the occupation began, over which time
Israel has revoked the residency rights of nearly 9,000
Palestinians, is reflective of Israel's ill intentions in
East Jerusalem.

Clearly, as international consensus regarding the
two-State solution on the basis of the pre-1967 borders
and the need to resolve the question of Jerusalem as the
future capital of two States continues to solidify, Israel
is blatantly and arrogantly accelerating its efforts to
artificially create an overwhelming Jewish majority
there and further entrench its de facto annexation of the
city. All such illegal actions, undertaken under a
variety of arbitrary and empty pretexts, are highly
inflammatory, threatening local and regional stability,
stoking religious sensitivities, sabotaging resumption
of negotiations and jeopardizing the two-State solution.
What is going on is unquestionably about the
viability and prospects of actually achieving this two-
State solution for a peaceful settlement of the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict and, in turn, the Arab-Israeli
conflict as a whole. This is genuinely endangered by
Israeli actions that are undermining the viability and
contiguity of Palestinian territory; the viability,
cohesion and development of Palestinian society; the
viability and recovery of the Palestinian economy; the
viability and credibility of and support for the peace
process; and the viability and primacy of international
law and our international system.

We have repeatedly called the attention of the
international community to the critical situation in
occupied East Jerusalem and the rest of the occupied
Palestinian territory, and repeatedly appealed for action
to implement the relevant Security Council resolutions.
In numerous resolutions, the Council has demanded the
complete cessation of Israeli settlement activities and
the dismantling of the settlements, and has directly
addressed Israel's colonization measures in occupied
East Jerusalem, calling for an immediate halt to all
such measures and deeming the changes caused by
those actions to be illegal. These resolutions include,
but are not limited to, 252 (1968), 267 (1969), 298
(1971), 446 (1979), 452 (1979), 465 (1980), 476
(1980) and 478 (1980).

In this regard, it should be recalled that resolution
478 (1980), inter alia, specifically deemed Israel's
enactment of the so-called basic law on Jerusalem to be
a violation of international law, decided not to
recognize the "basic law" and other actions by Israel
aimed at altering the character and status of Jerusalem,
and determined all such measures and actions to be
null and void, calling for them to be rescinded
forthwith. Israel's illegitimate de facto annexation of
East Jerusalem thus remains unrecognized by the
international community to this day. Yet Israel
continues to breach the law with impunity and
arrogance as it continues its destructive colonization
campaign.

In this regard, as was recently reaffirmed by
President Mahmoud Abbas, the Palestinian leadership
maintains that peace negotiations cannot resume while
Israeli settlement activities continue. Calling for a
cessation of settlements is not a so-called precondition
fabricated by the Palestinian side. The position of the
Security Council, the Quartet, international
humanitarian law and the international community as a
whole on this matter is very clear. It is a crime to
forcibly seize territory, colonize it and displace or
expel the indigenous population. And there is no
rational justification whatsoever for allowing or
accepting continued settlement activities while we are
trying to negotiate an end to this prolonged,
illegitimate occupation.

The reality is that Israel is actually imposing
condition upon condition while it continues unlawfully
to create facts on the ground in order to alter the
situation in its favour and unilaterally prejudge the
outcome of negotiations on the final status issues - be
they Jerusalem, settlements, refugees, borders, water or
security. Regrettably, over all these years the peace
process has been exploited by Israel to further its
colonial enterprise.

Our demands, on the other hand, are totally
consistent with international law, United Nations
resolutions and the Road Map obligation to freeze all
settlement activities, including so-called natural
growth. They are fundamental to the achievement of
the peaceful settlement that will bring an end to the
occupation that began in 1967; to the establishment of
an independent State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, living side by side with Israel in peace
and security; and to a just solution for the Palestinian
refugee question in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 194 (III).

We also reiterate that negotiations must resume
from the point at which they broke off. Prolonging the
suffering and loss of our peoples by starting from zero
in negotiations is neither acceptable nor ethical. We all
know what the solution is and should have the courage
to intensify our efforts, based on the just and well-
known parameters: Security Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973), the Madrid terms of reference -
including the principle of land for peace - the Arab
Peace Initiative and the Road Map.

In this regard, we welcome and appreciate efforts
being made in the region and the international
community as a whole to revive the peace process and
advance such a solution. These include the European
Union's adoption, under Sweden's presidency, of its
Council conclusions on the Middle East peace process
on 8 December 2009, and the diplomatic efforts being
exerted by the United States Administration,
particularly President Obama's Special Envoy, Senator
Mitchell. We stress, however, that we must strive
harder to reach our shared objective sooner rather than
later, in the certainty that the peace and security
benefits to our region and beyond will be enormous.

Remarkably, despite the bitter, brutal realities of
the continuing Israeli occupation, including the
appalling punitive measures being imposed on Gaza,
the Palestinian people and their leadership remain

committed to the goal of peace. They are working hard
to repair and build their national institutions and to
heal and develop their society, as they strive for
fulfilment of their legitimate national aspirations for
self-determination and freedom in their homeland.
Prime Minister Salam Fayyad's plan, "Palestine:
Ending the Occupation, Establishing the State", is
being pursued with determination and with wide
support from the international community, for which
we are grateful.

We continue to insist only that the peace we are
struggling for be based on international law and that it
be a just peace. Illegal Israeli actions, which are totally
contradictory to the achievement of such a peace and
which only fuel the conflict, must no longer be excused
or tolerated. Salvaging and promoting a lasting peace
on the basis of the two-State solution is dependent on
that. Thus, while we welcome and recognize the
importance of statements from around the international
community denouncing Israeli settlement activities and
other illegal measures, ongoing developments provide
ample proof that statements alone will not stop Israel's
settlement drive.

Serious practical measures are necessary to
compel Israel once and for all to cease its colonization
of the Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, to
abide by its legal obligations, including under the
Fourth Geneva Convention, and to truly commit to the
pursuit of peace. In that regard, the matters of
Jerusalem and the settlements are of direct relevance to
this Security Council, which is charged with the
maintenance of peace and security, for they are issues
that directly bear on whether or not we can have peace
in our region.

It is high time that the international community
confront that challenge, shoring up the necessary
political will to uphold international law, the Charter
and United Nations resolutions, and to demand and
compel Israel's compliance with them, as is demanded
of all Member States. We reiterate the need for
collective practical measures, and it is imperative that
the Security Council effectively shoulder its
responsibilities in that regard. That will dramatically
alter the situation on the ground, creating the proper
conditions to propel us to a new phase that will bring
an end to this prolonged and tragic conflict and usher
in an era of peace, security and coexistence.
