Ms. Stiglic (Slovenia): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The candidate
countries Croatia and the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, the countries of the Stabilization and

08-2361]

Association Process and potential candidates Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro and Serbia as
well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova, Armenia
and Georgia align themselves with this statement.

At the outset, let me thank the Security Council
presidency, Panama, for organizing this open debate on
children and armed conflict. The EU strongly
welcomes the new report of the Secretary-General on
Children and armed conflict (S/2007/757) and the
recommendations contained therein. We also look
forward to the adoption of a meaningful and operation-
oriented presidential statement by the Security Council.

The EU attaches great importance to this issue
and continues to be a strong supporter of the valuable
work of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict. We
commend Ms. Coomaraswamy and her office for their
outstanding work in raising awareness, engaging with
parties to conflicts through her field visits and keeping
this issue high on the agenda. We extend our full
support for this mandate for the future. Further, we
wish to compliment all parties engaged on the ground
for their indispensable work that contributed to this
report.

The report of the Secretary-General reflects both
positive and negative developments in the recent past.
We welcome the progress made in Colombia and call
on the Government to continue to tackle the issue of
the use of children by illegal armed groups and root out
abuses committed by State actors. We recognize the
noteworthy achievements that have taken place in Cote
d'Ivoire, the decrease in reports of grave violations of
children's rights in some countries and the release of a
number of child soldiers. Nevertheless, we are still
witnessing continuing factional violence in conflict
situations like Somalia and Iraq, escalation of violence
in the Middle East, deliberate attacks on schools by the
Taliban in Afghanistan and high levels of sexual and
gender-based violence in the Central African Republic,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi.

We strongly condemn the continuous use of rape
as a method of warfare in Darfur. This scourge should
be addressed by systematically bringing to justice the
perpetrators of this violence. The movement of armed
groups along the borders between Sudan and Chad and
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Uganda to recruit children continues to be alarming.

The 10-year Graca Machel strategic review notes
that the context of conflict over the last decade has
changed dramatically. The EU condemns the relatively
new phenomenon of using children as human shields or
in suicide attacks. We are distressed by the evidence
that points to camps for refugees and internally
displaced persons as prime recruiting grounds for child
soldiers, and by the number of children being detained
for alleged association with armed groups in violation
of international standards.

The scope of child casualties in armed conflicts
in relation to small arms, anti-personnel landmines and
cluster munitions is equally worrying. We welcome the
proposal of the Secretary-General to consider
concluding a binding instrument on cluster munitions.
The EU is committed to concluding such a legally
binding instrument that prohibits the use, production,
transfer and stockpiling of cluster munitions that cause
unacceptable harm to civilians.

The EU supports the call from the Secretary-
General urging those States that have not done so to
accede to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
(CRC) as a matter of priority and to sign and ratify the
Optional Protocols to it. We also urge States to
accelerate the process of ratification and accession to
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
(ICC). The EU welcomes the proposal of the Secretary-
General to refer to the ICC for investigation and
prosecution violations against children in armed
conflicts that fall within the jurisdiction of the Court.
We encourage the Council to implement such a
proposal. The EU also stresses the role of national
justice institutions and of transitional justice
mechanisms in the context of conflict and post-conflict
situations in order to end impunity for perpetrators of
crimes committed against children.

The EU welcomes and is encouraged by the work
already carried out by the monitoring and reporting
mechanisms on children and armed conflict established
by resolution 1612 (2005). We also welcome the
resulting information reported to the Security Council
in specific situations and their review by its Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict. We would also
compliment the Working Group for the concrete
conclusions it has adopted following its review of the
reports by the Secretary-General. We encourage the
Working Group to continue its good work, invite the
Security Council to take into account to the greatest
extent possible the conclusions of its Working Group in
its consideration of situations of conflict, and urge all
the parties concerned to implement those conclusions.

The EU would encourage the Security Council to
take appropriate and concrete measures against those
parties listed in the annexes of the report, as the
Secretary General proposes. Furthermore, we support
the call to the Security Council to take appropriate
account of all categories of grave violations, including
not only the recruitment and use of children, but also
the killing and maiming of children, rape and other
grave sexual violations, abductions, attacks against
schools or hospitals and denial of humanitarian access
to children.

We welcome the attention paid in its conclusions
by the Security Council Working Group to all
violations committed against children. Similarly,
situations of concern in all parts of the world need to
be addressed by the Security Council and the
international community as a whole, in order to
effectively protect the rights of children in armed
conflict. The EU would encourage the Security Council
to review the violations that trigger the listing of a
party in the annexes attached to the report of the
Secretary-General. As a first step, the criteria that
trigger the listing of a party might be expanded to
include the crime of rape and other grave sexual and
gender-based violence against children.

Still in the sphere of monitoring and reporting,
the EU reiterates the importance of the inclusion of
specific child protection advisers with a clear division
of labour, reporting lines and guidance within the
United Nations system. Their performance should be
enhanced through the review outlined in the lessons
learned study.

Additionally, we welcome the Secretary-General's
indications of progress in action plans for some parties
to conflict situations, such as in Cote d'Ivoire, the
Central African Republic, Burma/Myanmar and the
Sudan as well as Sri Lanka and Uganda. In order to see
even more progress in the future, access to all parties
involved, including non-State parties, must be
guaranteed. Moreover, setting up concrete time-bound
action plans and ensuring that the parties involved
implement them needs further constant monitoring by
the Security Council in all situations that warrant such
action plans. Member States too should play a better
role in facilitating dialogue with parties involved in
armed conflict.

08-2361]

The EU is proceeding with the mainstreaming of
children's rights into our advocacy, policies and
programmes, and we continue to monitor the situation
of children in armed conflicts, particularly through the
implementation of the EU Guidelines on Children and
Armed Conflict. Moreover, the EU advocates a
systematic mainstreaming of human rights, gender
issues and child protection. That is reflected in the
Checklist for Integration of the Protection of Children
affected by Armed Conflict into European Security and
Defence Policy (ESDP) Operations as well as in the
Conclusions on Sudan/Chad/Central African Republic,
both adopted by the Council of the EU.

Furthermore, we promote a comprehensive
approach to the issue. We believe that it is only by
addressing the development, humanitarian, security
and human rights aspects that we can successfully
prevent conflicts and their impact on children. Such a
vision is fully reflected in the recently adopted
Commission Communication entitled "A Special Place
for Children in EU External Action". The issue of
children associated with armed conflicts was also
included in the 2007 Joint EU-Africa Strategy and
Action Plan.

Additionally, a vast range of projects to combat
the effects of armed conflict on children are being
financed by the European Union. Since 2000, the
European Community Humanitarian Office has
provided more than €100 million for projects focusing
specifically on the needs of children in armed conflicts.
Moreover, through the thematic programme Investing
in People, the Commission is supporting the project
entitled "Prevention and rehabilitation measures
addressing children associated with armed forces and
groups or involved in the worst forms of child labour
in conflict or post-conflict situations", undertaken by
the International Labour Organization.

In 2007, EU action focused on concrete strategies
and projects to tackle this issue in the 13 priority
countries and potential new areas of conflict; on
continued support for international efforts and
instruments; and on improving United Nations
monitoring mechanisms, including early-warning
methods. In particular, the EU expressed its support for
the development, adoption and implementation of the
Paris Commitments and Principles to protect children
unlawfully recruited or used by armed forces or armed
groups, and invites all stakeholders to make extensive

08-2361]
use of those documents in their efforts to address the
issue of children and armed conflict.

We must pay special attention to sexual and
gender-based violence, girl combatants and girls
associated with armed groups and ensure that they are
included in disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) programmes. Sexual exploitation
of children by State and non-State parties remains a
widespread atrocity, affecting millions of victims. Such
violence is not an inevitable consequence of war, and it
needs to be addressed, including through concrete
commitments by the parties to armed conflicts to take
special measures to prevent such acts and punish the
perpetrators.

The EU welcomes the measures that have been
adopted to combat sexual exploitation and abuses by
peacekeeping personnel. We recognize the importance
of the United Nations comprehensive strategy on that
issue. The EU also welcomes the Policy Statement and
the work carried out on the criminal accountability of
United Nations officials and experts on mission.

As noted in the Secretary-General's report, a
greater focus needs to be placed on the reintegration of
children associated with armed groups. The
sustainability of DDR programmes can be enhanced by
supporting national initiatives focused on recovery
following demobilization, by encouraging national
ownership of such programmes and by engaging with
local communities and civil society organizations,
while ensuring that predictable, timely, adequate and
long-term international funding is available. The Paris
Commitments and Principles enhance the coherence of
our efforts to prevent the unlawful recruitment of
children and to ensure their sustainable reintegration
into families and communities.

Let me conclude by emphasizing that the EU is
fully committed and stands ready to continue to work
closely with the United Nations system, as well as with
national and regional organizations, non-governmental
organizations and civil society, to ensure effectiveness
and efficiency in our efforts to relieve the suffering of
children in armed conflicts. But, to meet the concerns
related to children and armed conflict, we must go
beyond holding the perpetrators accountable; we need
to respond to the needs of the survivors of such
violence.

Let us therefore unite our efforts and build on the
progress already made towards a future in which
children will no longer be victims of armed conflict.
We strongly encourage the Council to begin
discussions on a new draft resolution on children and
armed conflict that builds upon the experience gained
and lessons learned in the three years since the
adoption of resolution 1612 (2005), taking into
consideration the recommendations proposed by the
Secretary-General in his report.

