Mr. Mohamad (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, let me congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month and express our great appreciation to you for
having devoted today's discussion to the theme of
protection of civilians in armed conflict. Ten years
have passed since the submission to the Council of the
first report of the Secretary-General on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict (S/1999/957), and two
years have passed since the adoption of resolution
1674 (2006); we would like to commend Mr. Holmes
for his statement on this subject. We hope that today's
debate will lead to an objective vision on ways and
means to protect civilians and, above all, to eliminate
the causes of conflict, because, as they say, it is better
to prevent than to treat.

We note with concern that civilians are not only
victims of violence, flight and displacement, but are
also victims of the latest technologies of death,
including cluster bombs and phosphorus bombs, which
has shocked the international community. This is
particularly true in Gaza, where children, the elderly
and women, and even fruit trees, are victims of death
and destruction. The aggression against civilians in
Gaza leads us to raise questions in the Council about
the credibility of debates on the protection of civilians,
and about the crocodile tears and double standards that
we see.

In a number of reports, the Secretary-General has
emphasized the importance of activating and enhancing
the civilian protection capacity of United Nations
peacekeeping missions. At the same time, experience
and practice have shown that when there is no peace to
be keep on the ground, peacekeeping operations,
whatever their protection capacity, are restricted to
looking out for their own protection, because what
protects civilians, above all, is peace, which is
something that everyone needs, as are disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes, and
quick-impact development projects that can guarantee
progress and ensure that civilians are able to leave
displacement camps and return to their towns and
villages, so that they can resume their normal lives.

For this, peacebuilding needs to be a priority for
the United Nations so that the Organization is not be
bogged down in dealing with the symptoms of conflict.
We would also underscore that regional organizations
have shown an increased capacity in this area because
they understand the nature of conflicts and their causes
and can thus add value. Here, we need to mention the
decisions of the West Africa Conference on the
Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflict held by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) in Dakar in April 2007, which addressed the
role of regional organizations in protecting civilians,
beyond their peacekeeping role.

Protection of civilians in armed conflict is a noble
goal and a major priority. But we are concerned about
attempts to use this principle for political purposes,
including the broad debate on what is being called the
responsibility to protect. We stress that the principle of
the responsibility to protect, despite the fact that it was
incorporated in the 2005 World Summit Outcome
document (General Assembly resolution 60/1), is still
the subject of differing interpretations by Member
States, taking into account the Charter principles
concerning State sovereignty and the full and unlimited
responsibility of States with respect to the protection of
their citizens.

We also recall that the duty to protect civilians in
armed conflict is also one element in a comprehensive
and interdependent set of rights and responsibilities set
out in the 2005 Millennium Declaration (General Assembly resolution 55/2). Key among these are the
right to development, the prevention of conflicts, the
eradication of the root causes of conflict, the fight
against poverty, the right of refugees to return, and the
meeting by donors of their commitments in the area of
development.

That is why the protection of civilians needs to be
part of a comprehensive approach based essentially on
addressing the causes of conflict through an active
United Nations role in support of initiatives towards
political settlements and reconciliation, complemented
by a parallel role for the Organization and its agencies
in the humanitarian area and the spheres of sustainable
economic development and reconstruction.

The protection of civilians is ultimately the
responsibility of States, which is why we need to
enhance the capacities of the States involved so that
they can properly shoulder their responsibilities. We
must not weaken the capacities of these States through
sanctions or adventurist actions aimed at undermining
peace and through other kinds of interference in their
internal affairs.

The manner in which the United Nations
addresses the disaster facing civilians in Gaza should
provide an example of the expected role of the United
Nations in the area of the protection of civilians.

We need to hear from those who talk at length of
the need to fight impunity and genocide. We want to
hear them speak of the events in Gaza.

