Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): I, too, would like
to begin by thanking the Special Envoy, Ismail Ould
Cheikh Ahmed, for his briefing to the Council today.
As this is his final briefing as Special Envoy, I would
like to acknowledge his determination, unwavering
commitment and indispensable optimism over these
last three years. It is hard to imagine a more difficult
job. Let me also thank John for his sobering and frank
briefing on the humanitarian situation.

It has been almost three months since the Council
last met to discuss the situation in Yemen. This does
not reflect the urgency on the ground. Since we last
met, the violence has escalated, and civilian casualties
have continued to mount; the humanitarian situation
for ordinary Yemenis is deplorable and only getting
worse. This suffering stems first and foremost from
the conflict.

The Council's current efforts are clearly insufficient
to meet our responsibility to alleviate the world's
worst humanitarian crisis and to end this bloody
conflict, which is now in its fourth year. In recent
weeks, despite the well-known differences within the
Council's membership, we have worked together to find
consensus on responding to the humanitarian situation
in Syria. It is now incumbent upon us to make the same
effort when it comes to Yemen.

Today I would like to focus on how we can step
up our efforts on both the humanitarian and political
situation in Yemen.

Regarding the humanitarian situation, we have just
heard from Mr. Ging what is needed to alleviate the
indescribable suffering of the 22 million people in need
of humanitarian assistance or protection.

First, the Council must strongly reiterate the call
for a durable cessation of hostilities that we made in our
presidential statement last June (S/PRST/2017/7).

Secondly, we must demand that all parties fully
meet their obligations under international humanitarian
law and human rights law. This includes ensuring the
protection of civilians, including the most vulnerable,
by taking all precautions to avoid harm to civilians
and civilian infrastructure. All attacks on civilians,
including missile attacks by the Houthis, must be
strongly condemned. We are also worried about
reported attacks and threats against and the unlawful
detention of journalists and other persons promoting
freedom of expression.

Thirdly, we must help to ensure full and unhindered
access for humanitarian and commercial shipments. The
recent positive steps taken by the coalition, including
the resumption of humanitarian flights and the delivery
of cranes to Hudaydah, are welcome. It is now essential
to ensure that all of Yemen's ports remain open and
fully functional and that their capacities increase. We
call on all parties to refrain from any action that would
restrict the flow of life-saving food, medicine and fuel.

Fourthly, the 2018 Yemen humanitarian response
plan needs to be fully funded in order to allow the
United Nations and its partners to respond to the
massive humanitarian needs. To that end, and as
has already been noted this morning, Sweden and
Switzerland, together with the United Nations, will
host the 2018 High-level Pledging Event for Yemen on
3 April in Geneva. We encourage all Member States to
participate and to pledge generously. We appreciate the
generous pledges already made by the coalition.

Finally, as we were able to do over the weekend
in response to the humanitarian situation in Syria, the
Council should speak clearly and set the standards for
responding to the humanitarian situation in Yemen.
We should now focus our efforts on uniting around
this task.

Moving to the political situation, the appointment of
a new Special Envoy offers an opportunity to relaunch
the political process. It is essential that the Council unite
in giving strong practical support to the new Special
Envoy, Mr. Martin Griffiths, to create the conditions
needed to seize this opportunity. Members of the
Council and regional actors must use all their influence
to ensure that the parties engage constructively with
Mr. Griffiths, his Office and the United Nations-led
process in good faith.

A political solution can be achieved only through
a broad and inclusive political process. We should
strive to help the Special Envoy to rekindle the initial
spirit of the National Dialogue Conference and insist
on meaningful political participation by a broad
range of Yemeni actors, including women, youth and
marginalized groups.

The situation in Yemen is desperate. Civilians live
in constant fear for their lives. It is high time that the
international community, including the Council, give
the situation the attention it deserves.

