Mr. Forero (Colombia)(interpretation from Spanish):
Allow me at the outset to express my delegation's great
satisfaction at seeing you, Sir, preside over meetings of the
Security Council.

In regard to the matter that the Security Council is
considering today, my delegation wishes to underline that
in the final communique adopted by the Ministerial Meeting
of the Non-Aligned Movement, held in New York on 25
September 1997, the Ministers for Foreign Affairs and
Heads of delegations of the countries of the Non-Aligned
Movement reaffirmed the position expressed in the Final
Document of the Eleventh Conference of Heads of State or
Government of the Non-Aligned Countries in Cartagena.

The Ministers expressed concern over the three
Western countries' disregard of the appeals of regional and
international organizations and their efforts to reach a
peaceful settlement based on the principles of
international law.

They also affirmed that the measures imposed
against the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya are no longer
justifiable and urged the Security Council to expeditiously
review the air embargo and the other measures imposed
against Libya with a view to lifting them.

Furthermore, they underlined that the escalation of
the crisis, the threat to impose additional sanctions and
the use of force as a means of conducting relations
between States are in violation of the Charter and the
principles of the Non-Aligned Movement.

They reiterated their support for the proposals
submitted jointly by the Organization of African Unity
and the League of Arab States, as contained in the
declaration of the 65th regular session of the Council of
Ministers of the Organization of African Unity, held in
February 1997.

The Ministers called for refraining from the
imposition of sanctions unless a real threat to international
peace and security exists and only after all other peaceful
means for settling a dispute have been exhausted.

They also called for refraining from adopting
measures in the economic, financial, transportation and
communication fields, due to their serious and inhumane
effects on populations, as reflected in the views of the
General Assembly.

As has been said today, in the current circumstances
it is pertinent to reconsider the issue of sanctions. The
wide debate given to this issue during the past few years
in the Organization, both in the Working Group on an
Agenda for Peace and in the Sixth Committee of the
General Assembly, is the result of concern for the gravity
of the humanitarian consequences of the sanctions.

Once again the discussion centres on the imposition,
characteristics, duration, effects and lifting of sanctions.
It is clear that the purpose of sanctions is not, and should
not be, the punishment of the civilian population of the
targeted country and moreover that such punishment
should not be prolonged indefinitely.

We are facing the humanitarian problem created by
the prolongation of sanctions and measures imposed by
the Security Council, without any sign of their being

 

lifted. Sanctions without time limits tend to create
unintended and undesirable humanitarian emergencies,
creating situations that are incompatible with the purposes
of the Charter of the Organization.

Finally, my delegation has taken note with interest of
the Judgment by the International Court of Justice regarding
the case concerning Questions of Interpretation and
Application of the 1971 Montreal Convention arising from
the Aerial Incident at Lockerbie, in particular the analysis
of Security Council resolutions 748 (1992) and 883 (1993)
vis-a-vis the Convention.

