Mr. Stehelin (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank President Meron, President Joensen and
Prosecutors Jallow and Brammertz for their briefings.
France reiterates its thanks to all the staff of the
Tribunals for their work to carry out the procedures
to a successful end. We note the importance of the
mobilization of all parties to respect the calendar
defined by the Council, with reference to both trials
and appeals before the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR) and the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). The ICTY and the
ICTR branches of the Residual Mechanism have begun
the transition, so that the work ofjustice can continue
and come to a conclusion.

France attaches particular importance to ensuring,
as part of the completion strategy, that the Tribunals
should continue to renderjustice while fully respecting
procedural guarantees. While there are many reasons
for the delays relative to the deadlines in resolution
1966 (2010), the delays mean that we must redouble
our attention on the effectiveness of the work and the
use of the resources allocated. Bearing in mind that
double requirement, France can support the extension
of the mandates of the judges and prosecutors beyond
31 December 2014.

This debate is an opportunity for the Council
to welcome the significant work carried out by the
Tribunals aimed at combating impunity and promoting
reconciliation and for us to identify the work that now
rests with the States to carry out, so that the work of
justice accomplished can be recorded for history.
In 2013, we marked the twentieth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 827 (1993), establishing the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. In
20 years, as part of the resolute action undertaken by
the European Union, regional political dialogue has
made significant progress. Through its judgements, its
decisive weight with regard to cooperation and criminal
assistance between the various States' prosecution
authorities aimed at prosecuting criminals, and through
its effectiveness in dealing with 166 people who have
had arrest warrants issued for them and were arrested
and tried, the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia has served as a guarantee for the right to
the truth, for the fight against impunity and for a legacy
that has played a central role in regional developments.
From now on, it will be up to the States concerned to
continue to build up the rule of law, which is what will
ensure the independence ofjudicial power. Because of
that, trying so-called mid-level criminals must remain
a national priority supported by sustained regional
cooperation and involvement.

Concerning the ICTR, 2014 witnessed the
celebration of the Tribunal's twentieth anniversary.
The ceremonies provided an opportunity to recall
the importance of the work of the ICTR, which has
positioned justice at the heart of national reconciliation
and reconstruction. France will continue to support the
Tribunal and the International Residual Mechanism on
issues that have been raised this morning, particularly
the arrest of the remaining nine fugitives on whom
the Tribunal has issued warrants. France recalls the
obligation of all States to cooperate with the Tribunal
and the Mechanism in that regard. I would also like
to point out that the two cases referred by the ICTR
to French jurisdictions, those of Mr. Bucyibaruta and
Mr. Munyeshyaka, have been addressed with all the
necessary diligence and rigour. Finally, France, which
recently hosted two persons, would like to emphasize
the importance of relocating those persons acquitted by
the ICTR or who have served their time.

The International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda constitute a major phase of the fight against
impunity. As they implement their completion strategies
for their work, it is appropriate now to appreciate their
juridical legacy as much as their efforts on behalf of
justice, and which should now be kept alive, from
the point of View of memory as well as the academic
record. That has also demanded continued vigilance
in protecting witnesses and focusing on the rights of
victims. At the Assembly of the States Parties to the
International Criminal Court, which is in session right
now, the general debate will be an opportunity for
those 122 States parties to recall their support for the
fight against impunity and for pursuing the demands
of justice.

In conclusion, I would like to thank the
Ambassador of Chile, Chair of the Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals, and his entire team,
particularly for their efforts on the issue of settling the
question of the management of the completion strategy.
I would also like to thank the representatives of the
International Tribunals and the Office of Legal Affairs
of the Secretariat for their work in implementing the
transition provided for in resolutions 1966 (2010) and
2130 (2013).
