Mr. Antonio (spoke in French): I would like to
begin by reiterating our condolences to the
Government and people of Somalia. We take note of
the Secretary-General's words this morning referring to
the events in Mogadishu yesterday. He has reminded us
all of our responsibility to ensure that a lasting solution
is found to the conflict in Somalia.

We welcome the efforts of Russia on the specific
issue of piracy, which have led to today's presidential
statement. We are certain that the proposals made this
morning by the Secretary-General - whose report
(S/2010/394) we welcome, as we welcome the fact that
he personally presented it - are an important step in
this direction.

We share the concerns expressed by the
Secretary-General regarding the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in particular the
violent acts committed against civilians, and we echo
his call for more vigorous action to deal with those
promoting this violence.

We too express our thanks to the Contact Group
on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, and we are thankful
for all the efforts undertaken by partners, and even by
some African countries who we have heard speak
today, such as Seychelles and Kenya. We cannot
conclude our thanks without mentioning the valuable
assistance that we receive from all of our partners, the
United Nations and all others, and expressing our
appreciation to all the countries that contribute troops
to the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
who, as the Council knows, are sparing no effort on the
ground, with every means at our disposal, often in very
difficult conditions, to fight the terrorists who sow
death among the Somali civilian population.

(spoke in English)

The African Union has had occasion to stress the
following three main views regarding piracy in the
Gulf of Aden, with attacks even having occurred in the
Gulf of Guinea.

First, the African Union believes that piracy is
only one symptom of the broader challenge of peace
and security in the area of the coast of Somalia and the
Horn of Africa as a whole. Some have even noted that
activities involving piracy at sea are rooted in causes
on land. Secondly, the African Union has continuously
advocated the need for the international community to
adopt a comprehensive approach to addressing this
issue in a sustainable manner. Thirdly, the African
Union has, for its part, launched a process for maritime
security in Africa as a whole.

In the light of these three key views, we see
resolution 1918 (2010), which requested the Secretary-
General to present the report under consideration
today, as an important step towards a comprehensive
approach to tackling the phenomenon of piracy.

For its part, at its thirteenth ordinary session, held
in Sirte, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, in July 2009, the
African Union expressed serious concern at the
mounting insecurity in the maritime spaces around
Somalia and Africa in general, strongly condemned all
illegal activities in these regions and welcomed the
initiatives undertaken by the Commission to develop a
comprehensive and coherent strategy to combat this
scourge.

As a follow-up to this decision, the Commission
of the African Union convened a workshop on
maritime security and safety in Addis Ababa, on 6 and
7 April 2010. The workshop, which was attended by
AU member States, regional economic communities
and other AU institutions, as well as by the United
Nations and other multilateral and bilateral partners,
provided an opportunity to review the challenges
facing Africa in terms of maritime security and safety.
Emphasis was placed on illegal, unreported and
unregulated fishing, the dumping of toxic waste, arms
and drugs trafficking, human trafficking, oil bunkering,
piracy and armed robbery at sea, and other factors.

At its most recent summit, held in Kampala in
July 2010, the AU Assembly restated its concern over
the persistence and spread of maritime piracy, which is
an international crime pursuant to the relevant
international instruments, including resolution 1918
(2010). Expressing its support for the conclusion of the
Addis Ababa workshop, the Assembly urged the
Commission to pursue the efforts towards a
comprehensive response to piracy, including the
elaboration of a continental strategy for the
management of the continent's maritime domain with
the involvement of the emerging African Standby
Force in efforts to promote maritime security and
safety.

Furthermore, within the context of the need for a
comprehensive approach to tackling this phenomenon,
African leaders, at the recent summit in Kampala,
stressed the importance of adequate protection of the
African maritime domain, and that of island States in
particular, against organized crime, as well as illegal
fishing and dumping of toxic waste, and reiterated their
call for the convening, within the framework of the
United Nations, of a conference to develop an
international convention on piracy, as contained in the
Tripoli plan of action. They also renewed their call for
more efforts at the national, regional and continental
levels to promote maritime security and safety, to
ensure that Africa takes responsibility and full
advantage of its maritime domain, as part of the overall
efforts towards the development of the continent.

In this context, the African Union Commission is
planning to undertake a series of activities aimed at
raising awareness among the continent's key
stakeholders, mobilizing the necessary political will,
building capacity at all levels, securing the required
resources and building partnerships. Within this
context, we are confident that beyond the Council's
deliberations today, all parties will continue to
carefully consider the options proposed by the
Secretary-General in the report that is under
consideration in this very meeting.

Still in Kampala, the Assembly of the African
Union adopted the African Maritime Transport Charter,
which contains important provisions relating to
maritime and port safety and security aimed at
ensuring safe, secure and efficient shipping and port
operations. We would like to echo the call of the
Assembly to various United Nations bodies and
international partners to support the Charter's
implementation. The Commission of the African Union
is to actively promote its ratification and develop a
plan of action for its implementation, as requested by
the Summit.

(spoke in French)

The Council will recall that the African Union
proclaimed 2010 as the Year of Peace and Security in
Africa. We believe that today's initiative is also a step
in that direction, and we therefore reiterate our call for
the awareness-raising initiative launched by the
African Union to continue to have the support of all of
our partners. We do not mean, of course, that conflicts
in Africa will cease in 2010, but we believe that this is
an important step in our efforts for everyone to engage,
as we are today, in the search for more global solutions
to African conflicts.

