Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important meeting.
I express the State of Palestine's sincere appreciation
for the principled efforts you have exerted, in both
your national capacity as well as in Spain's capacity as
President of the Security Council for this month.

The Council's action, while long overdue, is timely,
necessary andimportant. Resolution 2334 (2016) adopted
today reaffirms the Council's decades-long position that
Israeli settlements in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, the eternal capital of the State
of Palestine, have no legal validity, constitute flagrant
breaches under international law, namely the Fourth
Geneva Convention, and constitute a major obstacle
to peace, gravely diminishing the viability of the two-
State solution based on the 4 June 1967 borders and the
possibility of realizing it.

We express our appreciation to all the Council
members that supported the resolution. They have
adopted the resolution on behalf of the entire
international community, reflecting the long-standing
global consensus on the matter. We must also express
our gratitude to the four co-sponsors - Malaysia,
New Zealand, Senegal and Venezuela. They have acted
in line with their constant calls for action to redress
the unjust situation, firm in their responsibilities as
Council members. We also thank Angola, as well as
the Non-Aligned Movement caucus members, for their
abiding support. Of course, we also thank our brothers
in Egypt, the Arab representative on the Council, for
all efforts exerted throughout the process. Let me also
thank all those who applauded the adoption of resolution
2334 (2016) here in the Chamber, and the millions who
have applauded in all corners of the globe, especially
those in the State of Palestine.

Over the years we have made countless appeals
to the Council to uphold its duties under the Charter
of the United Nations, convinced of its central role
and the primacy of international law, and insisting
on the need for concerted action to confront Israel's
oppression of the Palestinian people and relentless
colonization of our land under its half-century foreign
occupation. Our appeals have sought, in the short term,
to alleviate the suffering of our people, a defenceless
civilian population denied of their rights, dignity and
humanity. However, our appeals have also been calls
for the Council to contribute to the cause ofpeace in the
long term - peace for Palestine, peace for Israel, peace
for the Middle East region and peace for our world.

We have not been alone in our appeals; they have
been echoed by Security Council members themselves
and by the States, organizations, international civil
servants and civil society that have come before the
Council to implore it to act, including specifically to
address the illegality of Israeli settlement activities
in occupied Palestine, including East Jerusalem, and
the erosion of the two-State solution based on the
1967 borders and the prospects for a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace.

That the Council has finally chosen to act is
significant. Let me repeat: that the Council has finally
chosen to act is significant, after years of paralysis, as
is the fact that the resolution has been adopted with
overwhelming majority support. However, this step
requires vigilant follow-up, if it is to be meaningful,
so as to stem further deterioration and salvage the two-
State solution from relegation to history's archives.
Urgent efforts are needed to reverse the dangerous,
negative trends on the ground and to advance our
collective efforts to end the Israeli occupation that began
in 1967, and achieve freedom, rights and justice for the
Palestinian people, including the Palestine refugees,
leading to Palestinian-Israeli peace and security, as
well as the goal of Arab-Israeli peace.

No "bashing" is taking place, as repeatedly claimed
by the Israeli Government - not by Palestine, not by
the Council, nor by any who have time and again urged
the Council to act in the interest of peace and security.
Claims of bashing are beyond being offensive, because
in reality today's action may be too little too late. After
years of allowing the law to be trampled upon and the
situation to spiral downward, today's resolution 2334
(2016) may rightly be seen as a last attempt to preserve
the two-State solution and revive the path to peace
to keep hope alive. For many, that seems virtually
impossible at this point as Israel, the occupying Power,
has been permitted to entrench its occupation and a
one-State reality with absolute impunity, at times even
being rewarded for its violations and intransigence.

Against that backdrop, one Council resolution in
nearly eight years is not disproportionate; it is shameful.
But today's vote rectifies that record and sets us on a
new course.

The fact is that only Israel is doing the
bashing - of the Council and the entire United
Nations system - members heard what the Israeli
representative said - of the Charter of the United
Nations and international law. For five decades, despite
resolution 242 (1967), calling for Israel's withdrawal
from the territories it occupied in 1967, and all the
resolutions thereafter, Israel has persisted full force
with its occupation. Its illegal settlements and the
wall have severely fragmented our land, undermined
its contiguity and isolated East Jerusalem - the heart
and capital of our State and de facto Israeli annexation
of which the international community has never
recognized and continues to reject. Convictions in
the rationality, feasibility and fairness of the two-
State solution have been destroyed, as reflected in
the growing negative sentiments among Palestinians,
whether those besieged and inhumanely blockaded for
nearly a decade in the Gaza Strip, or those enduring
the colonization onslaught and daily settler terror in
the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, or those in
the diaspora, including in our refugee camps across
the region, whose patience in awaiting justice and a
peaceful solution is legendary, yet now so frail.

To the audacious claims of bias, we say that the
only bias taking place is that against the law, against
reason and against the vision of two States as the most
viable solution to this prolonged, illegal occupation
and disastrous, tragic conflict. We have heard it loud
and clear in the gleeful boasts by some Israeli officials
that "the two-State solution is dead" and "there will
be no Palestinian State". We witness it in the constant
Israeli schemes, including Knesset ploys, attempting
to pervert the law to accommodate the unlawful and
the pretexts used to expropriate and colonize our land
and deepen the occupation. We witness it in Israel's
blatant contempt of the global demands to comply with
its obligations under the law, as is expected of every
single other State in the international community, and
to finally commit to the path of peace. But today the
Council has said, "enough". And we thank Council
members for that.

Resolution 2334 (2016) represents a necessary step
for addressing one of the most critical aspects of the
longest issue on the United Nations agenda, a 70-year
open wound, precluding peace and stability in our
region, with far-reaching consequences, not least of
which is fuelling the anger and despair that injustice
breeds, especially among youth, who see no present or
future, and undeniably fuelling much of the radicalism
and extremism plaguing our region and world.

The Security Council must stand firm by that
decision, stand by the law and stand on the right
side of history. It should not be cowed by negative
threats or spin; the Council is doing the right thing by
adopting resolution 2334 (2016). We hope this global
call for a cessation of Israeli settlement activities and
violations will serve to compel compliance with the
law, de-escalate tensions, bring an end to the violence,
including all acts of terror, provocations and incitement,
and reverse the negative trends on the ground. That is
vital for salvaging the prospects for peace.
With the Council leading by responsible action,
including follow-up of the reports requested of the
Secretary-General on the resolution's implementation,
we hope that the coming period will be one of serious
effort to set the course for a credible political horizon
and help the parties advance towards a peaceful
solution. We recognize fully the Arab States' efforts in
the context of the Arab Peace Initiative, which remains
a cornerstone for peace, and the efforts of France, the
Quartet, Egypt and the Russian Federation. We hope
that those collective efforts, with international support,
will be fulfilled.

We remain firm in our belief that peace - the
central purpose of the Organization - is more than
worthy of both international legislation and action.
We therefore urge intensification of international
and regional efforts to achieve, without delay, an
end to the Israeli occupation that began in 1967 and
a comprehensive, just and lasting peace, based on the
relevant United Nations resolutions, the 1991 Madrid
Conference terms of reference, including the principle
of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the
Quartet road map, whereby the Palestinian people will
realize their rights and justice, including ajust solution
for the Palestine refugees on the basis of resolution
194 (III), and can finally live in freedom and dignity,
exercising their inalienable right to self-determination
in their independent, sovereign and contiguous State
of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital, living
side by side with Israel in peace and within secure and
recognized borders.

