Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I thank the President for
organizing today's important debate.

At the outset, lwould like to congratulate Judge Meron
and Mr. Brammertz for their recent appointments as the
President and Prosecutor of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, respectively. My
delegation is grateful for the comprehensive briefings
by the Presidents of the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals as well by
the Prosecutor from both institutions.

Malaysia welcomes the significant progress made
by the International Criminal Tribunals during the
reporting period. In particular, we acknowledge the
closure of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) last December, after the Appeals
Chamber delivered its judgement in the Nyiramasuhuko
et al. ("Butare") case. We are also encouraged by the
smooth transfer of the ICTR's functions to the Residual
Mechanism.

The closure of the ICTR after two decades of
unyielding and dedicated efforts by the international
community to ensure justice for the victims of the
genocide in Rwanda constitutes a lasting legacy for
international criminal justice and the global fight
against impunity. We applaud the professionalism and
commitment by all those who were involved in the
successful conclusions and transitions of the ICTR.
With the transfer of the ICTR's remaining cases and
functions to the Residual Mechanism, we urge Member
States to continue to support the Mechanism, especially
in addressing outstanding challenges, among other
things. Cooperation by the international community is
crucial to tracking the eight remaining fugitives indited
by the ICTR, to enforcing sentences and to relocating
those who have served their sentences or been acquitted
by the Tribunal.

Turning to the ICTY, we welcome the delivery of
judgments in the Karadeie and 525er cases last March.
In the case Prosecutor v. Goran Hadeic', we take note
of the briefing by the ICTY President and look forward
to reasonable, just and practical conclusions by the
Chamber in View of the inability of the Tribunal to
continue with the proceedings due to the health of the
accused. On the whole, Malaysia is reassured by the
commitment expressed by the President of the ICTY
that the judicial work of the Tribunal remains on track to
be completed by November 2017. We also acknowledge
the intensified efforts by the Tribunal to implement its
completion strategy within the stipulated time frame.
That includes the implementation of double hatting in
one of its approaches to integrate the staff and resources
of the ICTY and the Residual Mechanism.

With regard to the continuing delay by Serbia to
transfer three indictees to the ICTY for contempt
charges, Malaysia urges full and immediate cooperation
with the Tribunal, as obligated under the statute of the
Tribunal. Prolonging the matter, especially against the
backdrop of increasingly revisionist sentiment and the
politicization of the proceedings in the region, would
send the wrong signal to the international community
on its commitment to justice and the rule of law.

On a similar note, we call on the relevant Member
States of the former Yugoslavia to intensify the pace
and effectiveness of war crimes prosecutions where the
national authorities for cases being referred to national
jurisdictions.

Malaysia also takes note of the evaluation report
(S/2016/441) by the Office ofInternal Oversight Services
on matters and work pertaining to the ICTY. We urge
the ICTY to seriously consider the recommendations
in the report. However, the exercise should not divert
resources away from the Tribunal's main mandate to
conclude its remaining proceedings by the end of next
year, particularly at this crucial stage.

As the first war crimes court created by the
United Nations and the first international war tribunal
since the Nuremberg Tribunal and the International
Military Tribunal for the Far East, the ICTY has laid
the foundations for international criminal justice and
changed the landscape of international humanitarian
law. We therefore believe that the Tribunal should
continue to share its experiences and best practices
with the international community. In that regard,
Malaysia welcomes the book launched by the Office
of the Deputy Secretary last week focusing on the
prosecutions of conflict-related sexual violence at the
ICTY.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate Malaysia's
full support for the international criminal tribunals
in ensuring accountability for the perpetrators of
genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity
in the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda. Over 20 years
have passed since the atrocities were committed, but
our commitment to justice must not waver. We owe it
to the Victims and their loved ones to provide closure,
justice and accountability for the atrocities committed
against them. Their hopes and prayers must never be
left unanswered.

