Mr. Ben Mustafa (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic):
May I first of all thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened this urgent meeting of the Council in an
immediate response to the request made by the
Palestinian side, supported by the Arab Group and the
Non-Aligned Movement, to consider the dangerous
situation in the occupied Palestinian territories.

Today, it is clear that the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories has been one of unprecedented
seriousness for years. As is well known, the situation in
the field, in terms of its negative characteristics of
violence - Israeli violence - which has been ongoing
since last fall and is stifling the Palestinian people and
targeting it in all its sectors. This violence manifests
itself in many forms and in many ways.

First, it is military violence. Israel is making use
of the most powerful, modern, lethal and destructive
weapons. The Israeli forces, of course, are making use
of such weapons in a framework of an imbalance of
forces compared to the Palestinians, who limit
themselves to stones. Would it suffice to say that the
force exerted by Israel against the Palestinians is
excessive and disproportionate? The least that could be
said is that this Israeli violence has up till now led to
hundreds of Palestinian casualties - dead and
wounded.

The second manifestation of Israeli violence
against the Palestinian people is the economic blockade
consisting of besieging Palestinian villages and cities
by digging trenches around them, surrounding them
with military forces and tanks in order to isolate them
and restrict the movement of their inhabitants, and
finally, starving the overwhelming majority of the
Palestinian population.

While the world was waiting to hear something
new from the present Israeli Coalition Government that
would provide us with some hope regarding positive
new developments, this new Government has begun a
policy of escalation and major intensification. It is
implementing a military plan designed to dismember
and fragment Gaza and the West Bank into several
cantons thus facilitating the isolation of cities and
villages and ultimately blockading them. This policy
aims at tightening the economic vice against the
Palestinian people and making its destitution even
worse by undermining its economic and social
infrastructure, which is already all too fragile.

This is a deliberate, orchestrated, calculated
policy. Each of these elements shows that there is an
objective behind each of them, an objective aimed at
bringing the Palestinian people to its knees, at
subjecting it and forcing it to make concessions that
were not mentioned during the negotiations over the
last years.
We read and hear all the pretexts put forward by
Israel to justify this dual repression of extraordinary
brutality against the Palestinian people. Yesterday, we
heard the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Israel justify
that policy for Israeli security considerations. He told
us that this was aimed at coping with extremism and
terrorism. This is an attempt obviously designed to
pass off Israel as the victim and to place it on the
defensive.

Here, I would like to say two basic things
regarding the situation. First, with regard to the
imbalance of power in Israel's favour, there is
absolutely no link between the military brutality and
the economic problems that Israel is causing for
Palestinians, on the one hand, and Israeli security on
the other. As we said yesterday, the tight siege of
Palestinian cities and towns, a form of collective
punishment against the Palestinian people, cannot, in
fact, deter anyone who wants to set off a bomb. Those
measures are totally unacceptable in today's world.

Secondly, with regard to this open debate on the
serious situation in the occupied territories, there is a
need to put things in their proper context. What is the
problem? The problem is essentially one of the
decades-long Israeli colonization of the Palestinian
territories. That colonization and occupation is
accompanied by a usurpation of the national rights of
the Palestinian people, to their land and property, to a
decent life of dignity and self-determination; in
addition, this is accompanied by ongoing brutality and
repression. This is the basic problem: the Israeli
occupation is the underlying cause of the existing
imbalance and of all the acts of violence and bloody
confrontation that we are seeing in the occupied
territories.

At the beginning of the twenty-first century, when
colonization has disappeared in an era of freedom and
human rights, the Palestinian people continue to suffer
under Israeli occupation and to have their rights
trampled. Israel has for decades flouted all the
resolutions of the international community, including
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), which reaffirm
that occupied Palestinian territories should be restored
to Palestinians. The same holds true for the Fourth
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War and other agreements,
signed between the two parties. This is the fundamental
issue. When this problem disappears, then violence and
conflict will disappear from the occupied territories.
This is a situation that must be changed radically if we
are finally to create peace and launch the energetic
actions required to implement a future for the peoples
of the region.

The Palestinian side has fulfilled all the
obligations and commitments it undertook since the
beginning of the peace process in Madrid and Oslo.
The Palestinian side has cooperated politically and
security-wise with the Israeli side in an unprecedented
manner. It should not be forgotten that the Palestinians
have made preliminary concessions and have agreed to
accept only 22 per cent of the area of Palestine at the
time of the Mandate. This is important. What does
Israel expect? Does Israel expect even less land to be
given? The peace process that began in Madrid- a
process that my country has supported and in which it
has participated- remains the fundamental and ideal
framework to advance the peace process in the Middle
East, above all between Palestine and Israel.

The Palestinian side, as well as the Arab
countries, have always been committed to peace as a
strategic option. We are making every effort to achieve
that peace. We are demonstrating good intentions and
all the necessary political will. But, like all peoples of
the world, the Palestinian side cannot accept the
renunciation of its fundamental and legitimate rights.
Those inalienable national rights include, above all, the
right of Palestinians to self-determination and to
establish their own independent State with Jerusalem as
its capital. In addition, they include the rights of
Palestinians reaffirmed by international resolutions, in
addition to the principle of land for peace. Those
resolutions represent the legal and moral authority for
any just, lasting and comprehensive settlement in the
Middle East.

I must therefore say in all sincerity - and here I
turn to the Israelis - that systematically
procrastinating and side-stepping all the resolutions,
understandings and agreements as a matter of policy
will not achieve peace or serve the cause of peace; nor
will it help us to make progress. Genuine and lasting
peace cannot be made by one party alone. Consensus is
therefore necessary. Israel is called upon today to
demonstrate its determination by agreeing on peace
with the Palestinian side and by demonstrating the
necessary political will to achieve that peace. This
requires the return of the two parties to the negotiating
table. The Palestinian party wants to see a return to the
negotiating table from the point where the negotiations
stopped with the former Israeli Government.
International custom requires that States remain bound
by agreements concluded by previous Governments.
Any kind of peace between Israel and Palestine must
be a continuous one; otherwise there will be an
indefinite continuation of pointless and senseless
action in a vacuum.

Yesterday we heard the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Israel reject the idea of international
protection for the Palestinian people. He disputed the
legitimacy of sending an international observer mission
to the field. He even refused to have those observers
armed or even equipped with cameras. Such a mission,
in his View, could pose a threat to civilians or risk an
escalation of the situation. In all sincerity, we do not
understand that logic. We do not understand how a
camera could be more of an incitement to violence than
a gun. This is what we do not understand.

We do feel that yesterday's meetings with the
Israeli Minister for Foreign Affairs and with the
Permanent Observer of Palestine clearly showed us that
the idea of sending international observers will receive
general support. I think that it is time for the Council,
within the framework of its role in following the
situation in the region - an integral part of its
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security - to tackle the issue seriously and
to study all ways and means to respond to the call for
observers.

I think that it is false to say that such a mission
would internationalize the situation. In fact, the
situation has naturally been an international one since
the Organization was established. It is international
resolutions - whether resolution 242 (1967), 338
(1973) or any other- that represent the legal and
moral authority in the occupied territories. The
situation there is so unbalanced that it could threaten
international peace and security. A bilateral process can
be continued only if it is part of a multilateral process
that can provide full backing for the peace process.
Anything less will face us with disastrous
consequences in the region and in the world as a whole.

Finally, I wish to say that Tunisia vigorously
supports the request made here in the Council by
Chairman Arafat some time ago to re-establish the
confidence that is indispensable for a continuation of
the peace process from the point where it stopped. That
request is reasonable, has the backing of the Arab
Group and meets the demands of all parties, including
Israel.

