Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): Last month, I
was disappointed that a simple technical rollover of
the mandate of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism (JIM) was blocked by Russia. Yesterday,
I was deeply disappointed that, even after extensive
efforts to reach an agreement, a further reasonable
attempt to renew the mandate was again vetoed by
Russia. That veto seriously damaged my hope that those
using chemical weapons in Syria would be identified
and held to account.

But now, I am frankly astounded that Russia has
rebuffed Japan's perfectly sensible proposal to ask the
Secretary-General and the Director General of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
to consider the structure and methodology of the
JIM. This third veto in a month clearly exposes - if
it was not already obvious - Russia's determination
to protect its Syrian ally, regardless of the harm it
causes to the ban on the use of chemical weapons, to
the wider international system of rules, and to Russia's
own reputation.

The Council set up the JIM. unanimously as the most
appropriate mechanism to investigate allegations of
chemical-weapons use in Syria, and since its inception
it has had many successes. Its experienced and expert
staff have demonstrated complete impartiality. Its
investigations have been professional, thorough and
rigorous. It has concluded that the Syrian regime
is responsible for blatant, repeated use of chemical
weapons against its own people in an increasingly
reckless and deadly manner. It has also found that
Da'esh is responsible for the use of chemical weapons
in Syria. The failure to renew the JIM. is a failure to
uncover the truth behind the conduct of all actors who
used chemical weapons in Syria.

As I said yesterday (see S/PV.8105), those ofus who
are committed to upholding the international system
will not cease in our efforts to stop the use of chemical
weapons and to identify and hold to account those who
use these vile weapons. We will keep going not only to
bring justice to those who have suffered from the use of
these despicable weapons, but also to deter those who
might think of doing so in the future.

