Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
would first like to reaffirm Luxembourg's full support
for the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR). Their work shows that
international criminal justice can prevail and that
sooner or later the perpetrators ofthe most serious kinds
of crimes must be held accountable. I thank Presidents
Meron and Joensen and Prosecutors Brammertz and
Jallow for their comprehensive briefings and reports.
As the end of his term approaches, I would like to pay
tribute to Ambassador Rosenthal of Guatemala and his
team for the effectiveness and commitment with which
they have chaired the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals.

The ICTY laid the foundations for what is now
an internationally recognized principle for promoting
conflict resolution and reconciliation in regions
ravaged by war - that those suspected of responsibility
for the most serious kinds of crimes of concern to the
international community as a whole must be brought
to justice. The ICTY has played an essential role in
strengthening the rule of law and promoting stability
and long-term reconciliation in the Western Balkans,
but its contribution goes beyond that. Its jurisprudence
has contributed to the development of international
criminal law in areas such as individual criminal
responsibility and crimes of sexual violence. It has
given a voice to the victims, especially women and
children.

We thank the President ofthe ICTY for the report he
has just given us on the Tribunal's future jurisdictional
activities, as well as on the reasons that led to the
revised trial schedule. It is crucial that the Council be
kept fully informed of relevant developments so that it
can quickly help overcome difficulties and monitor the
Tribunal's completion strategy. The ICTY is currently
dealing with highly complex cases - which explains the
slippage in the schedule - particularly those of Seselj,
Karadeie, Hadeic' and Mladie. We also understand that
the problems related to staff retention have an effect on
the ICTY's ability to prosecute certain trials according
to the original timetable.

Of course, we hope the Tribunal completes its work
as quickly as possible, but nothing should undermine
its ability to deliver justice in such serious cases. So
while the Court is faced with a heavy workload, we
welcome the fact that the election of the sixteenth
judge of the Appeals Chamber was finally able to take
place on 18 November (see A/68/PV.53). We support
the requested extension of the judges' mandates. We
encourage the ICTY to take all necessary measures to
keep the delays to a minimum. The timely completion
of all trials is essential to achieving a smooth transition
to the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal

Tribunals. In that regard, we welcome the start of the
Hague Branch of the Mechanism's operations on 1 July.
Like the ICTY, the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda has made a significant contribution to
our common goal of ending impunity for the crime of
genocide. We welcome the ICTR's ongoing transition to
the Residual Mechanism and the fact that the transfer
ofjudicial functions will soon be completed. We also
welcome the fact that on 17 July the last remaining
case was transferred to Rwandan jurisdiction, thus
concluding an important element of the ICTR's
completion strategy.

However, as has already been mentioned, nine
fugitives continue to evade justice. The Office of
the Prosecutor of the Arusha Branch of the Residual
Mechanism is rightly focusing its efforts on the
search for three high-level fugitives, Messrs. Kabuga,
Mpiranya and Bizimana. Catching the fugitives is an
urgent priority ifjustice is to be done. We therefore urge
all Member States to intensify their cooperation with
the Tribunal and provide all the assistance necessary to
arrest all the fugitives and bring them to justice.

We also call for a solution to finally be found so
that the five persons acquitted by the Tribunal and still
living in safe houses in Arusha under the Tribunal's
protection can be relocated. With the date for the closing
of the Tribunal approaching, we encourage Member
States to help the ICTR implement the strategic plan it
has developed for relocating these persons.

With both Tribunals on track to complete their work,
the responsibility of States in the region for the fight
against impunity is growing, based on the principle of
complementarity. In both the Western Balkans and the
Great Lakes region it is essential to combat impunity
in order to promote national reconciliation, strengthen
regional cooperation and enable citizens to face the
future with confidence. In that context, we emphasize
the importance of strengthening national capacities and
raising public awareness, and of continuing efforts in
those areas.

The mass atrocities committed in recent decades
have shown that it is imperative to create a permanent
court to end impunity for the most serious crimes of
international concern. The two ad hoc Tribunals have
played a crucial role and paved the way for the creation
of the International Criminal Court, with permanent
jurisdiction and universal authority.
In conclusion, Iwould like to reaffirm Luxembourg's
commitment to supporting every effort aimed at
building on the legacy of the ICTY and ICTR at the
national, regional and international levels, including
through enhanced cooperation between the Security
Council and the International Criminal Court.

