Mr. Viinanen (Finland): 1 have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Nordic countries - Denmark,
Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden.

First, allow me to thank Japan for its long-term
commitment to improving the working methods of the
Security Council. This debate on the implementation of
the presidential note contained in document
S/2006/507 is welcome and timely. We also appreciate
the tireless and constructive efforts of the group of five
small countries on this issue.
The Security Council has the primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security. In fulfilling that task, maximum transparency
and interaction with the wider membership of the
United Nations is of paramount importance. Improving
working methods enhances the Council's legitimacy as
it acts on behalf of all States Members of the United
Nations.

Transparency plays a key role. We think it is
crucial that all Member States receive enough
information about the Council's work. This is
especially vital for small States, which rarely have the
opportunity to serve as members of the Council. That is
why we underscore the regularity and quality of
briefings to non-members of the Council. It has been
agreed previously by the members of the Council that
interactive wrap-up sessions at the end of each
presidency would be a useful tool for increasing
openness and the availability of information. Such
sessions provide an opportunity for assessing the
Council's work and discussing lessons learned. This
practice has unfortunately been discontinued, and the
Nordic countries wish to encourage Council members
to take it up again.

Regular open debates have increased the
openness of the Council. The Nordic countries attach
great importance to these discussions and commend
Council members for upholding this practice. We
believe, however, that there is scope for improving the
quality of these debates. First, we would like to
welcome consultation with non-member States in the
process of drafting the concept papers for these
debates. We also welcome an increased focus on how
the thematic debates can become more action-oriented
and can feed into future Council decisions on the topic,
making sure that key provisions of the thematic
resolutions are incorporated into country-specific
resolutions.

In that context, I would like to commend the
work of the independent not-for-profit organization
Security Council Report, which has significantly
increased transparency with its reporting. The
improvements to the Council website and webcasts of
the Council's meetings provided by the Secretariat also
warrant mention.

The Nordic countries welcome the significant
progress achieved in enhancing the transparency and
fairness of the listing and de-listing procedures of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999). Resolution 1904 (2009) and previous
resolutions on the issue have added transparency and
clarity to the procedures of the Committee by
introducing a number of important innovations, such as
periodic review of all the names on the 1267 list and
the obligation to add narrative summaries of reasons
for their listing. The establishment of the office of the
ombudsperson, as called for in resolution 1904 (2009),
will mark an important milestone in further enhancing
the transparency of the procedures of the Committee
and in strengthening the due process rights of listed
individuals and entities.

We are pleased to see that the ombudsman
institution - an idea originally introduced by one of
the Nordic countries - is now becoming a reality.
Given the importance of the mandate, the Nordic
countries now look forward to the swift appointment of
the ombudsperson. Once fully implemented, resolution
1904 (2009) will represent an important step forward.
The Nordic countries, however, believe that the
procedures for listing and de-listing need to be kept
under constant review and that the Council needs to
remain open to further procedural improvements in the
regime.

We welcome the past years' initiatives aiming to
improve the interaction between the Council and troop-
and police-contributing countries. Troop- and police-
contributing countries should be better engaged in all
stages of decision-making regarding peacekeeping
operations, starting with the planning of the mandates.
This would also be crucial for potential troop-
contributors. Furthermore, the existing practice of
informal consultations between the Council and troop-
contributing countries could be used more extensively
and efficiently. In this regard, I want to mention the
New Horizon initiative of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, which aims to develop
United Nations peacekeeping activities. A number of
the recommendations aim to improve the interaction
among the Council, the Secretariat and troop- and
police-contributing countries. We warmly welcome
those proposals.

I would like to express my appreciation to Japan
for organizing five meetings with troop-contributing
countries last year during its chairmanship of the
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations. The
meetings provided a good opportunity for the Council
to get input from those countries on various aspects of
peacekeeping. We hope that this practice will continue.

I would also like to highlight the importance of
promoting the relationship between the Security
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission in order to
guarantee smooth transition from peacekeeping to

peacebuilding. We wish to emphasize our continued
support for the practice of inviting Commission Chairs
to brief the Council on a regular basis. There is still
scope for increased cooperation and we see the current
review of the Peacebuilding Commission as an
opportunity to promote this important relationship.

The concept paper in document S/2010/ 165
highlights the challenges associated with the short time
period between the election of non-permanent members
and the beginning of their term. The annual workshop
organized in Doral Arrowwood, sponsored by Finland,
aims at addressing this problem, which is particularly
relevant for smaller delegations. Its purpose is to give
the new members an in-depth orientation and
familiarization with the practices, procedures and
working methods of the Council in order to help them
to be ready from day one of their term. Reports of the
workshops have been distributed as official documents
of the Security Council in the hope that they will
contribute to a better understanding of the complexity
of the work of the Council.

The first time the Security Council's working
methods were the topic of an open debate was in 1994
(see S/PV.3483). The second was in 2008, during the
Belgian presidency (see S/PV.5968). As today's debate
has illustrated, the topic is too important for an ad hoc
approach. The Nordic countries would therefore like to
suggest that the Council consider holding open debates
on Security Council working methods on an annual
basis.

Finally, the Nordic countries continue to
emphasize the ongoing reform of the Council's
working methods and procedures, so that it can fulfil
its task in a more transparent, inclusive and
participatory manner. At the same time, the yardstick
of success cannot be openness and transparency per se,
but the extent to which they improve the Council's
ability to fulfil its responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security.

