Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
It is a pleasure for me to welcome Mr. Rene Preval, the
new President of Haiti, and to congratulate him on his
election, which reflects an undisputed choice of the
Haitian people. We listened to his statement attentively,
and we wish him every success in his new duties. We
assure him of our full support in the many challenges
that he will have to meet.

I fully subscribe to the statement to be made by
the representative of Austria on behalf of the European
Union. Here, I shall make a few supplementary
comments.

The massive participation of Haitians during the
presidential election and the peaceful holding of the
first round of parliamentary elections are an important
step forward on the path towards democracy in Haiti.
In particular, they are an opportunity for Haiti to leave
behind the violence and political instability of the past.
The Haitian authorities must now work to promote
reconciliation and an inclusive political process, in
keeping with the wishes of the overwhelming majority
of the population.

I should like to commend the role played by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Valdes, and by the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) in that success.
Mr. Valdes succeeded in bringing the Haitian political
actors together, thus enabling MINUSTAH to succeed
in its primary task: ensuring the country's political
transition.

However, this is only the end of the first phase,
and the challenges to be addressed are still immense.
The long-term commitment of the international
community, beginning with the United Nations, must
be maintained. MINUSTAH will have to adjust its
mandate accordingly, and we will be grateful to the
Secretary-General for the recommendations that he will
give us and the new Haitian authorities in that regard.

I should now like to refer briefly to the
challenges that we believe will be most urgent in the
coming months.

The first is to complete the political transition.
The second round of parliamentary elections must be
held as scheduled. The Haitian authorities and the
Provisional Electoral Council, with the support of the
international community, need to ensure a transparent
process that makes it possible to obtain indisputable
results. The President must be able to swiftly take the
oath of office before the new Parliament, in accordance
with the constitutional rules.

In addition, much remains to be done to restore
security in Haiti, despite the progress made in recent
weeks. The continued existence of lawless areas has a
very negative psychological impact on all the residents
of Haiti and is a threat to the consolidation of the
democratic process and to the country's development.
Addressing that issue calls for a twofold response, both
military and humanitarian. Over the longer term,
security must be ensured by strengthening the Haitian
national police and to that end, police reform is
essential.

But reforming the police will not in itself make it
possible to establish security and the rule of law. The
third priority must therefore be the justice sector - an
area in which almost everything still needs to be
done - and disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) efforts, taking into account the
unique nature of Haiti's case.

More generally, the State's capacities must be
strengthened in many areas at both the national and the
local levels, and Haiti's development must be
promoted. No stabilization will be possible without the
launching of a process of sustainable economic and
social development. In that regard, we recall our
endorsement of the Interim Cooperation Framework,
which is necessary for the donors to coordinate among
themselves and with the Haitian authorities.

When the new authorities take up their duties, it
will mark the beginning of a new phase, but it will not
mark the end of the stabilization process. The
international community must be mobilized to assist
the President-elect and the future Government in
working for the country's recovery. In the new phase of
peacebuilding and the rule of law that is beginning,
continued international engagement alongside the
Haitian authorities is essential. The Haitian people
must be able to rely on the long-term engagement of
the international community.

Mr. President, my delegation supports the draft
presidential statement prepared by your delegation.

