Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank the Special Coordinator, Mr. Robert
Serry, for his very relevant briefing and his continued
commitment to peace in the Middle East. I would also
like to thank the Permanent Observer of Palestine
and the Permanent Representative of Israel for their
statements.

Luxembourg associates itself fully with the
statement to be delivered later in this debate by the
observer of the European Union.

My remarks will focus on the Middle East peace
process and Syria.

For month after month we have reiterated the
urgent need to see the emergence of a contiguous
and viable Palestinian State, living in peace and
security side by side with Israel. The announcement,
on 19 July, of an agreement in principle to relaunch
direct negotiations between Israelis and Palestinians
is, at last, a significant step forward on that path. As
others have before me, I would like to commend the
commitment and determination of the United States
Secretary of State. My Minister had the opportunity
yesterday to congratulate Mr. John Kerry personally
during his exchange of views with the European
Ministers for Foreign Affairs. We also commend the
political courage and sense of responsibility shown by
the Israeli and Palestinian authorities in agreeing to
return to the negotiating table.
We all know that this initiative may be the last
chance; we cannot let it go by. The consequences would
be tragic. The peace talks must now resume, and the way
to take the steps that will lead to the implementation
of a two-State solution must be determined on a basis
of clear parameters and a timetable that, we hope, will
enable conclusions to be reached within a reasonable
space of time. The time has come to take the necessary
difficult and historic decisions that coincide with a
vision of the long-term interests of the Israeli and
Palestinian peoples.

With its European Union partners, Luxembourg
is ready to continue to contribute actively to the
efforts under way, in close cooperation with the key
stakeholders, the Quartet and the countries of the
region. There can be no security in Israel without a
contiguous and viable Palestinian State, and no security
in the region without peace in every country in the
Middle East.

I now turn to Syria. The use of missiles and
cluster bombs, the possible use of chemical weapons,
the systematic imposition of states of siege, forced
displacements, torture, sexual violence, violations and
abuse against children, 100,000 deaths - perhaps by
now 150,000 - the toll after more than two years of
brutal repression makes the blood run cold. Human
rights in Syria are being trampled on. Violations
of international humanitarian law are multiplying.
The list of war crimes and crimes against humanity
committed daily continues to lengthen. In the face of
such horror, I will never tire of repeating here that the
Security Council should refer the situation in Syria to
the International Criminal Court.

Last week, at my delegation's request, the Security
Council had the opportunity to hear harrowing
revelations of the humanitarian situation in Syria and
the countries of the region affected by the crisis there
(see S/PV.7000). What is there to say, other than that the
distress of the Syrian people has reached unimaginable
proportions? There are 6.8 million Syrians in need of aid
and 1.8 million who have fled their country. More than
half of those affected are children. Regardless of the
political efforts being made - specifically the Russian-
American initiataive for the holding of the "Geneva II"
conference - which we support and which, we hope,
will enable an eventual political solution to the conflict
to be found, it is the Council's duty to concern itself
with urgent needs and the humanitarian imperative. It
is high time to show solidarity with the Syrian people.
It is high time to consider the best way to respond to the
appeals of Under-Secretary-General Valerie Amos. As
we see it, it is vital that the Security Council reinforce
the demands of the humanitarian actors on the parties
to the Syrian conflict by addressing issues related to
bureaucratic obstacles, transporting medical supplies,
opening routes for humanitarian access and trans-border
and front-line access for the affected populations.

The same applies to support for Syria's neighbours,
which, as has been highlighted by the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, Mr. Antonio
Guterres, are dealing with a influx of refugees without
precedent since the genocide in Rwanda. We simply
cannot be content to thank those neighbouring countries
for their generosity and continue to approach this issue
as if it were one of a mere temporary humanitarian
emergency. Even if a political solution in Syria were
to emerge tomorrow, it would still be the case that the
Syrian crisis is going to have a long-term impact on
its neighbours, particularly Lebanon. The international
community must come up with an adequate response
to it.

I venture to hope that, if only on humanitarian
issues, the Council will be able to emerge from its
silence and take up its responsibilities.

