At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his briefing as well as for his active engagement in these difficult circumstances. The Tunisian delegation aligns itself with the statements submitted by the State of Qatar on behalf of the Group of Arab States, the United Arab Emirates on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and Azerbaijan on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, and wishes to add the following remarks in its national capacity. As we have mentioned before, the chronic Israeli occupation of the Palestinian territory, violations of fundamental human rights and continuing aggressive unlawful practices on the part of the Israeli occupying Power continue to deepen the economic and social hardship for Palestinians and have had a tremendously devastating impact on their living conditions. All these factors, including occupation plans for settlement expansion, the closure system, the deterioration of the fiscal situation caused by Israel's withholding of Palestinian Authority revenue and the long blockade on Gaza, have devastated the Palestinian economy and limited Palestinian access to basic resources and basic services, including health care. With a medical infrastructure and facilities damaged by occupation and very limited capabilities, the Palestinian authorities are struggling to combat the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. As the difficulties are huge and the humanitarian needs enormous, we call upon the international community to continue its vital support for the Palestinian Authority, including for the public- health response, the economic recovery efforts and to meet the most pressing needs of Palestine refugees. Tunisia, as a member of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of the International Assistance to Palestinians (AHLC), welcomes the statement by the Chair of the AHLC on 3 April 2020 calling for strong international donor support to strengthen the Palestinian Authority's capacity to mitigate the effects of the COVID-19 crisis. In that connection, we commend the United Nations and the whole humanitarian community's exceptional efforts to assist in responding to the immediate humanitarian consequences of the pandemic in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and the Gaza Strip. We particularly insist on the necessity of providing continued support for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), as its financial situation has continued to worsen, including to fund UNRWA's immediate response to COVID-19. We appeal to the Security Council and the international community to urge Israel, the occupying Power, to abide by its obligations under international law to facilitate the free movement of medical staff, medical supplies and medicine throughout the State of Palestine, and particularly into Gaza, which is already suffering from severe medical shortages due to the siege. The occupying Power also has the responsibility to care for the Palestinian citizens who are in Israel, including Palestinian detainees and workers. Echoing the Secretary-General's call for an immediate global humanitarian ceasefire, the Middle East Envoys appealed to all to exercise maximum restraint, de-escalate tensions and work to resolve differences through dialogue and negotiation. They further called on all to refrain from any activities that could lead to further deterioration of stability and security in any country or the region as a whole. In the same spirit, and in line with the repeated calls by the international community, including the Council, Israel must fulfil its obligations under international law, especially by unconditionally ceasing all settlement activities, lifting its blockade on Gaza and ending its illegal occupation of Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem. Unfortunately, the situation on the ground has been rather alarming - with the continuing expansion of settlements, the demolition of homes, discriminatory treatment and provocative actions and rhetoric. The latest reports on Israel's potential move towards annexation are alarming. Israel must refrain from any attempts to implement its long-planned de facto annexation of Palestinian land, which would constitute a grave breach of international law. It is our common responsibility to uphold international law, including the relevant Council resolutions, by strongly rejecting and preventing any such unilateral illegal move, all of which are major obstacles to peace. In conclusion, I would like to stress once again that the situation in the occupied Palestinian territory is not sustainable. We should therefore walk the talk and intensify our efforts to revive prospects for peace in the Middle East based on the internationally endorsed terms of reference and parameters in order to end the world's longest ongoing occupation - that of the Palestinian territory - including East Jerusalem, since 4 June 1967, to ensure the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people, to end tensions and to guarantee security and peace for all the peoples of the region.
