Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): I wish to thank the
representatives of the Secretariat for the information
they have shared with the Council.

Over the past weeks, Indonesia has been
following closely, with considerable disquiet, the
situation unfolding in Georgia, in particular the
development of recent days, namely, in relation to the
status of South Ossetia and Abkhazia, which clearly
marks a new phase in the evolution of the issue. That
development is hardly likely to enhance the prospect of
achieving consensus in the Security Council. It is a
development that deeply concerns us.

From the very onset of this crisis, with the
attendant suffering of innocent civilians, we have
consistently advocated diplomacy, dialogue and
negotiation as being the only means to bring about a
comprehensive and lasting solution. We have protested
against the ascendancy of the logic of war and the
vicious of cycle of violence and more violence.
Instead, we have spoken in favour of diplomacy and
the power of reason and argument over the use of
force.

Naturally, therefore, given the primacy that we
place on dialogue and negotiation, we have drawn
encouragement from the heightened diplomatic efforts
in various capitals and through envoys of the highest
level to bring the hostilities to an end. We have,
therefore, welcomed the six-principle commitments by
the parties to bring the fighting to an end. We have also
consistently called for an early endorsement by the
Security Council of those commitments as a means to
consolidate the momentum towards peace.

I do not wish to digress. However, it is, indeed, a
source of profound disappointment to us, as an elected
member of the Security Council, once again to witness
the Council rendered incapable of discharging the
responsibility to maintain international peace and
security mandated to it by the Charter.

While the Council readily pronounces itself on a
host of issues, despite a series of emergency sessions
on a matter that directly impinges on that most
fundamental principle that governs relations among
nations, namely, respect for the territorial integrity and
political independence of States, the Council still, and
not for the first time, has collectively remained silent
and unable to reach consensus. My delegation wishes
once again to underline the need for the Council,
including its permanent members, to speak with a
common voice, calling on the parties concerned to
engage in peaceful dialogue and negotiations to bring
the crisis to an end.

Before I conclude, I should like to add some
additional final thoughts. Indonesia's commitment to
the peaceful settlement of disputes is abiding, anchored
in the belief that diplomacy and dialogue offer the best
chance for a lasting solution. Equally, its commitment to
the principles of the territorial integrity, sovereignty and
political independence of States, as enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations, is steadfast and consistent.
Those principles have guided and instructed Indonesia on
other issues that are confronting the Security Council,
including a most recent issue relating to another sovereign
State Member of our Organization. Consistency is
required in the application of principles. Hence, those
same principles are certainly also guiding us on the
present issue.

