Mr. Fall (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
presidential statement adopted by the Security Council
on 24 September 1999 contains the following
observation regarding the important issue under
consideration today:

"The Security Council notes with grave
concern that the destabilizing accumulation of
small arms has contributed to the intensity and
duration of armed conflicts. The Council also
notes that the easy availability of small arms can
be a contributing factor to undermining peace
agreements, complicating peace-building efforts
and impeding political, economic and social
development. In this regard, the Council
acknowledges that the challenge posed by small
arms is multifaceted and involves security,
humanitarian and development dimensions."
(S/PRST/J 999/28, second paragraph)
As the Council is aware, and as the Group of
Experts established in 1997 has stated, light weapons
are so defined

"because they are light and can be transported by
a single or few individuals, by an animal or in a

car .

An estimated 500 million small arms are said to
be in circulation around the world. Easy to handle,
inexpensive and durable, small arms and light weapons
fuel criminality, undermine social development and
give rise to innumerable humanitarian catastrophes. As
the Secretary-General has noted, small arms were the
weapons of choice in 46 of the 49 major conflicts that
bloodied the planet in 1990 - which was 12 years ago,
and therefore well before the genocide in Rwanda. In
that period, small arms and light weapons were
responsible for the deaths of 4 million people, 90 per
cent of whom were women and children. That figure is
in addition to the 5 million persons handicapped and
the tens of millions of people internally displaced as a
result.

Although they are not the direct cause of conflict,
small arms and light weapons are nevertheless the main
factor in prolonging, perpetuating and aggravating
conflict. They are therefore among the primary factors
responsible for delays and deadlocks in the resolution
of conflicts and in the implementation of painstakingly
negotiated agreements.

In Africa these weapons are a real calamity, as
they result in unspeakable, yet striking and observable,
suffering. They also undermine national reconstruction
efforts in many countries, promote every sort of
trafficking and sap energy from legitimate economic
and social development. This is particularly the case in
the West Africa subregion, where these weapons are
routinely recycled from one conflict to another by
criminal gangs operating with the extra-continental
complicity of veritable merchants of death and the
active or passive complicity of notorious and pathetic
warlords who are both shadowy and feared.

Aware of the gravity of this new plague
contributing to the proliferation of flashpoints of
tension - and in particular to the nourishing of many
irredentist movements - the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), over which my
country currently presides, has placed the fight against
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all
its aspects at the top of its Community-wide policy
agenda.
The resolute commitment of West African
countries led to the adoption by the ECOWAS summit
held in Abuja in 1998 of the Moratorium on the
Importation, Exportation and Manufacture of Small
Arms and Light Weapons in West Africa. The
Moratorium, which was endorsed by the Organization
of African Unity at Lome in July 2000, has been
strengthened by the creation of a coordination and
assistance programme in the area of security and
development. The programme was created in close
cooperation with the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) in order to create and disseminate
a culture of peace, stability and shared security
throughout the ECOWAS region.

It goes without saying that the initiatives that
have been launched in our subregion and in Central
Africa at the initiative of Cameroon to halt the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons must be
integrated in a comprehensive, coordinated and
coherent manner into a large-scale international
campaign to maximize the impact of these initiatives,
for the sake of the well-being of all human kind.

As the Council is also aware, Secretary-General

Kofi Annan - who, because of the massacres they
provoke, has aptly equated small arms and light
weapons with weapons of mass destruction - has

condemned the paradox that,

"unlike the case of chemical, biological and
nuclear weapons, no global non-proliferation
regime for light weapons has yet been established
by the international community".

Nevertheless, the Senegalese delegation is
pleased to note that the United Nations Conference on
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects was held in New York in July 2001.
The Conference led to the adoption of an important
Programme of Action that has served to strengthen the
common African position on the basis of such
approaches and regional initiatives as the Bamako
moratorium.

While welcoming the central role of the United
Nations in the success of that meeting and calling upon
the Security Council to continue to actively consider
the thorny problem of light weapons, Senegal would
also like to point out that if we really want to put an
end to this terrible scourge, the international
community will have to encourage, support and
perhaps even demand the implementation of at least
five steps that are both radical and beneficial. I shall
now describe them briefly.
The first step should be to reinforce the legal
instruments to control the proliferation of light
weapons and combat cross-border criminality; to
strengthen regulations with regard to arms transfers;
and to support the implementation of the code of
conduct that has been proposed to the United Nations
by the Nobel Peace laureate group.

Secondly, commercial transactions and arms
brokerage activities should be carried out in a
transparent manner, and annual reports on arms
transfers, including those of light weapons, should be
published.

Thirdly, programmes for disarming, demobilizing
and reintegrating former combatants should be
promoted; national and regional capacities should be
strengthened to supervise such disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes.

Fourthly, cooperation among producer and
consumer States should be intensified and enhanced;
producer States should officially renounce small arms
transfers to consumers in countries or areas where a
disarmament process is under way or a moratorium is
in place.

Fifthly, a dual system of tracing and marking such
weapons should be established.

It is thus clear that there is a long, steep, winding
path ahead of us. The review conference, planned for
2006 at the latest, must yield tangible and meaningful
progress if we do, indeed, wish to prevail in the bitter
united struggle against the proliferation of small arms,
with all its various ramifications and networks that are
growing and prospering in the tentacular grip of this
elusive force of devastation, this vile, multinational
enterprise of crime - international terrorism.

Given that the stability of States and the well-
being of peoples throughout the world, particularly in
Africa - and, indeed, the very survival of humanity -
are in jeopardy, this meeting of the Security Council
under the eminent presidency of the Permanent
Representative of that land of symbiosis, Cameroon,
should give added impetus to our efforts to achieve our
important objectives.

For several reasons of which you, Sir, are very
well aware, the delegation of Senegal welcomes the
fact that you are presiding over the Security Council
during this crucial month of October 2002 - a month
that will remain etched into the collective awareness of
all of us - we the peoples of the United Nations.
While conveying to you all my compliments and my
sincere wishes for success, I should like to express my
full conviction that you will honourably carry out the
sacred, fruitful and lofty duty entrusted to your
outstanding country at this very complex and sensitive
moment in the history of humanity - the nexus
between what has gone before and what is yet to come.

