Mr. Tanin: This is my first time briefing the
Council since I was appointed Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Kosovo and Head of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). I would like to begin by stressing
that the Council's continuing support to the Mission
remains crucial as we focus on promoting stability,
political progress and respect for human rights in
Kosovo and, indeed, in the region. The report before
the Council (S/2015/833) details developments from
mid-July to mid-October, but today I would like to
draw attention to a few key trends and concerns that I
have observed since taking up my post in early October.

I arrived amid renewed political turbulence in
Kosovo, and developments during the past week
have produced additional potential setbacks to the
implementation of the Belgrade-Pristina dialogue
led by the European Union (EU). I have met with the
top leadership in both Pristina and Belgrade, as well
as with our international partners and with political,
community and religious leaders on the ground. It
is clear to me that we require strong leadership from
both Pristina and Belgrade, as well as equally cohesive
actions among the international presences, if progress
is to be sustained.

Genuine progress was achieved at the EU-
facilitated meeting in Brussels on 25 August, leading
to a package of agreements, including on the general
principles and main elements of the Association/
Community of Serb-majority municipalities. Leaders
in Pristina and Belgrade continue to demonstrate a far-
sighted commitment to putting the people's interests
first. Regardless of shorter-term political posturing
and problems, I perceive an underlying resolve on both
sides to use the dialogue to overcome some of the most
difficult issues affecting mutual relations. The gains,
however, face continued challenges that are affecting
the full and timely implementation of the agreements,
as we have seen in the past few days.

Implementation of the terms agreed on between
the parties on 25 August in Brussels began during
this period. On l7 October, work commenced on the
revitalization on the Mitrovica bridge as part of this
implementation. On 30 October, Kosovo President
Atifete J ahjaga submitted the agreement for review by
the Constitutional Court. The Court issued a temporary
suspension of implementation, pending issuance of
its opinion within 60 days, raising concerns about the
possibility of delays. Ijoin in urging all stakeholders
involved to ensure that the commitments agreed to are
reviewed in short order and fulfilled on schedule.

For Kosovo, a major step forward was taken on
27 October, when Prime Minister Isa Mustafa and
Minister of European Integration and Chief Negotiator
Bekim Collaku, together with the High Representative
of the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, Federica Mogherini, and the Commissioner
for European Neighbourhood Policy and Enlargement
Negotiations, Johannes Hahn, signed a Stabilization
and Association Agreement. I wish to congratulate
the leadership in Pristina on this achievement. The
Agreement not only expresses the commitment of
Kosovo to its European path, but equally the European
commitment to Kosovo. Just as importantly, it should
open the door to increased trade and investment, as well
as improved prospects for the economic growth and
employment opportunities so sorely needed in Kosovo,
in particular for its young population. The ratification
of the Agreement by the Assembly of Kosovo
demonstrated the ability ofthe institutions to recognize
and capitalize on long-term strategic interests.

As I stressed at the outset, however, the current
political challenges are also very serious. On several
occasions during this period, violent tactics and
disruptive behaviour impeded the proceedings of the
Assembly of Kosovo, the institution at the core of the
democratic process. Members of the political opposition
used tear gas and other objects in the Assembly chamber,
includingjust two days ago when the use ofpepper spray
and tear gas once again forced the Assembly to relocate
its session. Clashes between opposition supporters and
Kosovo police have also resulted in injuries to police
officers and damage to public and private property.
The opposition parties have expressed their intention
to continue trying to block sessions of the Assembly.

I have strongly deplored these violent and
unacceptable actions. Argument and debate belong
in Kosovo's democratically elected Assembly; force
and intimidation do not. I commend the restraint
demonstrated by the Kosovo institutions in the face of
serious provocations, and I urge all parties to participate
in dialogue and allow a constructive political discourse,
which is vital to progress in Kosovo. The rule of law
must be applied equally; any persons who resort to
violence must be held to account.

Political progress or its absence directly affects
the circumstances and atmosphere on the ground in
Kosovo. Despite progress in many areas, there remain
signs of deep public frustration, along with unfortunate
political tendencies to lapse into divisive rhetoric. Our
mission and our international partners continue to
work with local communities and central authorities to
reduce tension whenever it arises. Ultimately, however,
the onus is on political leaders to take responsibility
for setting a tone that furthers reconciliation and the
normalization of relations.

During this period, Kosovo's application to
UNESCO weighed heavily in public sentiment and
debate. However, I would say that too often public
debate and diplomatic struggles have tended to blur
the underlying issues. The protection and preservation
of cultural and religious heritage should remain the
subject of intensive communication between Belgrade
and Pristina, including through the Brussels dialogue.
We remain closely engaged with all the stakeholders to
support consensual and lasting solutions.

Reconciliation also requires enhanced efforts to
determine the fate ofpersons missing from the conflict;
more than 1,600 persons are still unaccounted for. The
focus should remain on the needs of the surviving
family members waiting for clarity on the fate of their
loved ones. I welcome the recent cooperation shown by
Belgrade and Pristina in the framework of the Working
Group on Missing Persons, chaired by the International
Committee of the Red Cross.

I would like also to echo the Secretary-General's
message in the report on the importance of continued
progress in the process of the establishment of the
specialist court, as agreed between the European Union
and Kosovo.

With regard to the return to Kosovo of persons
displaced as a result of the conflict and its aftermath,
the current trend indicates that the number of returnees
in 2015 will be the lowest since the year 2000. No
more than 427 individuals had returned as of October,
according to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). I call upon
all stakeholders to increase available resources so
that more voluntary returns to and within Kosovo
will be encouraged and sustained. The Ministry for
Communities and Returns is presently working on
essential legislation specifically to protect the rights of
displaced persons, and I urge that this law be passed as
a matter of priority.

Resilience and stability in the region are being
further tested at present amid the influx of refugees
and migrants transiting through the Western Balkans
in unprecedented numbers. According to UNHCR, as
of 5 November there had been over 650,000 arrivals in
Greece by sea since the beginning of the year, the great
majority of them transiting northwards via the Western
Balkans route. Over 210,000 people were recorded in
October alone. The influx of such a large number has
stretched capacities and resources. While Kosovo has
been less directly affected so far, the Kosovo authorities
and the international presences are working together
to prepare contingencies. UNMIK is monitoring the
situation, in close coordination with UNHCR and all
partners in the region.

As we have just witnessed in the tragic events in
Paris, the phenomenon of violent extremism is a very
current and global concern, and the Western Balkans
region is no exception. This transnational issue demands
close cooperation among regional and international
stakeholders, and in this light Kosovo's recent adoption
of a strategy for the prevention of violent extremism
and radicalization is one important element. UNMIK
continues to support and facilitate the work of Kosovo's
institutions, within its mandate and in close coordination
with its international partners. Above all, these risks
demand improved information-sharing and cooperation
among all regional actors and their agencies.

Let me conclude my remarks by expressing my
deep appreciation to the membership of the Council for
its sustained engagement with Belgrade and Pristina,
and for its ongoing support of UNMIK. Indeed, this
commitment remains essential in order to safeguard the
political process. Our Mission will continue to cooperate
closely with all interlocutors and international partners
to promote peace and progress, as mandated by the
Council.

