I would like to thank Mr. Sven Jiirgenson, Permanent Representative of Estonia, the President of the Security Council for the month of May, for convening this open video-teleconference on the topic "Ensuring transparency, efficiency and effectiveness in the work of the Security Council", and for the compilation of the statements by Member States. I also thank Ms. Inga Rhonda King, Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, for her briefing in her capacity as Chair of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and other Procedural Questions, and wish her all the best in discharging that responsibility. I would also like to take this opportunity to express the appreciation of my delegation for the dedicated, intensive and successful work led by Kuwait, as former Chair of the Informal Working Group. In that regard, we commend the efforts of the Informal Working Group to enhance the transparency of its work. In addition, we thank Ms. Karin Landgren, Executive Director of Security Council Report, for her briefing. We appreciate the convening of this open debate, which is aimed at giving an opportunity to all Member States to provide practical proposals that can contribute to enhancing the transparency and efficiency of the Council, which is entrusted, pursuant the Charter of the United Nations, with responsibility for maintaining international peace and security. The current situation caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic has radically changed the way the world now works. For the first time in a long while, all nations are facing the same challenge. We can take this opportunity to bring nations together and prevent further conflict. We welcome and greatly appreciate the measures taken by the members of the Security Council to adapt its working methods in order to ensure the continuity of its work during this pandemic. Morocco would like to raise the following points in contributing to today's debate on working methods. Morocco believes that the note by the President S/2017/507 is a valuable tool for increasing the Council's transparency, inclusiveness and efficiency. It provides us a balanced, coherent and substantive document for reflection, which can serve as a useful guide on agreed measures or best practices in relation to its working methods. Articles 24, 25 and 26 of the Charter of the United Nations provide the Security Council with important powers and prerogatives, which it cannot exercise without adopting an effective and efficient approach. The Council must, in particular, support the development of its working methods by ensuring the proper implementation of its mandate. Needless to say, such methods concern all States Members of the United Nations, including both permanent and non-permanent members of the Council. The number of public meetings has increased steadily since 2013. The webcasting of meetings and media interactions have given greater visibility to the Council's work. More information is also now available through the United Nations website, as well as social media. Morocco stresses the importance of regularly holding open debates on the working methods of the Council, as continued discussion of this issue is of interest to all Member States that wish to see the Council working in the best way possible. There is no doubt that the pandemic has forced us all to work remotely, but prove that we can manage meetings using the new technologies, notably video- teleconference technology, allowing to the Security Council to continue functioning effectively during extraordinary and unprecedented circumstances. In this context, we should underline that the process of improving the Council's working methods is an open-ended, evolving and, above all, ongoing process that can contribute to enhancing the transparency and quality of the work of the Council, and also allows the Council to benefit from the diversity of positions and views among Member States. The Kingdom of Morocco, as a troop-contributing country, can attest to the lasting repercussions of the Security Council's efforts in conflict prevention, peacekeeping and the peaceful settlement of disputes, in particular on our continent of Africa. Morocco also attaches great importance to the development of preventive diplomacy, in line with the requirements for rapid and effective action to maintain international peace and security, the promotion of political solutions to conflicts, and support on the part of the international community for measures taken by the Security Council. Finally, we should not lose sight of the fact that discussions on improving the working methods of the Security Council are part of an overall vision for the reform of the United Nations architecture. The Kingdom of Morocco acknowledges the tangible efforts made in recent years and welcomes the positive developments in improving the functioning of the Council and enhancing its effectiveness and inclusiveness. We reiterate our commitment and willingness, particularly in these special circumstances, to continue to contribute to this important work on the improvement of the Council's working methods.
