Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): We
thank our United States colleague Samantha Power
for having requested the convening of this debate. We
hope that the continued commitment of the Security
Council and the General Assembly will provide the
support necessary to the ongoing efforts to defeat the
Ebola epidemic in West Africa. I would especially like
to thank Special Envoy David Nabarro and Special
Representative Anthony Banbury for their briefings and
tireless efforts. I particularly wish to thank Mr. Thomas
Mauget, Head of the French Red Cross in Guinea, for
his account from Conakry of the work on the ground.

On behalf of Luxembourg, I wish to pay tribute to
the heroic commitment of thousands of national and
international volunteers who, at the risk of their very
lives, are trying to contain the Ebola epidemic in West
Africa. I also wish to express my sincere condolences to
the authorities and colleagues of Rwanda for the loss on
17 November of Mr. Marcel Rudasingwa, Ebola Crisis
Manager for Guinea under the United Nations Mission
for Ebola Emergency Response (UNMEER).

Although the latest situation report of the World
Health Organization (WHO) offers a glimmer of
hope, the time is not ripe for complacency. On the
contrary, the efforts of the international community
must be pursued and intensified. As our colleague from
Lithuania reminded us a moment ago, the European
Union and its member States have committed to
mobilizing over €1 billion. Many are sending medical
and humanitarian personnel, mobile laboratories or
specialized equipment and supplies. The European
Union Emergency Response Coordination Centre has
been activated, and within that framework Luxembourg
is providing medical evacuation capability to repatriate
international humanitarian workers who might be
infected with the Ebola virus. As of mid-December,
two aircraft of the specially equipped Luxembourg
air ambulance will be available to evacuate patients
infected with the Ebola virus. All member States, the
United Nations, its agencies and relevant international
organizations can call on that capability, which is
critical to supporting humanitarian personnel deployed
on the ground.

Moreover, since early this month, my country
has mobilized strategic air transport capabilities that
have allowed the delivery of humanitarian equipment
to Conakry, Freetown and Monrovia. This logistical
operation has strengthened UNMEER and the World
Food Programme capacity to respond to the Ebola
epidemic by providing them, inter alia, with medical
vehicles and communications equipment valued at
El million. Luxembourg's total contribution to the fight
against the Ebola epidemic and to the preparation of
countries in the region today is over $2 million.

The spread ofthe Ebola virus to Mali is a distressing
development. We are nevertheless convinced that the
rapid reaction of the Malian authorities, partnering
with WHO and UNMEER, will make it possible to
quickly contain the virus. The case of Mali illustrates
the importance for Member States of the region to
prepare, prevent, track, isolate and treat all Ebola
cases as quickly as possible. They need our support to
strengthen their capacity in this area. For our part, we
are supporting a regional programme established by
the Red Cross to assist Benin, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Mali, the Niger and Senegal.

We welcome the responsible attitude of all Member
States that have maintained their transportation and
trade with the countries most heavily affected by the
epidemic. We also commend the airlines and maritime
transport companies that continue to provide their
essential services for the economy of the countries of
the region.

Beyond the emergency, we must already begin
preparing for the post-Ebola scenario. The Guinea
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC),
which I have the honour of chairing, is working actively
to that end with the authorities of the Republic of Guinea
and with the Liberian and Sierra Leone configurations
of the PBC. On 3 November, the three configurations
held ajoint meeting to assess the multifaceted impact of
the Ebola epidemic. After the meeting, we sent a letter
to the Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission
requesting that he ask the Secretary-General to assess
the impact of the epidemic in the areas of security, local
governance, political institutions, social cohesion and
sustainable economic development. That assessment
will make it possible for the international community
to better support the recovery of Guinea, Liberia and
Sierra Leone over the longer term. The Peacebuilding
Commission will have a role to play in this context, as
recognized in presidential statement S/PRST/2014/24,
which we have just adopted at the initiative of the
United States.

To conclude, I would like to assure the Council
of my country's full and complete commitment to
contribute concretely to the unprecedented effort of the
international community to free the affected countries
from the Ebola virus and thereby to eradicate that threat
to international peace and security.

