Mr. Farhfidi (Afghanistan) (spoke in French):
First of all, allow me to congratulate you, Mr.
President, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of December 2000.
May I also congratulate your predecessor on the skill
with which he presided over the Council last month.

In resolution 1267 (1999) of 15 October 1999, the
Security Council made it clear that the suppression of
international terrorism is essential for the maintenance
of international peace and security. In the same
resolution, the Council forcefully condemned the fact
that terrorists continue to be made welcome and trained
in the areas controlled by the Taliban, and that acts of
terrorism take place there.

The Pakistan/Taliban/bin Laden alliance has
categorically refused to cooperate with the
international community or to put an end to the training
and haven it provides to international terrorists. In
addition, that alliance has given new dimensions to
terrorist activities and to extremists from all corners of
the Earth. This fact was mentioned by the Secretary-
General in his report of 20 November 2000:

"There have also been persistent reports of the
involvement of a substantial number of Arabs,
Chechens, Pakistanis, Uighurs and other outsiders
fighting alongside the Taliban in Afghanistan".
(8/2000/1106, para. 37)

In response to that intransigence, the Security
Council is considering the imposition of new measures.
The Council is studying a new draft resolution in
keeping with its responsibilities under the Charter.
Here, we are grateful to Council members for having
included clear and explicit provisions for the
implementation of sanctions in such a way that they
will not hamper the provision of humanitarian
assistance to the Afghan population. Cautious use will
thus be made of sanctions, in order to spare innocent
people.

By the terms of the draft resolution, we look
forward to the Security Council employing all possible
monitoring mechanisms to put a halt to transfers of
weapons and ammunition and to the continued dispatch
from Pakistan of the armed Pakistanis and military
personnel who are helping the terrorists in Afghanistan,
and so that all Pakistani military personnel and so-
called volunteers will immediately leave Afghan soil.

The draft resolution on which the Council will
take action today does not deal with a peaceful
settlement of the present conflict in Afghanistan, and it
is silent on Pakistan's well-known aggression in
Afghanistan. The draft resolution addresses one
specific issue: the terrorism originating from that part
of Afghan territory that is under military occupation by
the diabolical Pakistan-Taliban-bin-Laden alliance.

The Islamic State of Afghanistan condemns
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. We affirm
that the suppression of international terrorism is

S/PV.4251

 

essential for the maintenance of international peace and
security. We consider that terrorism is but one of the
many effects of the military aggression against
Afghanistan. The Security Council should therefore
address the problem of Afghanistan in its entirety. It is
our fear that the Pakistan-Taliban-bin-Laden axis could
interpret the draft resolution before the Council to
mean that they can continue their atrocities and their
violence against the Afghan people, so long as they
simply put an end to their activities outside Afghan
territory.

We note with regret that the Security Council is
not considering the active role of the Pakistani military
junta and Pakistan's well-known military intelligence
service, the Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI), and the
close links between that organization and international
terrorist networks. In fact, the ISI constantly recruits,
among "Islamic" extremist groups, people whom it
trains, arms and sends to Afghanistan accompanied by
Pakistani military personnel.

We convey our gratitude to the Secretary-
General, who in paragraphs 23 and 81 of his 20
November 2000 report on the situation in Afghanistan
indicated that a there are a significant number of non-
Afghan combatants, essentially from Pakistan, fighting
alongside the Taliban; most are from Pakistani
madrassahs. In his report, the Secretary-General adds
that there is outside involvement in the planning and
logistical support of Taliban military operations.

On the basis of what the Secretary-General has
reported, we are in a position to affirm that there are
very close ideological, organizational, political and
military links between the international terrorist
network and Pakistan's ISI. Pakistani religious schools,
or madrassahs, are centres for indoctrination and
regimentation, used by the Pakistani army to train
armed personnel. Thus, in July 1999, following the
withdrawal of soldiers and extremist fighters from the
Kargil region of Kashmir, some of those fighters were
taken, in Pakistani military trucks, north of Kabul to
the Afghan provinces of Parwan and Kapisa to
reinforce the Taliban armed forces in their acts of
repression based on ethnic segregation. Pakistani
prisoners held by our side have made unambiguous
confessions to that effect.

The Islamic State of Afghanistan continues to be
gravely concerned at the recent deterioration of the
situation in Afghanistan and in neighbouring countries,
which is a direct consequence of the policy of military
occupation and the training of terrorists endorsed by
the Pakistani army; we therefore wish to make the
following comments.

First, the population of Afghanistan has
undergone genuine persecution by the terrorists and by
elements affiliated with a whole range of international
terrorist organizations from South-East Asia, South
Asia and the Middle East, whom the Pakistani army
continues to recruit through its military intelligence
service, the ISI. Pakistan remains the sole provider of
weapons and materiel to the terrorists who, in ever
greater numbers, come to Pakistan from all over the
world.

Secondly, the Islamic State of Afghanistan
affirms that it is inadmissible for Afghan soil to
continue to be used to wage war and commit hostile
acts that jeopardize the security and stability of third
States in the region and beyond. Pakistan will bear sole
responsibility for possible retaliation against
Afghanistan, which could involve loss of life and the
destruction of property.

We stress that the Islamic State of Afghanistan is
convinced that the acts just described constitute
flagrant violations of the Charter of the United
Nations. The Security Council should immediately be
seized of the question of armed aggression against
Afghanistan, which falls under Chapter VII, Articles 39
to 42, of the Charter. Pakistan's aggression and the
terrorism and other activities sponsored by Pakistan
pose a threat to regional security and hamper
development and cooperation in the region; they
should be denounced, condemned and combated
through appropriate measures.

The Pakistani military intelligence service, the
ISI, must be recognized as a criminal organization
responsible for the war of aggression, for crimes
against humanity and for war crimes. The Pakistani
army must no longer think it is safe from being
identified as responsible. We demand that the Council
appoint a commission of inquiry to investigate the
issue of military aggression in Afghanistan and to
present its conclusions to the Council. In addition to
noting Pakistan's aggression in Afghanistan, the
Council could decide to compensate Afghanistan,
through those bearing responsibility, for the material
damage, the loss of human life and the plundering of
Afghan cultural property caused by Pakistan's war of

S/PVAZSI

 

aggression, which Pakistan has been waging since
April 1992.

For justice to prevail, the real instigator of and
key figure in the instability, the centre of indoctrination
and regimentation of terrorists and the cause of tension
in the region - Pakistan - must be the object of
future sanctions by the Security Council. That would
constitute the real effective solution to the Afghan
problem.

This draft resolution clearly shows that foreign
elements, coming basically from Pakistan and in
alliance with terrorists from different countries, are
those really responsible for the terrorist activities. The
Afghan people themselves have never made use of
terrorism. The Taliban have given an inaccurate picture
of Afghanistan - an inaccurate image of the Afghan
people to the world at large.

