Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank France for organizing this
open debate on a topic of concern to all of us. I also
want to thank the speakers who bore witness today to
the violence that minorities are suffering in the Middle
East. Luxembourg fully supports the statement made
by the observer of the European Union.

All forms of extremism represent a blinding of
thought. It can only survive when cut off from the
real world and shielded by ignorance. Extremism does
not tolerate either difference or diversity; it abhors
culture and knowledge. Everything that differs from it
threatens its very existence. Shocking as it may seem,
the brutality that Daesh is demonstrating in Iraq and
Syria against minorities and ethnic or religious groups
is not surprising. Those minorities and groups represent
the religious, ethnic and cultural plurality that is so
characteristic of the Middle East. By the very fact of
their existence, they are a challenge to the nihilistic and
totalitarian ideology of Daesh.

In its destructive madness, Daesh attacks men,
women and children of all minorities, be they Christian,
Yazidi, Kurdish or Turkmen. Its will to annihilate all
trace of those communities leads Daesh to also attack
the sanctuaries and cultural heritage of the Shiites, the
Christians and even the Sunnis. As the concept note
before us (S/2015/176, annex) rightly indicates, this is
an attempt to systematically destroy the diversity of the
social fabric in the regions concerned.

The recent report of the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights on the situation
of human rights internationaln Iraq (A/HRC/28/18)
concludes that the acts committed by Daesh there
against minorities are akin to war crimes, crimes
against humanity and acts of genocide. Those findings
echo those of the ninth report recently issued by the
International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian
Arab Republic (A/HRC/28/69). Women and children of
minorities are particularly affected. Their life has no
value for the Daesh fighters; it is simply a means of
exchange. Boys are recruited and indoctrinated before
being used in the conflict. Women and girls, especially
Yazidis, are seen as the spoils of war and are raped and
offered as sex slaves to Daesh fighters.

We vehemently condemn all the atrocities that
Daesh and other parties to the conflict have committed.
In that context, we support the idea that the United
Nations should draft an action plan to protect minorities
in the Middle East with all the tools at its disposal.
Luxembourg is prepared to provide its support,
particularly in the humanitarian field.

The rise of Daesh in the Middle East cannot be
separated from the regional political context. Daesh
has fed on the brutal repression committed by the
Al-Assad regime against its own people in Syria and on
sectarian tensions in Iraq. Countering Daesh therefore
also means seeking a political solution to the multiple
crises that affect the region and the socioeconomic
challenges facing the people. That is all the more urgent
because there is a real risk of the spread of the scourge
of extremism.

In adopting resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014)
and 2191 (2014) last year, the objective of the Security
Council was to work to significantly improve the
humanitarian and human rights situation in Syria. If the
solution to the conflict in Syria can only be political,
that does not release the parties, primarily the Syrian
authorities, from their responsibilities in terms of
protecting civilians. The Security Council must act to
ensure full compliance with resolutions 2139 (2014),
2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014), as well as with resolutions
aimed at countering the terrorist threat in the region,
particularly resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014).

Over the long term, it is by doing justice that we
will best respond to injustice. It is by righting the
wrongs against the innocent that the victims will be
rehabilitated in their dignity. That is why Luxembourg
continues to call for the Security Council to refer the
situation that has prevailed in Syria since March 2011
to the International Criminal Court (ICC). That is also
why we encourage Iraq to accede to the Rome Statute
of the ICC, or at least make a statement recognizing the
Court's jurisdiction. Those who today threaten the very
existence of the minorities that are the mosaic of the
Middle East should know that justice will eventually
catch up with them.

