The President (spoke in Spanish): As this is the
first meeting of the Security Council for the month of
February 2008, I should like to take this opportunity to
pay tribute, on behalf of the Council, to His Excellency
Mr. Giadalla A. Ettalhi, Permanent Representative of
the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to the United Nations, for
his service as President of the Security Council for the
month of January 2008. I am sure I speak for all
members of the Security Council in expressing deep
appreciation to Ambassador Ettalhi for the great
diplomatic skill with which he conducted the Council's
business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Chad, the Central African Republic
and the subregion

The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Chad, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mbaye
(Chad) took a seat at the Council table.


The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
photocopies of a letter dated 3 February 2008 from the
Permanent Representative of Chad addressed to the
President of the Security Council, which will be issued
as document 8/2008/69.
Following consultations among the members of
the Security Council, I have been authorized to make
the following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council expresses its grave
concern regarding the situation in Chad.

"The Security Council supports the decision
of the African Union dated 2 February 2008
strongly condemning the attacks perpetrated by
armed groups against the Chadian Government,
demanding to put an immediate end to the
violence and calling on all the countries of the
region to respect the unity and territorial integrity
of the member States of the African Union.

"The Security Council in particular
welcomes the decision by the African Union to
mandate the Libyan leader, Colonel Muammar
Al-Qadhafi, and President Denis Sassou Nguesso
of the Republic of Congo, to engage the Chadian
parties with a View to ending the fighting and to
initiate efforts aimed at seeking a lasting solution
to the crisis.

"The Security Council strongly condemns
these attacks and all attempts at destabilization by
force, and recalls its commitment to the
sovereignty, unity, territorial integrity and
political independence of Chad.

"The Security Council urges all States in the
region to abide fully by the obligations they have
entered into with regard to respect for and
securing of their common border, in particular
under the Tripoli Agreement of 8 February 2006,
the Riyadh Agreement of 3 May 2007 and the
Sirte Agreement of 25 October 2007.

"The Security Council calls upon the States
of the region to deepen their cooperation with a
view to putting an end to the activities of armed
groups and their attempt to seize power by force.

"The Security Council calls upon Member
States to provide support, in conformity with the
United Nations Charter, as requested by the
Government of Chad.

"The Security Council expresses its concern
regarding the direct threat that the combats pose
for the safety of the civilian population, including
internally displaced persons and refugees.
08-2269]
"The Security Council reaffirms its full
support for the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad
(MINURCAT) and the European Union force
(EUFOR Tchad/RCA), whose deployment in
eastern Chad and north-eastern Central African
Republic was authorized by resolution 1778
(2007), to contribute to the protection of
vulnerable civilian populations and to facilitate
the provision of humanitarian assistance.

"The Security Council expresses its concern
over the safety and security of humanitarian
personnel, United Nations personnel and
08-2269]
European Union personnel and material deployed
in Chad. It underlines that all parties have a
responsibility to ensure the protection of all these
personnel and of the diplomatic personnel present
in Chad."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2008/3.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.55 a.m.

