Mr. Pujalte (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, I wish to thank Mr. Harri Holkeri, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo,
for his presence here today and also for having briefed
us on the current situation and the prospects for
Kosovo.

Since this is the first time that Mr. Holkeri has
briefed the Security Council, I wish to express to him
the Mexican Government's support for the work that he
has begun at the head of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We are
confident that his leadership will contribute to the
development of Kosovo as a multi-ethnic, tolerant,
democratic and prosperous society in which the rule of
law prevails.

Undoubtedly, the launching on 14 October in
Vienna of direct talks on practical matters between
Belgrade and the Pristina authorities is an important
step in the right direction, regardless of the
composition of the delegations or of the immediate
results achieved. It is important that the working
groups begin to meet as soon as possible in order to
discuss the four selected areas.

What will benefit the people of Kosovo most at
this time is the resolution of vital practical issues, such
as missing persons, the return of internally displaced
persons and refugees, energy and communications. To
resolve those problems is to take the path towards
reconciliation and towards the creation of a climate not
only of tolerance but also of greater confidence in the
future. In this context, the monthly meetings that the
labour and social welfare authorities in Belgrade and
Pristina have been holding for some time now, virtually
without mediation, are an example to be followed.

The parallel structures remain an obstacle to the
normalization of life in Kosovo. It is important not
only that Belgrade cease its support for their existence,
but also that conditions be created that will allow the
Serb minority to have confidence in the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government and in UNMIK. In this
regard, the recommendations contained in the report of
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe on this subject can be very useful.

We are pleased to see that further progress has
been made in the transfer of non-reserved
responsibilities to the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government and that it is envisaged that that transfer
will be completed by the end of this year. As we have
already indicated, it is important that the process be
consistent, both with resolution 1244 (1999) and with
the Constitutional Framework.

We are deeply concerned at the attacks committed
in recent months against members of the Serb minority,
apparently on ethnic grounds and also at the increase in
the number of acts of violence against UNMIK
personnel, which in both cases have resulted in loss of
life. Not only do those acts deserve the most
categorical condemnation on the part of all the political
protagonists in Kosovo, but also, as Mr. Holkeri
indicated, commensurate action must be taken. We
hope that the setting up of special investigation teams
by UNMIK will lead to the arrest of the perpetrators of
those crimes, so that they will not go unpunished.
As concerns internally displaced persons
belonging to minority groups, in particular the Serb
minority, we have taken note of the increase in the
number of persons who have been repatriated in the
course of this year as compared to the same period last
year. Nonetheless, as the report rightly indicates, this is
a small percentage given the large number of displaced
persons who remain outside of Kosovo, mainly in other
parts of Serbia and Montenegro.

The sustainable return of displaced persons
depends, to a great extent, on their finding acceptable
standards of living upon their return, not only from an
employment and economic standpoint, which is a basic
requirement, but also in terms of safety, security and
freedom of movement. It is understandable that the
crimes committed in recent months have heightened
the sense of insecurity prevailing among minorities, in
particular the Serb minority. It is important that
measures be taken to improve security conditions.

We have taken note of the efforts that are being
made to progress in the establishment of the rule of
law, including measures to increase the participation of
women and of ethnic minorities in judicial institutions,
including the courts, as well as in the Kosovo Police
Service and the prison service.

My delegation is particularly pleased to see that
progress has been made in mainstreaming the gender
perspective and in the participation of women in public
administration, including concrete institutional efforts
such as the establishment of the Inter-Ministerial
Working Group on Gender Equality and the
introduction in the Assembly of a draft law on that
issue.

Lastly, I should like to ask Mr. Holkeri whether
he could provide us with further information on two
matters that arose in September. First, can he amplify
on the results of the weapons amnesty programme?
Secondly, has there been progress in the investigation
of the incident in the Dubrava prison?

We once again express our support to you, Sir,
and our acknowledgement of your mission.

