Mr. Akbaruddin (India): We thank the delegation
of Poland for holding this open debate. I also thank
the President for personally being present here today.
We listened attentively to the remarks made by the
Secretary-General on this issue. We also thank the
other briefers for their valuable input, perspectives
and recommendations.

Listening to the submissions, there is clearly no
dearth of feeling around the Security Council table with
respect to addressing issues related to the protection
of civilians in armed conflict situations. Yet, judging
from the heart-wrenching narratives that we hear, it is
obvious that there is a crisis facing the implementation
of that concept. While it would be historically incorrect
to say that there was ever a time when civilians were
entirely shielded from the harrowing effects of conflict,
the human toll of conflict today is a tragedy that
requires redress by translating the concept into feasible
actions and operational responses.

Throughout history, ways have been sought to
limit the effects of conflict. Respect for international
humanitarian law and other relevant human rights laws
by all parties to an armed conflict and ensuring safe
and unhindered access for medical and humanitarian
agencies to people in need of assistance are well-
established norms. Hence it is not the absence of norms
that is the cause of today's challenges, it is the inability
to abide by established norms that is perhaps the reason
for the dismal situation we face in addressing this
multidimensional and cross-cutting issue.

While the rubric on the protection of civilians
stretches over a vast canvas, in view of time constraints
I will limit my remarks to the application of the concept
to United Nations peacekeeping missions directly
mandated by the Security Council. For if we cannot
set our house in order and address the issues with the
tool that the Council designs and oversees, then broader
endeavours may be more difficult to address.

The need to protect civilians in the context of
United Nations peacekeeping operations has gained
prominence since the 1990s, as armed conflict situations
evolved rapidly within the changing global geostrategic
context from inter-State to more intra-State situations,
often involving non- State actors and terrorist networks,
and that has led to large-scale violence against civilians.

From the beginning, the issue has been a complex
one because of the vastly different nature of the armed
conflicts themselves, possible contradiction with the
long-standing agreed principles of United Nations
peacekeeping and the limitations of the mandates and
the serious inadequacy of the resources made available
for peacekeeping missions. The issue continues to be
debated in the Security Council, which has adopted
several resolutions and other documents focused on the
concept. Those efforts have not really helped to address
the main challenges.

The difficulties involved in achieving the aims of
civilian protection are well known. The responsibility
of protecting civilians lies, first of all, with the
national authorities. Yet very little is done in terms
of bolstering the societal capacities for protection.
There is a tendency to assume that protection is about
how civilians can be protected by others - that is,
somebody other than those affected. That somebody
could be the parties to the conflict, peacekeepers and
humanitarian organizations. Strengthening national
and societal mechanisms is of primary importance.
Outside agencies can supplement those mechanisms,
but cannot supplant them.

While nine of the current 14 United Nations
peacekeeping missions include civilian protection
among their mandates, this aspect is only one of many
mandated components. By our count, that is one of,
on average, 10 such mandates that each mission is
individually expected to fulfil. Every time the Council
reviews a peacekeeping operation, it must carry out
a serious examination of whether the peacekeepers
have the ability to do what they are expected to do in
extremely trying circumstances.

It is clear that the expectation that United Nations
peacekeepers can effectively ensure the protection of
civilians in the absence of clear mandates is not realistic.
Therefore, the Council's membership needs to frame
mandates with clarity and specificity. The responsibility
also lies with those deciding the resources to be made
available to peacekeepers so that they are able to fulfil
the tasks that they are mandated to do. The growing
number of instances of serious attacks on peacekeepers
and the high level of casualties suffered by them in
various missions point to the difficulties of being able
to implement so-called robust mandates in situations
involving rival warring groups mixed with civilian
populations. That also puts at risk the credibility and
the image of the neutral presence of the United Nations
in situations of armed conflict.

Conflicts where peacekeeping operations are
deployed are inherently messy, complex and difficult.
However, those factors should not be taken as an excuse
to accept the devastating impact of conflict on civilians.
A number of courses of action and mechanisms and
processes are available to address the operational issues.
It is up to the Council to harness them in a collaborative

effort. For that, it is also useful to consider developing
a normative architecture for civilian protection as part
of a broader endeavour, a framework that is politically
attuned but not politicized or seen as instrumentalized.
It is only then can we move forward with cohesion to
address issues that have exacted the heavy price in
civilian lives.

