Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We appreciate the convening of today's meeting
and the important briefing by the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
whom we welcome.

Peru expresses its deep concern about the escalation
of armed conflict in Libya, in particular in recent
weeks. We call on leaders and political factions to cease
hostilities and engage in dialogue - hand in hand with
the good offices of the United Nations Support Mission

in Libya - and to work on concrete measures for the
well-being and protection of the civilian population.
We also reiterate our strong condemnation of the
many instances of atrocity crimes, the grave human
rights situation and the violations of international
humanitarian law that have been occurring in Libya.
Deliberate attacks on civilians and the fear generated in
the face of allegations of extrajudicial executions have
resulted in almost 40,000 internally displaced persons.
Only eight years ago, assuming its responsibility
under the Charter of the United Nations, the Council
expressed its confidence in the jurisdiction of the
International Criminal Court, by referring to it the
situation in Libya. Today, given the challenges facing
the Court, we reaffirm the values of the Rome Statute
and the need for States to cooperate with it.

In acknowledging the efforts of the Libyan
Prosecutor General's Office, we call upon other
Government authorities in Libya, as well as the
authorities of any State concerned, to execute the
arrest warrants issued by the Court, in particular the
two arrest warrants against Mr. Mahmoud Al-Werfalli,
whose flagrant crimes, according to the report, were
recorded and shared through social networks.

We reiterate our support for the mandate of the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court. Any
support for, and cooperation with, the work of the Court
must be understood as an opportunity to entrench justice
and the rule of law domestically and internationally. That
means promoting greater confidence in jurisdictional
institutions and effective deterrence.

The armed conflict in Libya is exacerbated by the
acts of terrorist organizations such as the Islamic State
and its affiliates, as well as Boko Haram, which control
areas of Libyan territory and are involved in human
trafficking and the smuggling ofmigrants. In particular,
we highlight the importance for Peru to address the
nexus between international terrorism and organized
crime, which is especially serious in the region.

With regard to the Islamic State, we express our
strongest rejection of the heinous terrorist attacks
in Libya, including one against the headquarters
of the Ministry for Foreign Affairs in Tripoli on
25 December 2018, which left more than a dozen dead
and many wounded. In this context, we encourage
the Office of the Prosecutor - in accordance with
the principle of complementarity - to also evaluate
such situations, as well as their possible connection
to ongoing investigations. This is all in the context of
efforts to find a political solution in Libya that will
put an end to the ongoing high levels of violence,
promote national and regional stability and achieve a
sustainable peace.

I conclude by emphasizing that trust in justice and
in the institutions responsible for guaranteeing it is
key to resolving and preventing the conflicts affecting
a growing number of countries. In that regard, the
International Criminal Court is essential to fulfilling
the responsibility of protecting the population and
guaranteeing accountability for the atrocious crimes
committed as a key component of the international,
norms-based order.

