Mr. Zhang Dianbin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation listened very carefully to
the briefing we heard from the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou
Bensouda. Over the past few years, the political and
security situation in Darfur and the Sudan have
improved considerably, a development that has been
welcomed by the international community. This is due
partly to the cooperation between the African Union
and the United Nations as well as the international
community as a whole. More important still, it is due
to the efforts and the contributions of the Sudanese
Government itself.

The Government of the Sudan has been working
for many years now to strengthen its own capacity in
the field of security and governance and to promote a
political process of reconciliation, in particular over the
past year, when it has engaged in an active campaign to
collect weapons, which has made a major contribution
to peace and stability in Darfur. We very much welcome

the progress that we have witnessed in Darfur and the
efforts undertaken by the Sudanese Government itself
to bring about the current situation.

The progress made in Darfur demonstrates
that the Sudanese Government is entirely capable
of progressively assuming and taking over its
responsibilities for the maintenance of peace and
stability in the region of Darfur. We hope that the
international community will continue to respect the
leadership of the Sudanese Government when it comes
to the issue of Darfur.

We hope that the international community will also
contribute effectively to peace and stability in Darfur,
with a focus on capacity-building in the areas of
security and governance. We also call on it to provide
humanitarian and economic assistance and to stand
with the Sudanese Government and help it in its efforts
to promote reconciliation reconstruction in Darfur
in order to ensure that all of these regions can enjoy
sustainable peace and lasting development.

China's stance on the Sudanese issue with respect
to the ICC remains unchanged. China hopes that the
Security Council and the ICC will fully respect the
sovereignty of the Sudan. They must also address
the legitimate concerns of the African Union and the
Sudanese Government when it comes to this issue and
fully respect the views of the African Union and the
League of Arab States, which cannot be ignored.

China has long been of the view that Heads of State
enjoy privileges and immunities under international
law by virtue of their office and that the referral of a
situation by the Security Council to the ICC in no way
necessarily undermines or strips the immunity enjoyed
by such Heads of State.

