Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the convening of this meeting and thank
the Secretary-General and Mr. Prendergast for their
important briefings.

Peru attaches high priority to the issue that brings
us together. Our country has not been spared the
scourge of the corruption that affects our hemisphere.
The problem manifests itselfin different forms in every
region of the world, and in the numerous conflicts that
make up the Security Council's agenda. Corruption

erodes citizens' belief and trust in their authorities and
institutions. It undermines ethical values, the rule of
law, justice and democratic governance. It is one of the
greatest obstacles to effectively addressing the needs
and development of our peoples.

The transnational scope and multiple forms of
corruption and organized crime should compel us to
commit to strengthening international cooperation and
multilateralism in order to respond consistently to the
challenges that are shared by all our countries. That
includes the work of the Council, given that according
to the United Nations Convention against Corruption,
this scourge represents a threat to the stability and
security of societies. It is clear that corruption is a root
cause of many conflicts and humanitarian crises, and
it is often associated with organized crime, which in
turn manifests itself as a financial backer and enabler
of violence and terrorism through activities such as
money-laundering and the illicit arms trade. In that
regard, we would like to recall the Council's presidential
statement of8 May (S/PRST/2018/9), which commits us
to deepening investigations in order to better understand
the nature and scope of the links between terrorists
and transnational organized crime. Peru attaches high
priority to the fight against corruption and organized
crime, in line with the Convention against Corruption
and with Goal 16 of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, which, among other things, commits us
to promoting peaceful and inclusive societies and to
strengthening the rule of law.

We emphasize that sustaining peace, defined
as a general objective and a permanent process in
identical resolutions recently reaffirmed by the General
Assembly and the Council (resolutions 70/262 and 2282 (2016)), duly commits us to consolidating inclusive,
transparent and accountable national institutions.

An effective fight against corruption requires a
culture of integrity and of constitutional provisions that
guarantee checks and balances on the exercise of power.
That includes full access to justice to ensure that there
is no impunity and greater participation by women and
young people in political and institutional life. The
citizenry must be able to know about the accusations in
cases of corruption in a timely manner and participate,
in an informed manner, in political life.

We are also believe that the scope of corruption
demands a coordinated response from Governments.
That is why, at the eighth Summit of the Americas,
held in Lima in April, Peru promoted the adoption of
the Lima Commitment, which includes 57 measures
and concrete actions in support of the fight against
corruption and regional cooperation in that area. We
are currently working on its implementation.

In line with the need to prevent corruption from
degenerating into conflicts and humanitarian crises, we
consider it essential that the international community
have at its disposal mechanisms for early warning and
exchanging good practices. We therefore consider it
important to consider extending Council sanctions
regimes to corruption and money-laundering networks
that benefit from conflicts, as Mr. Prendergast
has proposed.

Finally, with a view to strengthening national
institutions called on to sustain peace, we consider it
important to ensure that the fight against corruption
and respect for fundamental freedoms are reflected
in the mandates of peacekeeping operations and other
missions mandated by the Council in countries affected
by conflict, as appropriate.

