Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Today's meeting again demonstrates the
special attention that the Security Council devotes to
issues of settling crisis situations on the African
continent. It is significant in that connection that the
Security Council is not the only player in this field. We
note with satisfaction that the African Union (AU) is
increasingly present in resolving the continent's
problems.

What is worthy of support is the resolve of the
African Union and its member States to bear the
responsibility for preventing conflicts and carrying out
peacekeeping activities in Africa. A telling example
here is the actions of African peacekeepers in Somalia
and Darfur, conducted in cooperation with and with the
support of the United Nations.

The African Union's peacekeeping role
demonstrates the need for rational utilization of the
capacities of regional organizations by the Security
Council, pursuant to Chapter VIII of the United
Nations Charter. The existence of robust regional
organizations that are capable of bearing a greater
share of responsibility for the situation in their regions
enables the United Nations to focus on global issues to
a greater extent, in the interests of the entire world
community.

The African Union's peacekeeping capacities
require further strengthening, including through
support from the international community. There is
fruitful cooperation between the Security Council and
the AU Peace and Security Council and between the
secretariats of both organizations.

We believe that the creation of the United Nations
Office to the African Union will optimize assistance
for strengthening AU peacekeeping capacities from our
universal Organization. Furthering and enhancing the
effectiveness of efforts to strengthen regional security
and resolving cross-border problems on the African
continent will be promoted by the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa, which will be
established soon. We hope that the United Nations
experience in Western Africa will be brought to bear
here.

Regarding the provision of logistical and
financial support by the United Nations for the African
Union's peacekeeping efforts, we are wedded to a
rational approach. What is required here is a thorough
analysis of the conditions for the deployment and of
the needs of specific peacekeeping operations, and
multilateral consultations between the African Union
and the United Nations on all aspects of United
Nations support. What requires separate discussion is
the provision of further United Nations support to the
African Union Mission in Somalia, keeping in mind the
security and humanitarian situation in that country.
Yesterday's Security Council meeting (see S/PV.6407)
was useful in this respect.

In parallel to peacekeeping, we need to devote
our attention to bolstering the African Union's
mediation and preventive diplomacy capacity. The
priority here remains the creation by the African Union
of a multi-tiered, collective security architecture for the
prevention of and timely response to emerging crisis
situations. The most important element of the
architecture should be the international peacekeeping
force known as the African standby force, whose
creation the international community is assisting.

The Russian Federation is participating in the
elaboration and implementation of international
assistance programmes for Africa, including for the
strengthening of the African Union's peacekeeping
capacities. Russia's specialized educational facilities
are conducting training programmes for African Union
peacekeeping personnel. We intend to continue to
develop our cooperation with African States aimed at
strengthening peace and stability in the region.

The Russian Federation supports the draft
presidential statement prepared by the Ugandan
delegation.

