Mrs. Miculescu (Romania): In aligning itself
with the statement delivered by the observer of the
European Union and in adding a few thoughts in its
national capacity, Romania joins all the other speakers
in thanking you, Mr. President, and your country for
preparing and convening this debate. It is yet another
product of an excellent presidency of the Security
Council.

The reality we face today is that, despite sustained
efforts the virus of terrorism continues its genetic
mutations, periodically challenging our values,
presenting us with new legal and political dilemmas
and forcing the international community to constantly
adapt and rethink its counter-terrorism arsenal. That is
why this debate is a meaningful and necessary exercise,
and we welcome the adoption of presidential statement
S/PRST/2014/23.

It is in view of a long-standing concern with the
rules of international law on terrorism that my country
takes the floor today. Romania was one of the early and
strong promoters of a convention to render terrorism
universally punishable, and I cannot refrain from
mentioning in this context the work of the Romanian
jurist Vespasian Pella, who contributed directly to the
drafting of the 1937 Convention for the Prevention and
Punishment of Terrorism.

At the international level today, we are working
with a complex framework made up of sectoral
anti-terrorism treaties and Security Council resolutions
that keep the framework updated as the phenomenon
evolves and that contain important material and
procedural obligations for international criminal law.
Resolution 1373 (2001) and its most recent updates in
resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014) are fundamental
elements of that framework.

In view of the time constraints and the concept
note prepared by the presidency (S/2014/787, annex),
in particular the third topic suggested for discussion,
I will focus only on a technical aspect of international
judicial cooperation that raises particular challenges, in
our view. It is a matter on which the United Nations
could provide valuable support and guidance to
Member States and regional actors with regard to
implementation. We refer to judicial cooperation for the
collection of evidence needed for criminal proceedings
against foreign fighters.

Paragraph 12 of resolution 2178 (2014) recalls the
obligation of Member States to provide one another
with the greatest measure of assistance, including
evidence-gathering, in connection with criminal
investigations or proceedings relating to the financing
or support of terrorist acts. The paragraph then
underlines the importance of fulfilling that obligation
in investigations and proceedings involving foreign
fighters. The wording of the provision is closely
connected to paragraph 6, which asks States to ensure
that they incriminate and prosecute as serious offences
three forms of conduct involving foreign fighters.

As the scope being considered is universal,
rather than regional or bilateral, the question that
arises is whether the existing framework for mutual
legal assistance in counter-terrorism proceedings is
adequate and sufficient for all the offences referred to
in paragraph 12 of the resolution, read in conjunction
with paragraph 6. In the situation that prevailed prior to
the adoption of resolution 2178 (2014), the assessment
was that the sectoral conventions, although confined
to the specific acts that they criminalize, together
with related instruments such as the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,
offer a sufficient legal basis for mutual legal assistance,
including for the offences covered by resolution
1373 (2001). The situation following the adoption of
resolution 2178 (2014) has yet to be assessed.

What is the impact of extending the catalogue
of offences within the same mutual legal assistance
convention framework? We believe that now is
the right time to ask that question. Transnational
evidence-gathering is a particularly sensitive aspect of
mutual legal assistance. Therefore, an early assessment
of possible options would be of added value. States are
currently evaluating legislation and exploring the most
efficient ways to comply with their new obligations,
including in the framework of regional organizations.

We propose that the Council's subsidiary bodies
consider that topic in the exercise of their mandates.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate is ideally placed to look into that specific
question from a global perspective and to engage in a
dialogue with the competent national authorities and
regional actors. While regional systems might be better
equipped, we need to address the question globally, as
we are facing a global phenomenon, and we need to
consider instruments of universal applicability. Further
follow-up, either normative or technical, could also be
envisaged.

Let me conclude by underlining that we encourage
this specific exercise at the level of the Council's
subsidiary bodies in order to support uniform
compliance across different legal systems and to
facilitate the work of those who are on the front line of
our common endeavour, namely, national investigators
and prosecutors. Their efforts contribute not only to the
safety and security of our communities in the context
of a world we all know to be seriously haunted by
increasingly barbaric forms of terrorism and extreme
violence, but also to the values of the rule of law that
are the foundations of democracy.

