Mr. McNee (Canada) (spoke in French): I would
like to start by thanking you, Madame, and the
Colombian delegation for having organized this debate
on Haiti. I would first like to thank President Preval for
his statement and for his work and contribution to
strengthening Haitian democracy. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General and the United Nations
Special Envoy for Haiti, President Clinton. I would
also like to acknowledge the contribution made today
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
11-29077
for Haiti, Mr. Mulet, and to thank him for his
dedication to Haiti over the past few years.

This debate is taking place at an opportune time,
a few days before the announcement of the final results
of the presidential and legislative elections. Canada
would like to congratulate the citizens of Haiti, who
exercised their democratic right to choose those who
will govern their country. I also wish to highlight the
work of the authorities and President Preval and the
collaboration among various actors to ensure the
smooth conduct of the elections. We would also like to
thank the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) for its contribution to peacekeeping and
security.

Over one year after the January 2010 earthquake,
Haiti still needs international support, both in the short
term to meet humanitarian needs, and over the long
term to help the country rebuild its infrastructure and
institutions. After a catastrophe of such magnitude, a
country like Haiti obviously cannot recover overnight.

In the meantime, Haitians continue to be
perplexed by ongoing problems related to debris
removal, housing, employment and access to quality
education and health care, to mention but a few issues.
Their frustration appears to be justified. Despite the
international community's unprecedented commitment
and a desire to do more and better for Haiti, the fact is
that the progress made to date does not meet
expectations. Much remains to be done to help the
country reach its full potential.

Looking back on our efforts over the years, we
must face some hard realities. Despite eight United
Nations interventions of various types and billions of
dollars spent over more than 25 years, Haiti is still
suffering from serious problems that were exacerbated
by the earthquake. Those problems include a
Government that struggles to provide essential services
to its people, fragile public institutions and a
chronically unstable, often volatile political dynamic
that is oblivious to the public interest.

We cannot overlook some of the advances that
have been made, however. We recognize the leadership
of Haiti's Ministry of Public Health and Population in
the fight against cholera. Thanks to the evolution of its
mandates since its creation pursuant to resolution 1542
(2004), MINUSTAH has carried out remarkable work
in strengthening security institutions, which has helped
to guarantee a more stable and secure environment in

Haiti. For its part, the Security Council was able to
adapt MINUSTAH's mandate and allocate the
necessary resources to ensure that it continues to
exercise its primary role in terms of security and to
provide effective assistance to reconstruction and
humanitarian efforts.

Canada notes with great interest that the United
Nations is planning to attach increasing importance to
strengthening governance and the rule of law in Haiti.
That is a determining factor of any long-term success.
We must reconsider the international community's
approach and redouble our efforts to support good
governance and respect for the rule of law in Haiti.
Beyond the democratic process and the strengthening
of key institutions, good governance also represents the
capacity and, above all, the willingness of political
leaders to accept their governmental responsibilities
and thereby ensure the security and protection of and
justice for their citizens.

Reconstruction and development in Haiti depend
first and foremost on the people of Haiti, including the
Government, citizens, civil society and economic
stakeholders. The international community can only
provide support, the effectiveness of which depends on
a number of factors. Political stability can be achieved
only through an effective, honest and responsible
Government that has been democratically elected by
Haitians. That Government must have the public
interest at heart and be able to pave the way for
recovery and reconstruction. To avoid repeating
mistakes of the past, Haiti must profoundly transform
its governmental institutions and structures and its
political culture.

(spoke in English)

Canada is pleased to see that the Secretary-
General shares that opinion, as indicated in his recent
report on Haiti (S/2011/183*). In that report, the
Secretary-General refers to the fact that MINUSTAH
has started the process of realigning its priorities and
resources to promote a compact on the rule of law.
Canada recognizes the validity of that proposal. The
implementation of such a project by the Haitian
Government, with the support of the international
community, would help to guide the reform of key
systems and institutions and could help to re-energize
the commitment of the new Haitian leaders and the
people of Haiti. However, if such an initiative is to be
17
implemented, there must be real ownership and
leadership on the part of the Haitian authorities.

Canada thinks that this initiative is timely. In fact,
the arrival of new leadership is an opportunity for Haiti
to make a fresh start. Canada is determined to continue
to help Haiti in meeting that new challenge.

