The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia in which he
requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of the
item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Maleski (the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia) took a place
at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General pursuant to Security Council
resolutions 981 (1995), 982 (1995) and 983 (1995),
document 8/1995/987.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/ 1995/996, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Argentina, the Czech Republic,
France, Germany, Italy, the Russian Federation, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America.

Honduras has joined as a sponsor of the draft
resolution contained in document S/1995/996.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to vote on the draft resolution before it. Unless I
hear any objection, I shall put the draft resolution to the
vote now.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Argentina, Botswana, China, Czech Republic,
France, Germany, Honduras, Indonesia, Italy,
Nigeria, Oman, Russian Federation, Rwanda, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America


The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The
draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1027 (1995).

The representative of the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia has asked to speak, and I now call on him.


