I thank Mr. Griffiths, Mr. Lowcock and Mr. Beasley. I think the briefings left us in no doubt as to the scale of the humanitarian crisis, the human crisis in Yemen and the urgent need to find progress in terms of a political solution. The United Kingdom fully supports Mr. Griffiths' efforts to make progress on a political solution. The recent success that he described in securing the exchange of over 1,000 prisoners demonstrates that face-to-face dialogue can indeed lead to positive outcomes. We therefore encourage him to do what he can to bring the sides together to finalize the joint declaration. It is clear from everything we have heard today that only an end to the violence can help us bring enduring humanitarian relief and hope to the people of Yemen. But as Mr. Griffiths has said, we continue to see spikes in violence - in particular the Houthis continuing to launch persistent missiles and drone attacks on Saudi Arabia and to pursue further territorial gains in Yemen, casting doubt over the Houthis' commitment to peace. The recent arrival of a senior Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps envoy in Sana'a underlines this point and highlights Iran's destabilizing role in the Yemen conflict. We therefore urge the Houthis to refrain from such behaviour and, instead, to place their efforts into dialogue. Another necessary step is the implementation of the Riyadh agreement. The United Kingdom therefore calls on the parties to rapidly form an inclusive Cabinet and implement the necessary military reforms. We also heard today about the dire humanitarian situation. Several sets of data were released last week, and it is clear that the risk of famine is growing. But, as Mr. Lowcock said, this is not about data or statistics for the people and children of Yemen, but a grim human reality. The latest acute malnutrition analysis by the Integrated Food Security Phase Classification for parts of southern Yemen, as we have heard, predicts that malnutrition in the south is soon expected to reach its highest levels since the conflict began. We know how bad it has been, and it is getting worse. By the end of 2020, the number of children suffering acute malnutrition will grow by 10 per cent - risking the fate described just now by Mr. Lowcock. And as we heard from Mr. Beasley, the World Food Programme has also assessed that food insecurity is worsening faster than expected. With 40 per cent of households across the country now not having enough to eat, the dire picture makes swift action - now, before it is too late - all the more important, particularly in terms of the economy, humanitarian funding and humanitarian access. With regard to the economy, urgent action is needed to ensure the availability and affordability of food, as we have heard. At present, Yemen's economic problems are escalating and driving up the prices of such basic goods as food and fuel and putting additional pressure on the humanitarian response. The Yemeni rial has fallen, as we heard again today, to record lows against the dollar, and the hard currency reserves of the Central Bank of Yemen are effectively exhausted. The Government of Yemen must set out a realistic and transparent budget, while taking steps to avoid further inflation. External support in the form of getting hard currency to the Central Bank of Yemen is also urgently needed so that food importers can continue to bring food into the country. The United Nations-led humanitarian response, as we heard again today, remains vastly underfunded, further driving the risk of famine. Only 43 per cent of the $3.3 billion appeal by the United Nations has been received to date. As a result, 12 of the 38 major programmes of the United Nations in Yemen have already closed or been significantly scaled back this year. If no further funding is received, more will close, denying life-saving assistance to long-suffering Yemeni children and adults. It is critical that donors disburse their pledges promptly and consider additional funding for 2020. Donors must also commit new funds at the start of 2021, and not wait for a pledging conference. For its own part, the United Kingdom has already disbursed 81 per cent of its £200 million commitment for this financial year. Shockingly, inthis context, severe humanitarian access constraints, particularly in the Houthi-controlled north, continue to hamper the humanitarian response. Aid and humanitarian workers must be able to reach those in need, otherwise vulnerable Yemenis will needlessly die. We also condemn any attacks on aid workers, including the two recent incidents in Aden. A senior officials donor meeting is taking place this week in Sweden, hosted by the European Commission. It is vital that we use that meeting to send a clear message that we will not tolerate constraints on the distribution of life-saving assistance. I am grateful to the briefers for their updates on the FSO SAFER oil tanker. Last month, the United Nations Office for Project Services and the Houthis agreed in principle on an assessment mission to secure that tanker. But as Mr. Griffiths said, this issue is progressing slower than urgency requires. We understand the revised statement of works is due to be submitted shortly, but we encourage the United Nations to accelerate this process and urge the Houthis to agree to the revised plan so work can begin as soon as possible. What we have heard today is an urgent call to action from the leadership of the United Nations humanitarian organizations. We need to heed their grave warnings with immediate action.
