Mr. Helg (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland welcomes this debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, and we are grateful to
Mr. Egeland for his very promising contribution. I
should like also to thank the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs for the useful
update of the aide-memoire and ofthe road map.

The new aide-memoire further takes into account
the specific needs of women and children, as well as
those of internally displaced persons. The new version
of the road map facilitates the implementation of
recommendations, thanks to the addition of a list of
measures already taken, as well as of opportunities for
action. We also welcome the attribution of concrete
sets of responsibilities for the various
recommendations. It now remains for us to ensure that
these instruments are implemented and fleshed out by,
for example, integrating the relevant provisions of
Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) on the
protection of United Nations personnel in conflict
zones.

During the twenty-eighth International
Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent, which
recently concluded in Geneva, States discussed, under
the general theme of human dignity, many aspects
relating to the protection of civilians in situations of
armed conflict or of disaster. The concept of human
security creates a link between the humanitarian needs
and the overall security needs of individuals. As a
member of the Human Security Network, Switzerland
encourages the Security Council to endorse this
multidimensional concept as a way of protecting
human dignity and improving the well-being of
vulnerable people.

The Red Cross Conference also adopted a
Declaration and Agenda for humanitarian action. We
invite the Security Council to take note of the
important outcome of that Conference - the fruit of a
unique exchange between States and civil society.

Respect for international humanitarian law and
the principles of the rule of law, as well as the proper
functioning of national and international justice, are
key factors for the increased protection of civilians.
International humanitarian law has been called into
question on a number of occasions, following the
emergence of new forms of conflict. The major
challenge, however, remains to ensure that its
principles are scrupulously and unfailingly
implemented in all armed conflict situations by all
parties to conflict, including non-State armed groups.

Switzerland strongly encourages the use of all
available instruments, notably the International
Criminal Court and the International Humanitarian
Fact-Finding Commission, the latter of which was
created on the basis of the First Protocol Additional to
the Geneva Conventions. These mechanisms are
fortifications against the weakening of international
humanitarian law.

As the Depositary of the Geneva Conventions and
their Additional Protocols, Switzerland calls upon all
parties to those Conventions that have not already done
so to ratify the Protocols and to consider lifting the
reservations made in that respect.

Switzerland also welcomes the recent conclusions
of the meeting of the States parties to the 1980
Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons relating
to Protocol V concerning post-conflict measures on
explosive remnants of war. Switzerland encourages
States to ratify that Protocol, which gives us reason to
hope that explosive remnants of war will be removed
and eliminated as quickly as possible after the end of
hostilities and that protection of civilian populations
will thereby be permanently improved.

The obligation to guarantee safe and unhindered
access for humanitarian actors and to people in need of
protection and assistance is another important element.
This is the responsibility of both States and non-State
groups. It is also up to the Security Council to demand
from all the actors involved, whether political, military
or economic, greater diligence in providing protection
for humanitarians. In this context, Switzerland calls for
the effective implementation of the 2003 Oslo
Guidelines on the Use of Military and Civil Defence
Assets To Support United Nations Humanitarian
Activities in Complex Emergencies.

Finally, the fact that humanitarian workers have
become the target of deliberate attacks and the victims
of kidnappings, assault and threats is absolutely
unacceptable. Such acts make impossible, or have a
serious negative impact on, the work of humanitarian
organizations in support ofthe victims.

It is imperative to put an end to impunity through
national legislation and international law in the light of
the relevant provisions of the 1998 Rome Statute. In
order to improve the safety of United Nations
humanitarian workers, it is also necessary to draw on
the lessons set out in the report of the Independent
Panel on the Safety and Security of United Nations
Personnel in Iraq. We welcome the measures taken by
the Secretary-General to follow up on the
recommendations ofthe experts.

I would like to conclude by reaffirming that,
because of its commitment to human security,
Switzerland has significantly helped to promote and
develop a culture of protection. We are thinking in
particular about civilians in armed conflicts who have
been left off political agendas, in areas often neglected
by the media. We must protect the people in those
conflicts in particular.

