Mr. Lambertini (Italy) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on having convened this timely debate in your capacity
both as President of the Security Council for this month
and as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004).

Italy aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
by the Head of the Delegation of the European Union
to the United Nations. We also align ourselves with
the statement to be made by Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi,
representative of Spain, on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Resolution 1540. I would like to take this
opportunity to thank Spain for the work accomplished
in the Security Council and for its leadership of the
Group of Friends.

(spoke in English)

I also would like to thank both the Under-Secretary-
General, Ms. Nakamitsu, and Mr. Joseph Ballard for
their briefings.

Resolutions 1540 (2004) and 2325 (2016) constitute
the central pillars of the international non-proliferation
architecture and are key instruments for preventing
the most dangerous materials in the world from falling
into the wrong hands. The report of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United
Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism has proven and
confirmed the use of chemical weapons by both State
and non-State actors.

The rapid advances in science and technology,
as well as the globalization of commercial, logistic
and economic transactions, make it harder for States
to control proliferation activities and enable terrorists
to take advantage of transnational criminal networks
to gain access to weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs). In this regard, more attention should
also be paid to the so-called intangible transfer of
technology, which is reflected both in resolution
2325 (2016) and in the programme of work of the
1540 Committee. Strengthening cooperation and the
exchange of experience in the areas of border control,
surveillance of financial flows on the Internet and other
networks and legal assistance have today grown in
importance. Similarly, enhancing protection of critical
infrastructure relevant to the non-proliferation of
WMDs from the increasing risk of cyberattack is more
important than ever. It remains imperative for Member
States to effectively implement the provisions of this
resolution, establish domestic controls, have effective
points of contact and maintain an active dialogue with
the Committees.

We take this opportunity to emphasize the need to
achieve the universal implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) and the importance for States to submit their first
national implementation reports. Despite admirable
progress, the non-proliferation regime continues to be
confronted with serious threats, and recent alarming
developments have clearly demonstrated that no State
is immune to this danger. We know this from the
work that we have been carrying out this year in the
Security Council.

As underscored in last year's comprehensive
review, the delivery of technical assistance continues to
represent the key element to facilitating and improving
Member States's compliance with their obligations.
In this regard, we welcome all the outreach activities
conducted by the 1540 Committee and its strong
engagement in providing capacity-building assistance
to those stakeholders that need it the most, despite the
resource constraints of which we are all aware. As
Chair of the Global Partnership against the Spread of
Weapons and Materials of Mass Destruction, we invited
the 1540 Committee to make a presentation of its work,
in particular with regard to Africa, in order to highlight
current needs and increase opportunities for donors to
cooperate with the potential recipients, as well as with
the Committee itself. We are willing to continue this
cooperation with the 1540 Committee.

Last year represented a significant step forward for
efforts to prevent non-State actors from acquiring and
using weapons of mass destruction. It is important now
that we build upon that momentum. We thank Bolivia
for its leadership and commitment at the helm of the
Committee and pledge our full support.

