Mr. Martinez Blanco (Honduras) (interpretation from Spanish): Allow me to convey to you, Sir, our
sincere congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. Your
vast diplomatic experience and your distinguished
personal and professional abilities ensure the success of
our work. We offer you and the entire French delegation
our full cooperation.
We also congratulate Ambassador Nabil Elaraby and
the delegation of Egypt for their outstanding handling of
the Council presidency in June.

The current situation in Angola and the state of the
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol and the timetable
agreed by the parties indicate that the Government of
Angola and the Uniao Nacional para a Independencia
Total de Angola (UNITA) are not doing everything
necessary to accelerate the peace process in that country.

 

There have been some positive developments in the
peace process in Angola, such as the promulgation of the
Amnesty Law; the completion of the quartering of the rapid
reaction police; the ongoing withdrawal to barracks of the
Angolan Armed Forces; the beginning of the incorporation
of UNITA troops into those forces; the adoption of a
programme for disarming the civilian population; and a
gradual of the improvement of the humanitarian situation.
We must recognize that aspects that are fundamental to the
pacification of the country have yet to be fully carried out.
The quartering of UNITA troops within the time-frame set
out in Security Council resolution 1055 (1996) and the
timetable set by the Joint Commission has not been
completed, nor has UNAVEM. III received all the arms,
munitions and military equipment. Moreover, in the
political sphere, there is as yet no tangible progress with
regard to the prompt formation of the Government of Unity
and National Reconciliation.

Overall, for my delegation, the political, military,
economic and social outlook in Angola continues to be
discouraging. So long as the parties have not fully
implemented the "Acordos de Paz", the Lusaka Protocol
and the relevant Security Council resolutions, and have not
observed the commitments undertaken at Libreville, Gabon,
we believe that there will be no lasting solution to the
Angolan problem. We believe that the parties, especially
UNITA, must show greater interest in promptly carrying
out their commitments in order not to further delay the
peace process. We therefore urge them speedily to fulfil
their obligations and to take the necessary corrective steps.

Angola is experiencing a serious economic and social
crisis that requires the immediate assistance of the
international financial institutions and the support of the
donor countries. The rehabilitation of communities
devastated by war, the reconstruction of the Angolan
national economy and the process of the demobilization and
social reintegration of ex-combatants are essential
conditions for the restoration of peace in Angola. My
country therefore appeals to the international community
and to donor countries to continue their support for the
peace process and for the needs arising from the
demobilization and reintegration process.

With regard to UNAVEM. III, my delegation
recognizes that the Mission has pursued all its activities in
monitoring and verification, assistance to humanitarian
convoys, the work of demining and road repair, as well as
human rights training for UNITA soldiers in the quartering
areas. My delegation therefore believes that, at the present
phase of the peace process, the presence of UNAVEM. III
is necessary. We will vote in favour of the draft
resolution extending its mandate for three additional
months.

