Mr. Bonser (Canada) (spoke in French): It has
been a tumultuous few months since we last convened
to discuss the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH) (see S/PV.7262). A new Prime
Minister was named and a new Government sworn in.
Canada congratulates Mr. Evans Paul and his Cabinet
and wishes them success in achieving their objectives.
There are significant challenges ahead for Haiti and its
new Government, and Canada offers them its renewed
friendship and continued assistance.

Canada has shared a unique and multifaceted
partnership with Haiti for decades.

(spoke in English)

Since 2006, Canada has provided more than
$1.4 billion in development and humanitarian
assistance. Canada has worked on improvements in
a number of areas, including economic growth, food
security and governance - and, line with Canada's
Group of Eight Muskoka Initiative, maternal, newborn
and child health. Those efforts have been designed
to complement and support the efforts and actions of
our partners, including the international and regional
bodies in Haiti.

Canada has long held the position that holding
elections is a necessary step towards advancing and
reinforcing democratic stability in Haiti. With the
recent shift to rule by decree, the Haitian people cannot
wait any longer. It is imperative that elections take
place in 2015.

Canada welcomes the recent publication of the
electoral decree and calendar, and we strongly urge all
political stakeholders to continue to work collaboratively
to support all efforts towards fair, democratic and
inclusive elections. Canada has announced $8.7 million
in support of the elections through the United Nations
Development Program and the National Democratic
Institute. That contribution, along with those of our
partners, will complement the Government of Haiti's
own election funding.

We recognize and appreciate the efforts of
MINUSTAH in providing electoral assistance and
logistical support for those elections, noting the
importance of strengthening the status and capacity of
Haitian institutions to take on an increasing role in the
future.

Canada continues to support the important work of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti. For
10 years, MINUSTAH has worked to improve security
conditions and contribute to lasting stability in Haiti.
Considerable progress has been made.

Canada welcomes the recent Security Council
visit to Haiti, and in particular the concentrated review
process that has taken place with regard to the Mission's
mandate. Canada maintains that the gradual reduction
of the United Nations footprint in Haiti must continue
to reflect the situation on the ground and the capacity
of the Haitian State to deliver security to its population.

We are pleased that support to the Haitian National
Police (HNP) remains strong. Indeed, the HNP has
demonstrated increasing capacity in recent months.
We commend both the Government of Haiti and the
Mission's efforts towards those achievements. Canada
is proud to be among the top contributing nations in
terms of sending police trainers to Haiti, and we salute
our fellow Member States with whom we are working
in that effort, which must continue.

While MINUSTAH is not a permanent solution for
security in Haiti, we should avoid reduction scenarios
that could jeopardize the results achieved to date, and
take into account the role MINUSTAH should play in
contributing to stability and ensuring security during
significant national events, such as elections.

(spoke in French)

We want to ensure that MINUSTAH is the last
international mission to Haiti. We urge the Haitian
Government to continue to work and further build upon
it, prioritizing both the HNP and an independent and
strengthened judicial sector, thus ensuring that the
Haitian people can rely on the rule of law. Canada is
also pleased to see recent efforts by the Minister of
Justice to deal with the important issue of long-term
preventive detention.

Finally, I would like to assure the Council, but, more
importantly, the people of Haiti, of Canada's ongoing
support and cooperation towards improving the lives of
Haitians -from economic growth to access to health
care to police training, among the many initiatives
Canada continues to work with Haiti for a more stable,
secure and prosperous future.

