Mr. Mukerji (India): India is deeply concerned
at the steep escalation in the current conflict between
Israel and Palestine, which has resulted in a large
number of civilian casualties and heavy damage to

property.

When the Council last held its open debate on
this issue in April 2014 (see S/PV.7164), the direct
negotiations between Israel and Palestine, which began
in late July 2013 after a gap of more than two years, had
ended without any outcome. Instead of a resumption of
dialogue, we are today faced with the tragic resumption
of conflict.

We in India are following the current situation with
a great deal of concern. We have called upon both sides
to exercise maximum restraint and avoid taking actions
that may further exacerbate the situation and threaten
the peace and security of the region. India supports all
efforts for an immediate ceasefire between the parties
involved.
We remain hopeful that a sustainable ceasefire
will be reached between the two sides, linked to the
resumption of the peace process, for a comprehensive
resolution ofthe Palestinian issue. India remains firmly
convinced that dialogue remains the only viable option
that can effectively address the issues confronting the
region and its people. We hope that both sides will
demonstrate the necessary political will to agree to a
ceasefire and return to the negotiating table.

India's deep association with, and continuing
commitment to, Palestine is rooted in our modern
history that goes back to our own struggle for
independence. We would also like to reiterate our
support for a negotiated solution to the Israeli-
Palestinian issue based on the relevant United Nations
resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet
road map, resulting in a sovereign, independent, viable
and united State of Palestine with East Jerusalem as its
capital, living within secure and recognized borders,
side by side and at peace with Israel.

India has consistently held that the blockade of
Gaza, which adversely affects essential services,
economic activities and infrastructure development,
must be lifted. We reiterate that this blockade and the
issue of increasing settlement activities need to be
addressed to take forward the peace process so as to
reach a mutually acceptable political solution.

