Mr. Verbeke (Belgium): On behalf of the
Chairmen of the three subsidiary bodies of the Security
Council established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004), which deal with
the issue of terrorism, I would like to make some
introductory remarks on the work of and the
cooperation among those Committees.

Terrorism remains one of the biggest threats to
international peace and security, and the cooperation of
all is more necessary than ever before. Even though our
mandates differ in content and character, we strive to
work closely together, both directly and through our
respective expert groups.

In our complementary efforts to reach out to
Member States, the three Committees and associated
expert groups have worked together and have jointly
participated in visits to States. To date, the experts of
the 1267 Committee's Monitoring Team and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
have carried out eight Visits to States, namely, to
Tanzania, Nigeria, the Philippines and India in 2006,
and to Turkey, Bangladesh, Indonesia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina in 2007. The three expert groups also
systematically exchange their trip reports with one
another, as appropriate, so as to derive common benefit
from the information gathered during those trips. This
includes requests for technical assistance and other
requests made by States.

In addition, on the basis of concerns expressed by
Member States, a common strategy paper to assist
non-reporting and late-reporting States was jointly
drafted by the three expert groups. The strategy,
approved by the three Committees, is currently being
jointly implemented through the organization of
several reporting workshops in cooperation with the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. A first
workshop was held in Dakar, Senegal, at the end of
September for West and Central African States.
Another is scheduled for the end of this month in
Gaborone, Botswana, for Southern African States. A
third should take place in the first half of 2008 for
Northern and Eastern African States. Progress has
already been achieved, as new reports have already
been submitted to the three Committees since the
adoption of the common strategy.

Our cooperation with one another extends further.
We continue to urge our three expert groups to share
information and their analyses, as appropriate, of
07-59786
efforts by Member States to implement their
obligations under the relevant Security Council
resolutions dealing with counter-terrorism. We also
encourage our experts to work closely together as they
develop their relationships with other organizations,
including international and other intergovernmental
organizations, such as the International Atomic Energy
Agency, the International Air Transport Association,
the International Civil Aviation Organization, the
International Maritime Organization, INTERPOL, the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
and the World Customs Organization, as well as
regional and subregional organizations, such as the
African Union, the Caribbean Community, the
European Union, the Organization of American States,
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe and the Pacific Islands Forum. The three expert
groups are also cooperating within the framework of
the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force,
established to ensure overall coordination and
coherence in the counter-terrorism efforts of the United
Nations system, in particular in the context of the
implementation of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy.

The primary responsibility of implementing the
obligations under the relevant Security Council
resolutions is vested in Member States, and our
interaction with them is therefore essential. The efforts
of the three Committees can be only as effective as
Member States will collectively enable them to be.

The Committees established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004),
as well as their respective expert groups, remain
committed, within their respective mandates, to
eliminate terrorism and are convinced that their work
contributes to the overall United Nations and
international efforts to assist States in fully
implementing the respective resolutions.

