Mr. Kim Sam-hoon (Republic of Korea): I
would like to extend the appreciation of my delegation
to the presidency for initiating this valuable discussion
on justice and the rule of law. Throughout the history
of the United Nations, the shared values of justice and
the rule of law have served to unite the international
community in its effort to prevent conflicts and re-
establish ordered and equitable societies in regions of
conflict.

From the experience of the United Nations in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo, East Timor, Sierra
Leone and Afghanistan, we have learned that, in
breaking cycles of conflict, establishing a credible
system of justice and the rule of law is as crucial as
providing security and basic humanitarian aid on the
ground. A peace achieved without the foundations of
justice and the rule of law may be tentative and fragile.
We should thus view the institution of justice and the
rule of law in post-conflict societies as an investment
in a sustainable, durable peace. Reasserting the leading
role of the United Nations in creating, advancing and
maintaining global peace, the Republic of Korea
believes that the Security Council should continue to
integrate justice and the rule of law into the scope of its
work in rebuilding post-conflict societies.

Against that backdrop, the Republic of Korea
would like to highlight the importance of capacity-
building at the local level. Experience has shown that,
in order to translate the lofty principles of justice and
the rule of law from rhetoric into action, these concepts
must take root in the afflicted society at the grass-roots
level. Public awareness and educational programmes
have proved to be effective in that regard. However,
these programmes represent, not an instantaneous
solution, but rather a long-term commitment to gradual
societal change. Moreover, it is important to note that a
society will adopt these values only if they are
promoted in a way that is compatible with the long-
standing traditions and beliefs of its people. Therefore,
we must tailor our approach to each unique situation.

Indeed, the process of establishing justice and the
rule of law cannot take place in an atmosphere of
impunity and violence. Without a system in place for
addressing human rights violations and crimes against
humanity, there can be no public confidence that the
workings of its society will be fair, impartial and
transparent, and thus there can be no momentum
towards reconciliation and stability. We believe that the
United Nations war crimes Tribunals in Rwanda and in
the former Yugoslavia constitute constructive examples
of judicial processes that have played a crucial role in
securing justice in post-conflict societies.

However, as noted by the Secretary-General, the
objectives of justice and reconciliation can sometimes
be at odds. Somewhere between amnesty and
uncompromising justice, each society must strike its
own delicate balance that will enable it to establish
sufficient justice to restore peace and to move onward
from its violent past.

In contemplating these complex issues, inherent
in propagating justice and the rule of law, we are
always reminded of the constraints imposed upon our
noble mission by the limited time and resources of the
Security Council. While the Council should indeed
make every effort to carry out its mandate to secure
global peace, the close coordination and cooperation
among the various organs and institutions of the United
Nations system and non-governmental organizations
can be invaluable in implementing longer-term
commitments to establishing the rule of law and justice
in post-conflict societies. Through a careful and
informed division of labour, we can prevent any
overlap that might cause the overburdening of the
Security Council while ensuring that the multifarious
needs of all post-conflict societies are met.

In concluding, I would like to express the sincere
hope of my delegation that our deliberations today will
contribute to our common endeavour to safeguard the
fundamental freedoms and interests of people in post-
conflict regions through the promotion of justice and
the rule of law.

