Mr. Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, my country's delegation wishes to thank the
French presidency of the Security Council this month
for its able stewardship of this critical debate. We
commend the tireless efforts undertaken in drafting
the Secretary-General's report on children and armed
conflict (S/2017/821), dated 24 August 2017. However,
Iraq would like to highlight some observations on the
section of the report having to do with Iraq.

According to the report, its drafting involved
wide-ranging consultations throughout the United
Nations, both at Headquarter and in the field. That
reflects a new approach of cooperation with Member
States. We held numerous consultations with the Office
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict. However, none of
our observations were taken into consideration, with
the exception of a few trivial ones, which have no real
impact on the content of the report. That is despite
the fact that we cooperated fully with the Office of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
responded to all the questions it posed and shed light
on a great deal of information in the section on Iraq.
We also consulted with the Ministry of Justice, the
Ministry of Defence, the Ministry of Labour and Social
Affairs with respect to the content of the report.

The report acknowledges the fact that the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)/Da'esh was the
essential cause of serious violations perpetrated
against children. Da'esh was the very reason for
the displacement of thousands of children, for the
recruitment of children, for the use of children as suicide
bombers and as spies and sources of information. The
report further acknowledges that ISIL's violations were
not solely perpetrated in Iraq, but that its operations
also affected Libya, Lebanon, Syria and Yemen. The
Security Council has indicated in numerous resolutions
that ISIL constitutes a terrorist organization. However,
the report of the Secretary-General treated ISIL as a
party to conflict. It failed to call it by its actual name,
that is, a terrorist and extremist organization.

Furthermore, there is no reference whatsoever in
this report to child Victims born as a result of the crimes
of rape perpetrated by terrorist groups, even though
such instances are documented in the annual report of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict of 15 April (S/2017/249).
We have called for the inclusion of these documented
cases in the report so that they could be to presented
to the international community. We fail to understand
why they have so far not been included in the report,
even though these phenomena are dangerous and will
have nefarious consequences if they are not contained.

The Secretary-General's report expresses its
concerns about so-called civilian control procedures
used by Government forces and about the lack of access
to humanitarian access for children in the areas that
have been seized by ISIL. However, Iraq welcomed the
training for Iraqi security forces provided by United
Nations experts, as reflected in our letter of 16 May
addressed to the Office of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General.

According to the report, the popular mobilization
forces recruited 57 children. We requested the Office of
the Special Representative to provide us with a single
child's name and the military units within which they
were recruited, in order to take the necessary legal
measures, as the popular mobilization forces have been
officially under the auspices of the Iraqi Government
since 26 November 2016. However, the Office of the
Special Representative was unable to provide us with a
single name of one of the 57 children.
Iraq is a State party to the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child with respect to
children's involvement in armed conflict. We also took
other measures, in collaboration with our partners,
in particular the United Kingdom, to facilitate the
adoption, on 21 September, of resolution 2379 (2017),
on compiling evidence of crimes committed against
innocent civilians, including children, by members of
Da'esh in order to bring them to justice.

In the light of what I have said here, we call on
the United Nations to be professional and specific with
respect to the information in the report. Sources must
be verified. The report contains vague information on
Iraq, as well as accusations against Iraqi security forces
and the popular mobilization forces, which we reject.
Furthermore, the sources in this report are not only
unreliable, some of them have questionable motives.
Some ofthe sources are not even in the areas ofoperation
and in the liberated areas. We must also note that
Mr. Jan Kubis, Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Iraq, reaffirmed repeatedly that neither he
nor his Office was able to verify the credibility ofmany
of the sources in the report. He said that non-specific
information in the report of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General constitutes a burden for a
country that is defending its territory and facing one of
the most ferocious terrorist organizations in existence.

We therefore reaffirm that information and statistics
must be gathered from official sources that have been
approved by the Iraqi Government. Information should
not be gleaned from unreliable sources that cannot

be verified.

