Mr. Gasso Matoses (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): We
are meeting at a crucial moment in the fight against
terrorism, Al-Qaida, the Al Nusra Front, the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and related terrorist
organizations. In that context, the United Nations
and the Security Council have acted decisively with
resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014), both of which
contain significant provisions for combating these
groups and against the phenomenon of foreign terrorist
fighters.

This suggests that the situation is a threat to
international peace and security, as the Council
has asserted, and that States have to act globally
against the threat. That involves four elements that
my delegation would like to highlight. First, we need
to focus on the conditions that foster the emergence
of the phenomenon. Secondly, we must combat the
propaganda that promotes violent extremism. Thirdly,
we must promote cooperation among States in order to
combat the scourge. Lastly, I would like to refer to the
importance of combating financing of these groups.

On the first point, I note that it is essential to
examine the conditions that promote the spread of
terrorism, while at the same time respecting human
rights and the rule of law. Terrorism should be fought
on various fronts with efficiency and respect for the
law. It is essential to delegitimize terrorism, focus on
the radicalizing environment that fosters its emergence,
and fight its expressions by prosecuting perpetrators
and holding them accountable in courts of law for their
acts.
Spain has taken steps in this area and implemented
measures within the current legal framework, in
particular to prevent Spanish citizens and residents
of my country from travelling to areas of conflict and
participating in terrorist activities and violent actions.
Various individuals have been detained while trying
to leave Spain for that purpose, and, in cooperation
with neighbouring countries, we have dismantled
a network that was involved in recruiting those
individuals. Although Spanish criminal law already has
useful provisions for combating terrorism, including
in addressing the phenomenon of foreign terrorist
fighters, our country is preparing additional legal
reforms in order to strengthen our capacity to prevent
the recruitment and travel of such fighters.

The second aspect that my delegation wanted
to refer to is the need to act resolutely against the
radicalization and propaganda that promotes violent
extremism. In that regard, Spain has drawn up a national
strategic plan to combat violent radicalization. Actions
in that area should always be carried out in close
cooperation with leaders of communities susceptible to
radicalization. Terrorists' use of new communications
technology should lead us to developing programmes
of action aimed at de-activating and countering the
propaganda that is spread by terrorists through social
media. We should always respect - and this is a very
sensitive matter - the freedom of expression and the
free circulation of ideas. It is very important to develop
positive and inclusive messages that target members of
these communities and in particular their young people.

The third aspect is critical international cooperation
among States, without which it is impossible to
effectively combat the threat of global terrorism. We
need to step up and promote exchanges of information
and assistance in terms of criminal investigations
and the gathering of proof. Our national experience
leads us to think that international cooperation is a
very effective tool for coping with and defeating the
terrorist threat. In that context, Spain has established
strong mechanisms for cooperation with its neighbours,
in particular the States of the southern shores of the
Mediterranean.

Finally and fourthly, we believe - and it goes
without saying - that it is essential to combat the
financing of terrorism. The Council has acted to that
end by adopting the two resolutions that have been
frequently referenced in today's debate. It is crucial
to strengthen international coordination to establish
mechanisms that will leave no loopholes whereby
terrorists could continue receiving financing for their
criminal activities. Strengthened cooperation is also
necessary to prevent the financial flows that benefit
those groups.

With respect to the four elements I have mentioned,
the work of the United Nations is essential. In that
respsect, my delegation expresses its full support for
the excellent work carried out by the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning counter-terrorism, the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force, which
are the best equipped and most appropriate mechanisms
in the fight against violent extremism and, indeed,
terrorism in general.

I cannot conclude without expressing Spain's
solidarity with the victims of terrorism, whom we must
always keep in mind because they can play a key role in
preventing radicalization and violent extremism.

