Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the international community's
active efforts to normalize the situation in the Great
Lakes region, namely, in the Democratic Republic ofthe
Congo. That constructive commitment is demonstrated,
among other things, by the decisions taken at the July
summit of Ministers for Foreign Affairs and Defence of
the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
and the Southern African Development Community and
the recent visit to the subregion of the group of envoys
led by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
Mrs. Robinson. We commend Mrs. Robinson for her
energetic efforts in this crucial role and wish every
success to her successor, Mr. Djinnit.

We call on all parties to fully uphold the agreements
undertaken in the Framework agreement, including
respect for territorial sovereignty, non-intervention in
one another's internal affairs and the establishment
of confidence-building measures between countries
of the subregion. In that context, we are concerned by
the armed clashes on the Congolese/Rwandan border
in June. All sides must absolutely demonstrate full
restraint and take steps to de-escalate the situation,
including through drawing upon the Joint Verification
Mechanism and what is set out in the Framework
Agreement.

We note significant progress in implementing the
military component of the Framework Agreement,
including the successful defeat of the Mouvement du
23 mars (M-23) and the Allied Democratic Forces.
There is a need to continue the operation to neutralize
other armed groups that are acting in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Of equal importance is amnesty for former fighters
who did not perpetrate serious crimes, as well as
their disarmament, demobilization and reintegration.
We hope to see the successful implementation of the
national plan for 2014 to 2017, recently adopted by
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which should
include the participation of 12,000 combatants. There is
also a need to ensure the repatriation of approximately
100 former M-23 fighters from Uganda and Rwanda.

We note the beginning of the voluntary disarmament
of the Forces Democratiques de Liberation du Rwanda,
which should be concluded by the end of this year. If
insurgents think of pretexts to draw out the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process, then perhaps
pressure must be brought to bear on them, including
military pressure.
However, it is clear that there can be no
military solution to the conflict. There is a need for
comprehensive efforts to eradicate the root causes,
including by strengthening State institutions in the
liberated areas. Of particular importance is speeding
up the implementation of the recommendations of the
2013 National Dialogue, including the establishment of
a Government of national unity, security-sector reform
and the resolution of pressing social and economic
issues.

United Nations peacekeeping efforts play an
important role in ensuring stability in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We support efforts to focus
basic energies and resources on the east of the country,
where they are most relevant.

We note the successful joint operation between the
Congolese army and the Force Intervention Brigade of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
to weed out armed groups. However, we believe that
the primary responsibility for combating armed groups
and stabilizing the situation lies with the Congolese. In
that connection, success will depend on, among other
things, the establishment of a rapid-reaction force.
On a practical level, we suggest that, as the situation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo normalizes,
the issue of optimizing the troop level of MONUSCO,
which is at present the largest United Nations
peacekeeping mission in the world, be addressed. That
is all the more relevant if we take into account the
pressing need to deploy United Nations peacekeeping
presences in other flashpoints in Africa.

