Mr. Cohen (United States ofAmerica): I thank you,
Sir, for convening and presiding over today's important
debate. I also thank the Secretary-General and our
briefers from the African Union (AU) and the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS).

The United States remains committed to working
with regional organizations to address priority issues of
peace and security. Regional organizations can also be
force multipliers for the United Nations in meeting the
challenges we all face. Nonetheless, the Security Council
must always retain its autonomous decision-making
authority. We should ensure that new opportunities
for cooperation address real and critical political,
security, development, human rights and humanitarian
challenges. There is much that regional organizations,
such as the African Union, can do to resolve ongoing
conflicts and crises, independent of our discussions on
new initiatives or new financing mechanisms. Regional
organizations bring critical expertise to negotiations,
while identifying appropriate options and solutions
and mobilizing resources for response. Many times,
the only resource required for regional and subregional
organizations to play a stronger role is political will and
an invitation.

We have been pleased to see the Organization
of American States (OAS) engage on Nicaragua and
Venezuela, particularly the adoption of resolutions at
the OAS condemning human rights violations against
the people of Nicaragua and encouraging that steps
be taken to identify the individuals responsible and
demand that para-police groups be disbanded. The
OAS established a working group in August, which is
the beginning, we hope, of a stronger regional effort
to improve the lives of Nicaraguan citizens. We also
welcomed the June OAS resolution condemning the
20 May sham elections in Venezuela, which proposes
concrete actions to press the regime and highlights the
worsening humanitarian crisis. But those steps should
be the beginning, not the end, of a stronger regional
effort to improve the lives of the citizens of the region.

Similarly, the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) has been engaged on Burma and has
expressed concern about the humanitarian situation in
Rakhine state and its support for the full implementation
of the memorandum of understanding signed among
Myanmar, the United Nations Office of the High
Commissioner for Refugees and the United Nations
Development Programme to facilitate the repatriation
process of displaced persons from Rakhine state. The
ASEAN Humanitarian Assistance Centre is helping
address concerns in Rakhine state. In the past year,
the Centre facilitated the provision of relief items to
vulnerable Burmese citizens and deployed emergency
response and assessment team personnel to assist in the
work of Burma's relief and resettlement department.
That, again, should be the beginning, not the end, of a
stronger regional effort.

In Africa, the United Nations and the African
Union have worked together to improve local security
environments and create space for political processes
to take shape. There are many other situations where
high-level political engagement by subregional groups
has been critical for conflict resolution and prevention
throughout the African continent. One example in
particular, as mentioned by a number of other speakers,
was the role ECOWAS played, in partnership with the
AU and the United Nations, in resolving the political
crisis in the Gambia in 2017. It mitigated a situation
that could have necessitated a larger and much
costlier intervention. When we look at South Sudan,
the continued political impasse in Burundi and the
volatile political environment ahead of elections in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, we see situations
where regional and subregional organizations have
long been involved in attempting to advance political
processes, but where much more work remains to be
done to reach satisfactory solutions. Again, the main
resources required to contribute to those situations are
political will and regional leadership.

A number of Member States today have addressed
the draft resolution on the financing of AU peace
support operations in their remarks. The United
States regrets that we have so far been unable to reach
agreement on a consensus text. We continue to believe
there is room for agreement on language that goes
well beyond the Council's two prior resolutions on the
matter, while respecting important concerns, especially
related to financing, Council oversight and Council
primacy for the maintenance of international peace and
security. Any draft resolution must not rush forward
on the matter of assessed contributions, acknowledge
the AU's unfinished work to meet the benchmarks
the Council previously established, affirm the AU's
commitment to fund 25 per cent of any peace support
operations supported through that framework and
apply only to future AU-led operations. Ultimately, the
Security Council must maintain oversight and control
of any peace support operation conducted using United
Nations funds. We urge the penholder to continue to
work with us and to show flexibility in finding a way
forward that enjoys unanimous support.

In conclusion, the United States welcomes a closer
working relationship between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations. It also welcomes
regional and subregional organizations leading the way
in crisis resolution and conflict prevention. We need
not wait for the establishment of new mechanisms or for
the allocation of new funding for that work to intensify.
There is plenty of work to be done right now.

