Mr. Sareer (Maldives): Let me begin by thanking
the Russian presidency of the Security Council for
convening this quarterly open debate on the situation
in the Middle East.

This debate is taking place at a timely juncture
when the world is in trepidation over the grave
humanitarian situation in Syria, particularly regarding
the escalating violence in Aleppo. We also take note
of the Council's Arria Formula meeting that took place
last week on the subject of illegal Israeli settlements,
which was organized by Malaysia, Egypt, Senegal,
Angola and Venezuela.

It is with great concern that my delegation joins
many other States in noting the Security Council's
inability to exercise the duties with which it has been
entrusted by the international community in the Charter
of the United Nations with regard to the maintenance of
international peace and security.

The targeted attacks taking place in Aleppo
completely disregard civilian populations and
infrastructure and have resulted in the deaths of
hundreds, including children and humanitarian aid
workers. Schools, hospitals and basic infrastructure have
been annihilated, thus depriving an entire population of
their basic rights and necessities. Decades of growth
and development have been wiped out in the blink of an
eye, with the future looking increasingly dark.

We expect the Council to use all appropriate
means to protect innocent civilians, to end the
escalating violence taking place in flagrant violation
of international law and to ensure accountability for
war crimes and crimes against humanity. The failure
to act, resulting in the dire humanitarian crisis in
Syria, sets a dangerous precedent for the role of the
Council in addressing future conflicts. Therefore,
Maldives calls upon all Council members to ensure the
compliance of all States with the relevant resolutions of
the Security Council.

In a similar vein, we also call upon the international
community to enhance humanitarian aid - and upon
the actors concerned to ensure unimpeded, continuous
and full access to it for those in need. We must
undertake every effort to alleviate and end the suffering
that has been unjustly inflicted on innocent civilians in
Syria. We also strongly urge all the parties concerned
to engage constructively in political dialogue to bring
about a sustainable and peaceful solution to the crisis
and to refrain from resorting to further acts of violence,
which could fuel and escalate the conflict.

The perpetuation of hostility and conflict in
occupied Palestine, which has compromised peace and
security in the region for decades, is another result of
the Security Council's imparity and failure to exercise
its responsibilities. The facts are clear. The excessive
punitive measures and ongoing brutal violence by the
occupying Power - the Israelis against the Palestinian
people 4 have not only denied the Palestinians'
fundamental human rights, but have also claimed
numerous lives. The expansion of Israeli settlements
through construction and the designation of land for
exclusive Israeli use are in clear violation of international
law, including the right to self-determination. Those
activities extinguish any prospect of development or a
stable future for the Palestinian people.

While Israel maintains the facade of being
committed to a two-State solution, its actions clearly
demonstrate the exact opposite. This year alone,
settlement activities have expanded at an alarming
rate, with the demolition not only Palestinian homes
and property, but also of humanitarian infrastructure
established by the international community. Maldives
reaffirms solidarity with the Palestinian people and
reiterates its call upon Israel for an immediate cessation
ofits settlement activities, which are illegal.

Although we believe that the agreed two-State
solution to the conflict is ultimately a political one
that can be reached only by the parties concerned, we
also believe that it is the responsibility of the Security
Council to facilitate the solution by setting the necessary
parameters to maintain conditions on the ground that
will enable them to work towards that goal in good
faith. The current state of affairs, with the expansion
of illegal Israeli settlements, coupled with continuing
violence, is steering the conflict further away from the
two-State solution.

Maldives commends and welcomes the numerous
initiatives that have been undertaken by various
Member States and the international community,
including civil society, to address the situation in
the Middle East. Undoubtedly, those initiatives have
substantially contributed to alleviating the suffering of
people affected by the conflict.

At the same time, we wish to emphasize that the
duty primarily falls upon the Security Council. If
the Council is unable to take adequate measures to
maintain international peace and security, its current
methodologies and strategies must be re-evaluated
and changed. Maldives is ready to play its part in such
an exercise.

