Mr. Berrocal Soto (Costa Rica) (interpretation from Spanish): I congratulate you, Sir, on the way in which you
are conducting our important debates today.

The subject that is today before the Security Council
undoubtedly has many facets and implications in the realm
of political realities and in the legal field and that of
international legality.

Given this profound complexity, my country is not
prepared to provide a complete and definitive answer to all
the questions before us. Nonetheless, on two essential
aspects of our debate today the position of Costa Rica will
always be one of principle, consistent with the letter and
the spirit of the Charter of the United Nations.

First, in connection with the sanctions regime, whether
it be this case of Libya or any other State made subject by
the Security Council to the provisions of Articles 39 and 41
of the Charter in this matter, Costa Rica has stated on a
number of occasions that, although we accept the principle
that sanctions are a means of collective defence for
international society, recognized and established in the
Charter, the regime established must be carefully designed
to meet the all-important objective of changing the illegal
policies of a given Government. This and nothing but this
is the objective of the sanctions. And from this standpoint,
therefore, the sanctions - which must always be time-
limited - must not under any circumstance become a form
of punishment for the innocent civilian population and must
always be interpreted in a restricted manner in the context
of an overall humanitarian approach. Moreover, any
sanctions regime must be accompanied by active and on-
going dialogue among the parties in order to ease the way
for the State that is subject to sanctions to change and
modify its illegal policies and thus be reincorporated, when
its new conduct is clearly established before the Security
Council, into the international community as a full member
under the terms of the United Nations Charter.

This is Costa Rica's position of principle, which we
have always affirmed and defended before the Security
Council and in the sanctions committees - although,
obviously, the foundations and the objective facts of every
situation and of every sanctions regime are different,
whether it may apply to Iraq, Sierra Leone, Liberia,
Somalia, Angola or Rwanda. And this is also the position
of principle in the specific case of Libya.

Secondly, Costa Rica has always advocated the
effective implementation of the guarantees established in
Articles 31 and 32 of the United Nations Charter,
particularly when these guarantees involve or are related
to a debate at a formal meeting of the Security Council to
consider situations contemplated by and authorized under
Articles 39 and 41 of Chapter VII of the Charter. This is
also a strict position of principle of my country, in
keeping with something that is an essential value of our
democratic concept of international society and in strict
compliance with the letter and, at the same time, the spirit
of the Charter.

This being the case, this debate and this formal
meeting constitute a step forward in what is a demand of
all Member States regarding the necessary and vital
transparency in the working methods and in the rules,
both written and unwritten, of the Security Council. As
we say this, Costa Rica cannot fail to note that, in this
way, the sole winners are the legitimacy and the
international legality represented by the United Nations
Charter.

Therefore my country is pleased that this formal
meeting of the Security Council is taking place. Libya and
any other State subject to a sanctions regime, as well as
the other parties that are legitimately concerned or
affected by any international dispute, have the right to
present their own argumentations concerning the facts,
their own legal reasoning and their own defence. For its
part, the Security Council and the sanctions Committees,
within their own purview, have the legal, ethical and
political obligation to hear them and to reflect upon and
analyse objectively their arguments and reasoning in order
to take a decision in full consistency with their lofty and
very serious responsibilities established in Chapter VII of
the United Nations Charter.

My country attaches the utmost importance to and
recognizes the seriousness of the substantive arguments
and the legal assertions of the United Kingdom and the
United States in connection with the criminal terrorist

 

attack on Pan Am flight 103, and the same applies to UTA
flight 772 and the position of France.

We have said, and we want to reiterate, that under no
circumstances can we forget that at the origin of this
sanctions regime are two unjustifiable criminal terrorist acts
committed against two commercial flights that took the
lives of 441 innocent people and caused pain and suffering
to thousands of relatives. These two ignominious acts are
unprecedented in the history of civil aviation and constitute
an attack on the values of civilized human coexistence. In
the face of the gravity of these acts, the international
community, represented by the United Nations, must take
a clear and unequivocal stance so that the criminals are
tried and justice is done. Any other attitude would
constitute unacceptable complacency regarding international
terrorism.

The minute of silence that we observed in this
Chamber was a way of reaching out to and showing respect
for the victims and their family members, but at the same
time, it was a firm expression of that determination on the
part of the Security Council.

During the informal consultations held a few days ago,
in reviewing the terms of the sanctions established in
resolutions 748 (1992) and 883 (1993), the Security
Council, although it noted some progress in the situation
and took note of new facts that must be considered and
evaluated objectively, concluded unanimously that the
sanctions regime imposed on Libya must be maintained and
extended for another 120 days. That is Costa Rica's
substantive position.

At this formal meeting we have listened with the
greatest attention to the substantive arguments and legal
viewpoints of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Libya.
Likewise, for some days now we have been considering and
studying the two Judgments of the International Court of
Justice of 27 February in connection with the Montreal
Convention and its possible implications in this case. In
addition, as an important reference document, mention must
be made of the report of Mr. Dumbutshena and
Mr. Schermers regarding the Scottish judicial system, dated
18 December 1997.

My country attaches great importance to the views of
the Organization of African Unity, the League of Arab
States and the Non-Aligned Movement. Likewise, we will
be listening with the utmost attention to the views and
opinions of all States that take the floor at this meeting of
the Security Council in accordance with their indisputable
right under Article 31 of the Charter.

All these views must be analysed carefully. In
particular, the analysis of the actual scope of the recent
Judgments of the International Court of Justice on
procedural aspects, and not on the substance of the
dispute, is undoubtedly a legal element that will have
implications for the further review that will have to be
conducted by the Security Council in the coming months
under the agreed terms.

It is also necessary to point out that the Government
of Libya, with the support of the Organization of African
Unity, has submitted for the consideration of the
international community a number of jurisdictional
options, and this is undoubtedly an element of objective
importance. My country, which has emphatically indicated
that it fully recognizes the jurisdiction of the Scottish
courts as the natural and logical framework in which
these tragic and criminal events must be judged,
nonetheless recognizes that this willingness on the part of
the Libyan authorities must be taken into account, and
that perhaps through this channel and with the support of
the Secretariat, it may be possible to specify, develop and
elaborate a constructive dialogue in order to resolve the
substantive problem of jurisdiction and the relevant laws.

In any event, the existence of all these elements and
the holding of this formal meeting of the Security Council
demonstrate that we could be emerging from the
stagnation of the past several years and that it may not be
overly optimistic to think that through dialogue and
diplomatic negotiation solutions can be found in order to
make progress and achieve the essential objective of these
sanctions, which is only to subject the alleged criminals
to the rule of law and thus to do justice to the innocent
victims of the terrorist attack at Lockerbie and of the
UTA flight over the Niger. My country once again
expresses its complete willingness to cooperate fully for
the attainment of this objective of the Security Council.

