Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): We wish to express our gratitude to Martin Griffiths and Mark Lowcock for their updates and continued cooperation with the Security Council. We also commend their unwavering dedication to the people of Yemen and their efforts to find a lasting solution to the conflict. I begin by reiterating that Saint Vincent and the Grenadines stands in solidarity with the people of Yemen, who have suffered, and continue to suffer, immeasurably. We underscore yet again that the only viable solution to the crisis is an inclusive Yemeni- led and Yemeni-owned political process. That cannot be overstated. We continue to see that attempts at a military solution are counterproductive and come at the expense of the Yemeni people. As Mr. Lowcock said in his briefing, much is being asked of the parties, but we need to ask a great deal of them because enough is enough. Let us put this protracted conflict into perspective. We need to truly grapple with the magnitude of its impact. The people of Yemen have been enduring this conflict for far too long and, while no one within Yemen has been left unscathed by it, we know that the children of Yemen have been, and will continue to be, the most affected. The children of Yemen will suffer psychologically and to an unfathomable extent, even after the conflict finally comes to an end. Too many children in Yemen go to sleep hungry as the country suffers an unprecedented humanitarian crisis. Too many children in Yemen, some of whom can sooner describe the sound of a gun and pangs of hunger and of grief than they can spell, read or write their own name, have been deprived of their education. Too many Yemeni children have never known peace. Too many Yemeni children have only ever known war. Let us allow that to sink in. Those are the children for whom we are meant to guarantee peace and security. Yet, under our watch, schools continue to be attacked, children continue to be maimed and killed, and there continue to be reports of sexual assault and humanitarian access denied. Far too many children, if they survive, will be forever scarred. We are failing them, and that can never be justified. It is time to heed the call of Yemeni women. We recognize that the world is overwhelmed by the coronavirus disease and its consequences, but the people of Yemen are fighting on too many fronts all at once. They are our brothers, they are our sisters and their children are our children, all of whom continue to cry out for our help. On their behalf, today I make a plea to the international community to do better and to do more before it is too late. I implore the actors within Yemen to work with the Special Envoy, in good faith, to resume negotiations. We welcome the additional funding that has been pledged and encourage all donors to disburse funds as soon as possible. We regard the recent prisoner-exchange agreement, and the advancements made towards it, as a huge breakthrough in the political process and a much- needed confidence-building measure. We appreciate the unstinting efforts of the Special Envoy, Martin Griffiths, and his team, as well as the work of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the United Nations Mission to Support the Hudaydah Agreement and all other organizations operating to bring relief to the people of Yemen. However, before closing, we must also reiterate our continued concern for the lack of concrete progress on the FSO SAFER oil tanker. That is an issue that must be resolved as soon as possible if we are to avoid a humanitarian and environmental catastrophe in Yemen and the wider region.
