The President: I now make a few remarks in my
capacity as representative of the United Kingdom.
First, I join others in thanking Ambassador
Brahimi for his very thoughtful and important analysis,
which is very much in line with our own assessment of
the current situation in Afghanistan and of priorities for
the way ahead. We share much of the analysis of other
speakers during this debate, and our overall policy is
aligned with that of the European Union, on whose
behalf the representative of Denmark will make a
statement later.

I will highlight a few particular points. We are
grateful for the kind remarks around the table about the
role of the United Kingdom in its six-month leadership
of the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF).
We are very pleased that Turkey has taken over the
leadership of that force in fine spirit, and we will
continue to contribute strongly to it. We share the
concern of Ambassador Brahimi and others about
insecurity in the provinces outside Kabul and its
implications for the humanitarian recovery effort. On
that I share the analysis of my French colleague,
Ambassador Levitte.

We attach early and particular importance to
progress on security sector reform, within the
framework of a coherent overall strategy. It is very
important, for instance, to ensure consistency between
the ongoing army training, led by the United States
with the help, particularly, of France, and the
demobilization of private militias and the programmes
for that. That is one instance where there needs to be
properly structured security sector reform, and the
United Kingdom will contribute strongly to that
structure as part of its significant overall contribution
to work in Afghanistan.

Secondly, we echo the Special Representative's
call for the rapid delivery by donors of funds already
pledged to provide for effective and visible
development achievements in the provinces. This is
critical, not only for its own sake but also to establish
the credibility of the Transitional Authority in the eyes
of the Afghan people. So I hope the pleas of speakers
around the table this morning will be heard by the
wider international community.

I remind members of the Council that the United
Kingdom will host the Kabul Coordination Conference
on Counter-Narcotics on 23 July 2002. This will be an
important opportunity to coordinate efforts in the field
of counter-narcotics with wider strategic planning. We
shall have some specific proposals to make at that
conference.

I have a couple of questions for the Special
Representative. There has not been any mention this
morning, or in his remarks, of the incidents of
corruption in the Afghan structures, and in Kabul and
the local administrations. I would like him to say a
word about that, because if that ugly factor begins to
raise its head, it needs to be cut down very quickly to
encourage an open, transparent and honest
administration throughout the entire Afghan territory.

Secondly, although Ambassador Kolby and others
have underlined the importance of work on gender and
women's issues, could the Special Representative say
what structures are being put in place for that by the
Afghans themselves, and what capacity he has in
UNAMA for linking with those structures to make sure
that women's issues are taken forward in practice and
on the ground.

I now resume my function as President of the
Council and would like to continue with the speakers
list under rule 37. I invite the representative of
Afghanistan to make his statement.

