Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
introductory comments and to thank Mr. Pascoe for his
presentation. Their statements underline the highly
worrying character of the upturn in violence between
the Palestinians and the Israelis in the past month.
Once again, the civilian population has been seriously
put to the test. Under these conditions, the most
pressing need is the cessation of all violence.

First of all, France condemns all terrorist attacks,
which seek to undermine the peace process. I am
thinking here of the horrible attack perpetrated on
6 March against a seminary in Jerusalem; I also am
thinking of the rocket attacks on the civilian population
in southern Israel.

Moreover, France has condemned the recent
Israeli military operations in Gaza, which, as the
Secretariat emphasized, resulted in a large number of
civilian fatalities, in particular women and children. In
accordance with international law, Israel's legitimate
right to self-defence cannot be objected to, nor can it
be applied in a disproportionate or excessive manner.
The relative lull of the last few days is
nevertheless encouraging, though it remains fragile.
We support all efforts, in particular those of the States
of the region, that could lead to a cessation of violence.
The perspective sketched out by the parties themselves

at Annapolis - an agreement on the establishment of a
democratic, Viable Palestinian State, living in peace
and security side by side with Israel before the end of
2008 - is an objective that must be upheld and
sustained. In addition to the end of violence, that will
require confidence-building on the ground so that the
Israeli and Palestinian populations will be able to see
the positive developments affecting their daily lives.

In this regard, we cannot in any way ignore the
situation in Gaza. First of all, a policy of cordoning off
this territory and of collective punishment runs against
international law. Moreover, it is contrary to bolstering
the security of Israel. As will be stressed by the
representative of Slovenia, speaking on behalf of the
European Union, whose statement we fully align
ourselves with, we demand that all crossing points into
and out of Gaza be opened, be it for humanitarian or
commercial activities. We note with satisfaction that
the crossings have seemed less difficult for a few days
now. We welcome this development and hope that it
continues.

The European Union (EU) is ready to continue its
follow-up mission in Rafah, in accordance with the
November 2005 agreement on travel and access. All
efforts aimed at facilitating a peaceful settlement of the
crisis must be encouraged, as there is no military
solution. For that purpose, we will undoubtedly have to
hold discussions with Hamas at the appropriate
moment. For their part, they must renounce Violence,
recognize Israel and respect the principles of the peace
process.

The position of the international community on
this issue is clear. First and foremost, the Palestinians,
undoubtedly with the help of States of the region, must
determine the conditions for a possible dialogue on
inter-Palestinian reconciliation. In this regard, France
welcomes the efforts undertaken by the President of
Yemen, Ali Abdullah Saleh.

Beyond Gaza, we must continue to provide
political and financial support to the Government of
President Mahmoud Abbas and Prime Minister Salam
Fayyad and their vision of the future Palestinian State.
That was the objective of the Paris Conference last
December, whose first fruits are beginning to be seen,
in particular with regard to budgetary stabilization.

New impetus must be given to this approach.
Donors must quickly meet their commitments, and the
Palestinian Authority must pursue its efforts for the
rapid and comprehensive implementation of the reform
plan that was announced. In this regard, we take note
of the strong mobilization of Palestinians to stabilize
public finances and their significant efforts to reform
the security services. Finally, this means that Israel
must improve the circulation of goods and persons,
which, as emphasized by the International Monetary
Fund and the World Bank, is a prerequisite for full
economic recovery.

Today, as was recalled by Mr. Pascoe, the French
Minister for Foreign Affairs is visiting Brussels,
meeting with his Norwegian counterpart, with the
European Commission and with Tony Blair for a
second follow-up meeting to the Paris Conference. The
upcoming Ad Hoc Liaison Committee meeting in
London and the future conferences in Bethlehem and in
Berlin are also part of the same approach, and we
support them fully.

Finally and especially, trust on the ground and the
very solidity of the Annapolis process will be measured
by the ability of the parties to fulfil their commitments
and obligations without delay, particularly with regard
to the Road Map. We know the factors of this equation.
The Palestinians must continue their efforts with regard
to security and fighting terrorism. Israel must do more
with regard to the release of prisoners and to
progressively repeal restrictions on circulation in the
West Bank. It must also put an end to all kinds of
settlement expansion and must dismantle the illegal
outposts.

In this regard, France deplores the recently
announced extensions of certain settlements. The
building of settlements should cease, for it is a major
impediment to peace, prejudicing the final status. As
the President of the French Republic recently said, we
believe that colonization runs counter to the security of
the State of Israel.

With the European Union, and particularly in the
context of the Quartet, France will provide the
American authorities all necessary help in their task of
supervising the implementation by the parties of their
commitments and obligations, as recalled at Annapolis.
The international community must also support the
parties in their efforts and help them to find creative
solutions and accept difficult compromises on this road
towards peace. On that road, the Security Council will
have an important role to play.

We also reaffirm our support for the Arab Peace
Initiative, which, like the Security Council resolutions
and the principle of land for peace, is one of the
foundations of a comprehensive settlement.

Before concluding, I would like to touch upon the
situation in Lebanon, where the priority remains to
emerge from the political stalemate.

We have noted the new delay, to 22 April, of the
parliamentary session to elect the President. This
situation is risky. A few days before the summit of the
Arab League, where, we deplore, Lebanon cannot be
represented by a President, France recalls and reiterates
the support it has given from the outset, with the EU,
for the Arab League plan as well as for the efforts of its
Secretary-General. France reaffirms its support for a
legitimate and democratically elected Government of
Lebanon, in charge until elections are held. France
recalls the importance for the parties concerned, within
and outside of Lebanon, to demonstrate restraint and a
sense of responsibility in the face of the tension
generated by the political stalemate. Finally, France
underscores the importance of the implementation of
Security Council resolutions, in particular resolutions
1701 (2006) and 1757 (2007).

