Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks Under-Secretary-General Rosemary
DiCarlo and Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock
for their informative briefings on developments
related to the humanitarian situation in the Syrian
Arab Republic.

Cote d'Ivoire remains concerned about the new
military escalation in Idlib governorate, despite the
signing in September 2018 of the agreement between
Russia and Turkey on the demilitarized zone, which
is intended to separate insurgent territories from
Government areas and ensure a cessation of hostilities
in that region. According to the United Nations, that
offensive resulted in the displacement of approximately
180,000 people between 29 April and 9 May, including
many deaths. If we are not careful, that new outbreak
of violence risks undermining the many efforts of
the international community to achieve a peaceful
solution to the Syrian crisis and worsening the already
worrisome humanitarian situation.

In that context, Cote d'Ivoire, which condemns
the pursuit and intensification of fighting, including
its disastrous consequences, calls on the parties to
immediately cease hostilities throughout all Syrian
territory in order to give the peace process a chance
to succeed. In that regard, we call on the parties to
the conflict to fully implement the Russian-Turkish
agreement on the demilitarized zone. In particular, we
urge all the parties to respect the obligation to protect
civilians and respect international law and international
humanitarian law, violations of which, we should point
out, can be subject to prosecution in the competent
international courts.

My delegation welcomes the meeting held in
Sochi on Tuesday, 14 May, between the United States
Secretary of State and his Russian counterpart, to
discuss issues of common interest, including that of
Syria. We hope that this meeting will open up other
areas for consultation with a view to identifying, in
the words of the Secretary of State, "pathways forward
in Syria to move the political process forward". My
delegation hopes that the most urgent issues, such as
the humanitarian situation and the establishment of the
constitutional committee, can unite the views of all
stakeholders in the Syrian crisis.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate my country's
call for a political solution to the Syrian crisis through
an inclusive dialogue among all the stakeholders, in
accordance with resolution 2254 (2015). In that regard,
Cote d'Ivoire affirms its full support for Special Envoy
Geir Pedersen's tireless efforts to restore peace and
stability in Syria.

