Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, my good friend Ambassador Tanin, for his
briefing and for sharing his thoughts with us. I also once
again welcome the presence in the Security Council
of the First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Serbia, His Excellency Mr. Ivica
Dacie, and Ms. Vlora Citaku.

I would like to begin what will be my last
statement in the Council, at least as a member, on this
agenda item by reiterating Spain's gratitude for the
excellent work of Ambassador Tanin and our firm and
unwavering support for him and the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
Their work is important and necessary, but also of
great complexity in the light, inter alia, of the reiterated
issue of defining the Mission's purpose. We believe
that the current lack of headway in various spheres
on the ground makes the work of UNMIK doubly
relevant, in particular its efforts to foster reconciliation
between the communities, promote and protect human
rights, and improve governance at the local level. It is
precisely at this local level that UNMIK has chosen to
prioritize its actions, because it is the key to unlocking
the vault of reconciliation and peaceful coexistence
that we all desire for Kosovo. It is the objective we all
share, but that unfortunately we continue to be unable
to fully achieve.

The future of Kosovo and the entire Western
Balkans necessarily depends on overcoming division,
finding mutual understanding on prevailing needs,
and jointly constructing a progressive future. In this
process, we must acknowledge that the European Union
plays a crucial role. However, we must ensure that in
the future the citizens themselves must play that role
with sincere and unconditional commitment. Moerover,
we can support only those processes that are jointly
spearheaded by the citizens themselves.

Among those, the most noteworthy event was
without a doubt the Brussels dialogue facilitated by
the European Union - first, because it was jointly
determined by the parties, and secondly, because,
independent of the political or ethnic affiliations of
citizens, the dialogue process placed the region within
the framework of the values and principles of the
European Union. Nevertheless, despite the aspirations
created at the outset, the dialogue was unable to achieve
major results in 2016, which is about to end. It is
therefore necessary to restart the dialogue in good faith
and in a constructive manner, particularly at the highest
level, and for the parties to renew their commitment
to the implementation of and compliance with the
agreements already reached.

Spain welcomes the recent telecommunications
agreement and other small, as yet incomplete measures,
such as the work to reconstruct the Mitrovica Bridge.
However, other recent measures, such as the adoption
of the so-called nationalization law of Trepca,
openly contribute, due to their unilateral nature, to
undermining the spirit of dialogue. It is indispensable
that the parties avoid adopting unilateral measures that
erode the necessary mutual trust, neutralize progress
and further himder progress. There is a need to work
together in good faith to implement the agreements
reached to date in the context of dialogue, and to work
towards reaching new agreements. In that regard, the
establishment of the association/community of Serb-
majority municipalities remains key to ending the
current deadlock situation, so that the process becomes
a priority for all parties.

We are aware of the domestic difficulties that have
been the hallmark of the political situation on the ground
throughout this year. However, these difficulties cannot
be used as a pretext. The same is true, if not more so,
of the use of political violence and failure to respect the
rules of the game of democracy.

Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to
reiterate the two essential elements of the Spanish
position, combining coherence, and this without
prejudice for its principled position, with a constructive
spirit, which allows us to support any measure or
process which, like the dialogue between Belgrade
and Pristina, not only benefits the population of the
territory but also the stability of the entire Western
Balkans region.

