Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank the Under-Secretary-General Gambari for his
sobering briefing and for the commitment he displays
with respect to this vital issue.

I speak just after the shocking news of the
assassination of Industry Minister Pierre Gemayel in
Lebanon. We condemn the assassination. It is evidently
the act of those with no concern for Lebanon's interests
or the interests of a wider Middle East peace. No one
gains in the long term by deplorable and senseless
actions of this sort. We call on all parties to refrain
from acts of Violence and for all those with influence
over the extremists, inside and outside Lebanon, to
exercise it in the cause of peace.

The United Kingdom remains fully committed to
a Middle East peace process. It is one of the highest
priorities we face. The British Prime Minister has
repeatedly made clear that the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict is at the heart of the challenges faced by the
region. Therefore, a solution to that conflict must be at
the core of our response to those challenges. We all
need to work towards a two State solution: on the one
hand, an independent, viable Palestinian State, and on
the other, a safe and secure Israel, living side by side in
peace and security and as equals.
My Foreign Secretary has been discussing the
way forward with Foreign Minister Livni in London
today. We hope that there will soon be a Palestinian
Government with which we can have similar direct

discussions. The United Kingdom welcomes President
Abbas' continued efforts to form a new Palestinian
Government. We will look at the programme of any
Government closely. We wish to see a Palestinian
Government with which we can work in partnership,
which means that it is based on the three Quartet
principles, namely, the renunciation of violence, the
recognition of Israel, and the acceptance of previous
agreements and obligations, including the Road Map.

When this Council last met in this sort of session
on the Middle East, we had just witnessed the awful
events at Beit Hanoun. What happened at Beit Hanoun
is a tragedy that we cannot afford to see repeated.
Equally, rocket attacks on Israel are unacceptable.
More rockets were fired at the town of Sderot today,
critically injuring one person, even while the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights was
visiting.

All sides need to realize that violence simply
begets more violence and does not and can never offer
the solution. The extremists are not dying for the
people. It is the people who are dying for the
extremists. It is also important that the abducted Israeli
soldier, Corporal Shalit, be released. Equally, it is
important that detained Palestinian ministers and
legislators also be released.

The United Kingdom remains troubled by the
humanitarian situation in the occupied territories. We
have given $57 million this year and the European
Union has given more to the Palestinians this year than
in previous years, some $820 million. I would like to
take this opportunity to say that we align ourselves
with the statement that will shortly be made by the
presidency of the European Union.

The current situation further underlines the
necessity of finding a political solution to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict. We continue to believe that the
Road Map offers the best chance for a lasting peace.

I would like to say a few words about Lebanon.
Despite today's tragic event, there has been good
progress on implementation of many aspects of United
Nations Security Council resolution 1701 (2006),
although it is clear that more needs to be done. The
United Kingdom hopes that all Member States, and
particularly those in the region, will meet the
obligations under resolution 1701 (2006) and help the
democratically elected Government of Lebanon to
implement it. All parties in Lebanon need to work

together in a spirit of conciliation and cooperation to
create the conditions in which peace, stability and
democracy can flourish. We hope that countries in the
region will encourage them to do so.

