The Secretary-General: Today's historic resolution
is the first hopeful news on Syria in a long time. For
many months, I have said that the confirmed use of
chemical weapons in Syria would require a firm, united
response. Tonight, the international community has
delivered. I commend the members of the Council. I am
especially grateful for the efforts of Russian Federation
Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov and United States
Secretary of State John Kerry.

As the Mission sent to investigate the allegations
confirmed, chemical weapons were used in Syria. The
perpetrators of that crime must be brought to justice.
This week, the mission under Professor Ake Sellstrom
returned to Syria to complete its investigations,
including of the incident at Khan al-Asal. I expect that
the team will complete its fact-finding activities by next
week. I will promptly transmit its final report to the
Security Council and all Member States. At the same
time, the international community has a responsibility
to ensure that these weapons of mass destruction never
re-emerge of as an instrument of war or terror.

As the UnitedNations is a depository of the Chemical
Weapons Convention, I welcome Syria's accession and
its declaration to implement it on a provisional basis.
Today's Vital decision by the Executive Council of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) establishes ambitious but realistic deadlines
for the verified elimination of the Syrian programme.
Given the scope of the task and the continuing conflict
in Syria, the United Nations and the OPCW have a
preliminary agreement that will be fully developed
based on the resolution and will form the basis for
my proposal to the Council. I thank OPCW Director-
General Mr. Ahmet Uzumcu for his collaborative spirit.
We will be dispatching an initial team to Damascus
on Tuesday. The inspection teams will have the full
support of all relevant United Nations departments and
offices.

Resolution 2118 (2013) will ensure that the
elimination of the Syrian chemical weapons programme
happens as soon as possible and with the utmost
transparency and accountability. Ensuring the verified
destruction of chemical weapons is a difficult task in
any circumstance. In Syria, the inspectors, who are
scientists and technical experts, will have to contend
with the realities of the continuing conflict. The success
of the Mission will depend on the Syrian Government
implementing its obligations faithfully and without
delay. That includes ensuring the safety and security of
OPCW and United Nations personnel.

The cooperation of opposition forces will also
be important. All sides share a common interest in
the permanent destruction of these weapons. The
process will also require the active engagement of the
international community. I am grateful for the pledges
of support for United Nations and OPCW activities
received today. In the days ahead, the two organizations
will further explore how to facilitate the elimination of
Syria's chemical weapons programme. I will provide
my recommendations to the Security Council in due
course.

As we mark this important step, we must never
forget that the catalogue of horrors in Syria continues
with bombs and tanks, grenades and guns. A red light
for one form of weapons does not mean a green light
for others; it is not a licence to kill with conventional
weapons. All the Violence must end. All the guns must
fall silent. We must capitalize on the newfound unity
of the Council by focusing on two other equally crucial
dimensions of the conflict - the dire humanitarian
situation and the political crisis.

We expect Council members to firmly demand
that the Syrian Government and the opposition uphold
their obligations under international humanitarian law,
including the lifting of all obstacles to all humanitarian
access. Some besieged communities have received no
assistance in more than 10 months. The Council has
agreed that the only way to bring peace to Syria is an
inclusive and Syrian-led political process based on
the Geneva communique of 30 June 2012 (S/2012/523, annex). Today's resolution calls for convening an
international conference on Syria to implement the
Geneva communique as soon as possible.

It is time to make that happen as soon as possible.
The United Nations has completed all the preparatory
work. President Al-Assad has stated that he is prepared
to send a delegation to Geneva and the Syrian National
Coalition has expressed its willingness to engage.

Our conversations ofthe past week have focused on
launching "Geneva II". On Wednesday, at my working
lunch with the Foreign Ministers of the five permanent
members of the Council, we agreed to make sure that the
Syrian participants come to the conference to negotiate
in good faith. Today, the Joint Special Representative
of the League of Arab States and the United Nations,
Mr. Brahimi, and I continued these discussions with
Member States. We are aiming for a conference in
mid-November. In the meantime, Mr. Brahimi will
launch all the necessary preparations to ensure success.

No one is naive to the challenges of ending the
conflict peacefully. The Syrian side must engage
constructively towards the creation of a democratic
State that guarantees the human rights of all in Syria.
The regional actors have a responsibility to challenge
those who would actively undermine the process and
those who do not fully respect Syria's sovereignty,
unity and territorial integrity. The Security Council
members, individually and collectively, have a key role
to play in ushering the Geneva process forward towards
a lasting peaceful solution.

