Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): The
Ambassador of the United Kingdom has voiced my
feelings very accurately. Our mission worked as a team
without any differences of view among our seven
members. That, to a large extent, is the result of the
personal efforts made by Ambassador Holbrooke,
whom I wish to thank here.

The Security Council mission to Central Africa,
of which I was honoured to be a part, was certainly
busy and useful. It was busy because of our many
different contacts with almost all the actors in the
conflict. It was useful because it enabled us better to
understand the suffering and hopes of the Congolese
people and to assess the state of mind of the
belligerents, to evaluate the expectations held of the
United Nations and to contribute to the settlement of
one problem - in Kisangani - that erupted while the
mission was in the region.

The mission enabled us to make several findings.
On that basis, we can see where we should focus our
efforts over the coming weeks and months.

As to our findings, the mission's report faithfully
describes the elements thereof. I should like to stress
those that I feel to be the most noteworthy.

First, the Congolese people is suffering and
profoundly weary of war and of its chaos, violence and
devastation, the massive violation of human rights, the
massacres in war and occupation zones, the plundering
of natural resources, the total absence of law, order and
the minimum basic services that citizens are entitled to
expect of their authorities. Ambassador Greenstock
spoke very eloquently of the situation in Kananga,
which is just one example among many.

Secondly, the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is now ready to cooperate fully
with the United Nations and to facilitate the work of
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC). Clear
commitments have been made in this respect. Evidence
of that is the signing of the status-of-forces agreement
in the presence of our mission.

Thirdly, third States involved in the conflict claim
themselves ready to respect the ceasefire and the 8
April disengagement plan and to implement the Lusaka
Agreement. Indeed, the ceasefire has been respected
since 14 April. The only major incident has been the
fighting that erupted in Kisangani on 5 May between
Ugandan and Rwandan forces. The presence of the
mission in the region allowed us to persuade those two
countries to agree to disengage their forces and to
demilitarize the city.

Fourthly, the people and all parties to the conflict
are calling on the United Nations to shoulder its
responsibilities without delay - in other words,
rapidly to deploy MONUC.

On the basis of these findings, where should we
focus our efforts? France has identified five main
areas.

The first is the implementation of the military
aspect of the Lusaka Agreement. This is the top
priority. We must build on the basis of the ceasefire
established on 14 April. This requires, first, that the
parties, through the Joint Military Commission (JMC),
implement the plans for disengagement, redeployment
and, ultimately, withdrawal; and secondly, that phase II
of MONUC be deployed as quickly as possible so as to
be able to monitor respect for the ceasefire and the
parties' implementation of the commitments they have
made.

Specifically, this involves several tasks. First,
MONUC and the JMC must be co-located pursuant to
resolution 1291 (2000). Secondly, we must speed up
preparations for deploying MONUC up to the level
authorized by the Council. The United Nations can do
nothing without commitment by Member States to
provide the human, material and financial resources
needed. For its part, France will contribute to the
equipment and logistical support for one of the four
battalions deployed in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Thirdly, a special effort must be made in
Kisangani, which, in accordance with the agreement
between Uganda and Rwanda, is to be demilitarized
and controlled by MONUC. This will require MONUC
to be given the means necessary for the job. In our
opinion, deployment must be progressive and proceed
as resources become available so that we can
consolidate the nascent peace dynamic where it is most
urgent and delicate, especially in Kisangani.

Here, I would agree entirely with the statement
made by the Ambassador of the United Kingdom. I
believe it would be useful and urgent for the Secretariat
to help us to define the resources - no doubt even
greater than anticipated - in that large city of 2
million inhabitants, the third largest in the country. In
this way, the United Nations, through MONUC, can
assume this major responsibility identified by our
mission, in addition to those originally defined in
resolution 1291 (2000).
In order to carry out all of these operations, the
United Nations is represented on the ground by two
eminent individuals, Mr. Morjane, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and General
Diallo, MONUC Commander. All of the parties now
have confidence in them, and this attests to their
outstanding personal and professional qualities, for
which I commend them.

The second area where we must focus our efforts
is the national dialogue. This is not only one of the
fundamental elements of the Lusaka Agreement, it is
also the way in which the Democratic Republic of the
Congo can be given a democratic base, allowing the re-
establishment of unity in the country, the achievement
of national reconciliation and the rebuilding of the
State. France supports the work of the facilitator, Mr.
Masire, by providing him with political support and
$700,000 in financial support. As is recommended in
the report, we are in favour of swiftly appointing a
high-level adviser to the facilitator, who would be
based in Kinshasa and should be French speaking.

As for the venue, the report suggests that, first of
all, one might consider Kisangani, which is centrally
located in the country and which should be
demilitarized and under United Nations control,
pending a subsequent shift of the venue to Kinshasa for
the national dialogue, in due course. We think this is a
good proposal, and we believe it should be supported.

As regards the substance, the facilitator must
make sure that the dialogue brings together all of the
political forces, without giving preferential treatment to
those that have taken up arms, and that it develops
quickly, avoiding endless sterile dialogue. However,
even though it is desirable that the internal political
dialogue and the military provisions of the Lusaka
Agreement proceed in parallel, it would be
counterproductive to link the two processes too closely,
because in the military situation - and we saw this
just recently in Kisangani - there are developments
that might be destabilizing and that have hardly any
connection to the internal political issues in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The third area where we should focus our efforts
is the establishment of a panel on the illegal
exploitation of natural resources. Even before the
mission left, the Council had taken a position of
principle in favour of such a panel. The mission could
not but note the importance of this problem and that it
would be a good idea to clarify the situation.
Therefore, without delay, we have to spell out the
mandate of the panel and call on the Secretary- -General
to set it up. Tackling what feeds the war - and is
sometimes the motivation for the war - is a
prerequisite to the search for peace. The French
delegation attaches special importance to this matter.

The fourth area where we should focus our efforts
is mass violations of human rights and massacres.
Information on this subject is piling up week after
week. Just yesterday, Human Rights Watch issued a
new report that we cannot fail to be affected by. In the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, as elsewhere,
impunity must not be tolerated. The Council must very
quickly start thinking about ways and means of fact-
finding and making sure that criminals are brought to
justice.

The fifth and last area is disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of armed groups. This
is certainly a very difficult matter, first of all because
the facts are very difficult to establish. Of course, it is
convenient to use just one single accusatory label for
all the so-called non-signatory forces, but the situation
is certainly more complex than this. But above and
beyond the difficulty of establishing the facts, it is
clear that there can be no viable lasting military
solution. For years, many trained armies have been
trying in vain to find a military solution.

Thus, the only reasonable approach involves two
elements. First, all refugees, exiles and wanderers who
at one time or another have seen recourse to arms as
the only solution must be offered three kinds of
prospects in their countries of origin: their physical
security must be guaranteed, they must be given an
economic option, and they must be reintegrated into
political life in their country.

Secondly, those who are truly guilty of crimes of
genocide must be brought to justice, as well as all of
those who in the last four years in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo have been guilty of crimes of
war or crimes against humanity.

In conclusion, we are at a crucial moment in the
evolution of this conflict in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. Some progress has been made, and we must
consolidate that progress.

At the political level, first of all, we must
maintain and support the dialogue that the Security
Council has now begun with the parties, first in
January, on the initiative of Ambassador Holbrooke,
and then this month with the Council mission. As the
mission report notes, and as Ambassador Holbrooke
pointed out, the French presidency of the Council in
June will be organizing another meeting here in New
York on 15 and 16 June, between the Council and the
members of the Political Committee of the Lusaka
Agreement. I will come back to the Council to provide
further information on this once we get the details
about the visit to New York by the members of the
Political Committee.

The second area where we have to consolidate the
progress of the peace process is at the military level.
We must quickly give MONUC all the resources it
needs so that it can be deployed on the ground. The
credibility of the Council and of the United Nations as
a whole is at stake.

On this point, I would like to stress once again
what was said by the two preceding speakers,
Ambassador Holbrooke and Ambassador Greenstock.
Recent events in Sierra Leone certainly cast a shadow
on all of the peacekeeping missions of the United
Nations, particularly in Africa. But every crisis has its
own particular features. We must of course draw all
possible lessons from the Sierra Leone situation, but
the lesson we draw for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is that the Sierra Leone situation must lead us to
redouble our efforts here and to make our commitment
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo a success
achieved by the United Nations - in other words, a
success achieved by all of us.

