Mr. De Antueno (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, we would like to join others in thanking
Mr. Abou Moussa for the work he has carried out at
the Head of the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa (UNOCA) and his leadership in support
of regional efforts in conflict prevention.

The crisis in the Central African Republic is
an issue of great concern. We are confident that the
renewed efforts by the international community and the
Organization, including the deployment of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic, will be up
to the task of dealing with the many challenges faced
by the Central African Republic. We call on UNOCA
to continue to work with the transition Government
in order to establish and strengthen coordination with
neighbouring countries and key players in addressing
the humanitarian consequences of the crisis.

Regarding security, we also call on UNOCA
to continue to work on ensuring cooperation in
strengthening cross-border controls and to confront the
growing threats posed by terrorism and trafficking in
arms and natural resources. The trafficking and illegal
trade in natural resources are worrying not only because
of their environmental and economic consequences
but because of their links to armed groups and their
financing. We urge UNOCA to continue to promote
regional efforts to deal with this challenge.
Regarding the Boko Haram armed group, we share
in the condemnation of its activities and the concern
that those activities are increasing and the group's area
of influence is expanding. The establishment of the
Multinational Joint Task Force was an important step
forward in dealing with the group and with illegal and
terrorist activities in the subregion. With regard to the
Gulf of Guinea, we are sorry to see that the Secretary-
General's report (S/2014/319) emphasizes the fact that
the region is now the area of the world most seriously
affected by piracy, robbery at sea, organized crime
and illegal fishing. We urge UNOCA to strengthen
coordination in dealing with these issues, which pose a
particular threat to peace and security.

It is positive news that the Lord's Resistance
Army (LRA) has not been able to carry out large-scale
violations of human rights and is to some degree on the
defensive. In that regard, we commend the efforts of
the African Union's Regional Task Force to fight the
group and those aimed at promoting the disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation of LRA
members. However, the attacks referred to in the
Secretary-General's report indicate that the group is
still active and that we should not halt our efforts. The
withdrawal of Uganda's troops from the African Union
Task Force fighting the LRA is significant, and we call
on countries in the region to take the steps necessary
to avoid a security vacuum that the LRA might exploit.

