Mr. Losada Fernandez (spoke in French): Allow
me first of all to thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity given once again to the European Union
(EU) to participate in the discussions of the Security
Council on the Joint Force of the Group of Five for
the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). This meeting is undoubtedly an
important step in increasing the strength of the G-5
Sahel Joint Force, and it is, as pointed out in the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2019/371), imperative to
support to it.

Indeed, we all note the deterioration in the security
situation in the Sahel. Security in the Sahel represents
not only the security ofthe States in the region as well as
the security of Europe; it represents the security of all.
The European Union therefore supports the Secretary-
General's report and remains strongly engaged, just
as it was in Brussels two days ago, on 14 May, with
the Foreign and Defence Ministers of the EU member
States and the G-5 Sahel.

I also note that stability in the Sahel has a corollary.
There will be no lasting stability in the Sahel without
the full, effective and inclusive implementation of the
provisions of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation
in Mali. The EU is working to that end and encourages
the Malian parties and the new Government of Mali
in redeploying the reconstituted security and defence
forces in northern Mali and implementing disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration.

Since the establishment ofthe G-5 Sahel, in 2014, the
European Union has actively supported its increasing
presence, in terms of both security and development, by
helping to mobilize the international community. That
support is one of the priorities of the foreign policy of
the European Union and its member States. I would like
to bring three points to the Council's attention.

First, the European Union will continue to support
the operationalization of the Joint Force of the G-5
Sahel in its various components, including its police
component. Continued support must be accompanied
by greater involvement by the G-5 Sahel States in
achieving objectives on the ground. That was the main
message conveyed at the ministerial meetings held
in Brussels earlier this week and is the condition for
rebuilding international support.

Efforts must remain focused on the implementation
of the compliance framework on respect for human
rights and international humanitarian law for the Joint
Force operations and on the judicialization of the Force.
Nearly 800 European experts from three Common
Security and Defence Policy missions - the European
Union capacity-building mission (EUCAP) Sahel Niger,
EUCAP Sahel Mali and the European Union Training
Mission in Mali - are present alongside defence and
security forces in the Sahel and are providing advice
and training.

Together with our Sahelian partners, we have
embarked on a process of adapting and regionalizing
those missions in order to better support the Joint Force
and meet the needs of the security and defence forces
of all G-5 Sahel countries. A regional advisory and
coordination cell will soon be deployed in Nouakchott
to better support the Permanent Secretariat.

Those experts remain at the disposal of our
Sahelian partners to help them, in particular, refine and
revise the Force's concept of operations in order to first,
prioritize the most unstable areas; secondly, allow for
the increased mobility of the Force in those areas; and,
thirdly, ensure rapid transfer to internal security forces
to ensure the prosecution of persons arrested - all
with strict respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law.

With regard to the police component, the EU is
working to respond to the needs expressed by the various
States of the G-5 Sahel for the operationalization of their
national police components in order to enable them to
fulfil three designated tasks: investigation, intelligence
and supervision. That support will ofcourse be provided
in coordination with the United Nations.

The EU has provided robust support for the
development and operational implementation of
the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel in the amount of
€100 million, which covers equipment, services and
infrastructure - €75 million; support for the peace
and security structures of the G-5 Sahel - €5 million;
support for the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
to provide operational and logistical support for the Joint
Force in Mali - €10 million; and support for the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights for the establishment and implementation of a
compliance framework for respect for human rights
and international humanitarian law for Joint Force
operations - €10 million. The latter two categories of
support are provided under the EU-United Nations-G-S
Sahel technical arrangement signed on 23 February
2018 in Brussels.

With regard to support for the Joint Force through
MINUSMA, it should be noted that resolution 2391
(2017) allows the Mission to provide operational and
logistical support only on Malian territory and not in
all G-S Sahel countries; as noted previously, that could
regrettably limit support to battalions in operations in
third countries. The EU also supports the Secretary-
General's recommendation that MINUSMA be
authorized to provide life consumables to all battalions
operating within the framework of the Joint Force
and the compliance framework on respect for human
rights and international humanitarian law for the Joint
Force operations.

Secondly, with respect to the compliance
framework on respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law, it should be noted that the first
pre-financing tranche of €5 million was paid to the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights in June 2018 and that initial activities
have begun, such as the deployment of a technical
assistance team to the Joint Force to assist military staff
in reviewing key documents and providing training for
military officers. It is a very positive system and is
unprecedented for an African operation. It must now
be applied and extended so as to prevent all forms
of unacceptable and disreputable abuses that would
discredit an operation in the eyes of the international
community and civilians on the ground.
Thirdly, and lastly, the European Union plays a
leading role in coordinating international support for
the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel and welcomes the
operationalization of the G-5 Sahel trust fund. The
coordination hub, an ad hoc body set up by the European
Union and recognized by resolution 2391 (2017),
facilitates the coordination of bilateral assistance to the
Joint Force by focusing donor support on the needs of
the Force.

Following the establishment of the support
committee of the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel, based
in Mauritania, initial exchanges were conducted
between the Force and the coordination hub. The
establishment of the regional advisory and coordination
cell in Nouakchott in July will also strengthen the
support committee of the Joint Force and the transfer
of the coordination hub to Nouakchott to establish
full ownership of the process by the countries of the
G-5 Sahel.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that
cooperation between the United Nations and the EU is
on an excellent footing, in particular the cooperation
between the EU security and defence missions - both
civilian and military - and MINUSMA on the ground.
The EU fully supports the excellent and indispensable
work of MINUSMA and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mahamat Annadif.

The European Union and its member States are
determined to continue to build a partnership with the
countries ofthe G-5 Sahel, which is vital for the region's
security and development. The European Union is
ready to continue its support in 2019 and 2020, subject
to greater involvement by the States of the G-5 Sahel in
achieving objectives on the ground. Such support also
entails remobilizing the political and financial support
of other international partners, as we have just done at
the European level with the Ministers of the G-5 Sahel
in Brussels.

Those mutual efforts must be shared by both sides
and based on frank and effective dialogue between
the EU and the G-5 Sahel and concrete progress on
the ground. We must continue that momentum if we
want our efforts to be maintained and strengthened. We
count on the support of the Security Council, which is
essential if such efforts are to continue, both politically
and in terms of logistical and financial support for the
G-5 Sahel and its Joint Force.

