Mrs. Jakubone (Lithuania): I thank Ambassador
Skoog of Sweden and Ambassador De Aguiar Patriota
of Brazil for their comprehensive briefings and
personal commitment to the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC).

Lithuania recognizes the critical importance of
peacebuilding as the foundation for sustainable peace
and development in the aftermath of conflict and highly
values the contribution of the PBC, the Peacebuilding
Fund and the Peacebuilding Support Office in support
of post-conflict recovery and peacebuilding in the
countries on the PBC agenda. Over the past year,
the PBC has further demonstrated its potential in
identifying gaps to peacebuilding and ensuring that
countries at risk of sliding back into conflict remain
on the international community's agenda. The PBC was
especially instrumental at the beginning of the Ebola
outbreak. The Commission has actively utilized its role
as an advocate and in resource mobilization, and has
helped to draw the international community's attention
to and focus on the risks posed by the Ebola outbreak
to the three most affected countries. Its advisory,
advocacy and resource mobilization capacity should be
further utilized.

Sustained and predictable funding for areas
critical to peacebuilding and consolidation is crucial to
international efforts to prevent a relapse into Violence.
Investments in support of political dialogue and the
strengthening of security and rule-of-law institutions
are essential, both during Violent conflict and in its
aftermath. Institutional capacity-building is a long-term
endeavour and requires targeted and sustained support.
We welcome the PBC discussions in that regard on ways
to enhance the predictability of peacebuilding funding.

National as well as regional leadership and
ownership are crucial to sustainable peacebuilding. We
commend the Commission's active engagement with
African countries and Africa's regional and subregional
organizations, in particular the African Union. It should
further promote established partnerships and enhance
synergy, since that contributes to forging greater
regional coherence in the post-conflict response.

The PBC should remain actively engaged in
support of the political dialogue and other preparatory
processes during the electoral periods in the countries
on the PBC agenda. We welcome the active engagement
of the PBC Burundi configuration in that regard. As the
country is experiencing a severe pre-electoral crisis, it
is very important that the PBC configuration remain
vigilant over the developments in the country.

It is important to further promote the gender
dimension of peacebuilding, and we commend the
Commission's continuing work in that regard. Women
and young people can and should play a very active
role both in conflict resolution and in peacebuilding
efforts. Women should be in a position to envisage the
path to empowerment with full-scale participation in
post-conflict social, economic, political and security
structures.

We support the advisory role of the PBC and
encourage exploring further ways of making better
use of the mutually beneficial links between the PBC
and the Security Council. The interaction between
the two bodies should remain mutually proactive. The
PBC should continue to draw the attention of Council
members, formally and informally, to emerging threats
in the countries on its agenda in order to reduce the risk
of emergence or relapse into violent conflict.

Peacebuilding is a long and delicate process
involving many actors and different stakeholders. We
trust that the ongoing peacebuilding review will draw
on past experiences and lessons learned and generate
concrete recommendations on how to strengthen the
international community's response to the post-conflict
situation and build sustainable peace.

