Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to express my appreciation
for the briefings by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for the Central African
Republic, Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga; the Special
Representative of the African Union, Mr. Bedializoun
Moussa Nebie; and the Head of International Relations
of the Community of Sant'Egidio, Mr. Mauro Garofalo.

For several months now, the Central African
Republic has swung between consolidating the
achievements made since the completion ofthe political
transition period and election of President Touadera,
especially the headway made in the areas of Bangui
and Bambari, and a serious deterioration in security
conditions in other parts of the country, which has
negatively impacted both the humanitarian situation
and human rights of the local population.

Uruguay would like to express its profound concern
about the ongoing clashes between armed groups in
the Central African Republic and the attacks targeting
civilians in specific communities, as well as United
Nations peacekeeping personnel and humanitarian
workers. Those groups continue to destabilize the
country and cause the loss of many lives, in addition to
the significant displacement of the population.

I take this opportunity to underscore the heroism
demonstrated by Spanish Bishop Juan Jose Aguirre of
the Diocese of Bangassou, who, on various occasions
since 2014, has served as a human shield to protect all
Christian and Muslim followers alike from ruthless
militia attacks. We therefore exhort the leaders of
the armed groups to spread awareness among their
members with a view to committing to an immediate
and total ceasefire of hostilities and fulfilling, without
restriction, their commitments to the disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation process.

In order to reverse the downward spiral in which
the country unfortunately finds itself immersed, it is
critical that the international community continue to
encourage and support the efforts of the Government of
the Central African Republic in the name of peace and
stability, which requires urgent, decisive and consistent
measures. I would like to commend the active role
played by Secretary-Genera Anto'nio Guterres in that
regard. The organization of the high-level ministerial
meeting on the political, security and humanitarian
situation in the Central African Republic, which was
held on the margins ofthe seventy-second session ofthe
General Assembly in September, and his recent visit to
the country from 24 to 27 October are clear examples
of his resolute commitment, which all Member States
should support decisively.

We also recognize the important efforts made
by the African Union through the African Initiative
for Peace and Reconciliation, as well as the efforts
of the Community of Sant'Egidio through the Rome
agreement of 19 June, representatives of which are
present today and have reiterated their commitment
to continue supporting the Government and the
people of the Central African Republic in their quest
for peace. Uruguay encourages all Central Africans,
the Government, armed groups and all segments of
society to commit to those initiatives and work towards
their implementation.

The current mandate of the Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA), established in accordance with
resolution 2301 (2016), is drawing to a close. In our
opinion, the Mission has played a key role in keeping
the peace in Central African Republic, especially
through its good offices and support for the peace
process, protecting civilians and monitoring human
rights violations, as well as through its support to the
Government to expand the authority of the State and
strengthen its institutional capacities.

Uruguay commends the work carried out by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations with respect
to the strategic review of the Mission. We express our
full support for its assessment of the current situation,
its findings and its recommendations for the future
mandate of MINUSCA, including the suggestion to
increase the maximum amount of authorized resources.
The new mandate of the Mission will require greater
prioritization of tasks so as to better adapt to the current
situation on the ground.

However, it is worthwhile to point out that,
however much improvement in capacity-building and
strengthening of the Mission's mandate, a peacekeeping
mission in and ofitselfcannot, nor is it its responsibility,
to substitute for a State or stabilize an entire country.
Such achievements can be made only through the shared
work of all national stakeholders, with the ongoing
support from their international partners.

To conclude, allow me to pay tribute to the Blue
Helmets who have lost their lives this year in the
discharge of their duties as the consequence of cowardly
attacks, which we condemn in the strongest possible
terms. The security of the members of MINUSCA must
be at the heart of our attention - a necessary condition
for them to be able to fulfil their mandate. We must
remember that attacks against Blue Helmets may be
considered to be war crimes and that their perpetrators
must be held accountable and brought to justice.

