Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this
month and to thank you for the informative concept
note (S/2016/ 102, annex) you have circulated to inform
our discussion on the working methods of the Security
Council's subsidiary bodies. I would also like to
thank the delegations of Sweden and Chile and their
Permanent Representatives for their contribution to
today's deliberations on a very important subject.

There can be no question of the importance of
listening to the points of view of non-members of the
Council in suchpublic debates, especially those countries
that are suffering from conflict or have emerged from
conflict into a reconstruction phase, and that are dealing
with the imposition of sanctions regimes in accordance
with Security Council resolutions. The Sudan is one of
those States. Sanctions have been imposed on part ofour
territory through the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1591 (2005), which was set up 10 years
ago and which you chair, Mr. President. In the 10 years
since the establishment of the Informal Working Group
on General Issues of Sanctions, practice has shown that
the working methods of the Committee and its Panel of
Experts should be looked at and studied in depth, as we
are trying to do today.

Among the most important aspects that we should
focus on and review are the issues of transparency
and impartiality in the sanctions committees' working
methods. Based on our practical experience with the
1591 Committee, we have come to believe firmly that in
most cases the basic problem is a lack of transparency
on the part of the Panel of Experts in gathering and
analysing information. That leads to mistakes on the
part of the Committee and affects its ability to evaluate
the reality of the situation objectively and fairly. In
most cases, the Panel's reports to the Committee are
based on sources that are either affiliated with the
insurgents, and therefore biased, or simply unknown
or with clear, specific agendas. That is why we
reiterate how crucial it is to ensure that the Panel of
Experts maintains transparency and impartiality in
its gathering and presentation of information, and
that interactive dialogues continue to be held with the
Governments of the countries concerned on any subject
before information is included in a report to a sanctions
committee.

We also want to see regular reviews of the
importance and effectiveness of the role played by the
panels of experts in promoting the political process
and achieving stability in the countries concerned.
By their very nature, there is a danger inherent in the
Security Council's sanctions regimes whereby they can
become supervisory, and Member States have a special
responsibility to see that the Council's mechanisms
are not exploited in order to achieve private political
agendas. While that may seem somewhat unnecessary,
we should not forget that the United Nations was
created for the purpose of achieving collective security,
and that the members of the Security Council represent
every State Member of the Organization, not just their
own Governments.

Recourse to sanctions as one of the methods
available to the Security Council in certain cases
pursuant to the Charter of the United Nations should
not be the norm. First and foremost, the Council should
focus its efforts on stepping up the role of sanctions
committees in strengthening and building peace. The
Council must be strict with those who reject peace and
must resist the temptation to impose sanctions against
economic entities or institutional sectors such as, in
some countries, the management of natural resources,
as that has a direct impact on the economy of a country
that is tantamount to sanctioning people and depriving
them of their sovereign rights. We emphasized this
point yesterday: people have a sovereign right to enjoy
their country's natural resources (see S/PV.7619).

We would like to reiterate that country visits
by the Chairs of sanctions committees constitute an
important element because they allow the Chair to see
the reality of the situation on the ground and compare
that information with that provided in the reports of
panels of experts.

I also said in the Council yesterday that a plethora
of procedures and mechanisms in a country can result
in contradictions that lead to a dispersal of resources
and efforts and increase administrative and financial
corruption. We hope that the process of reforming
the working methods of the Security Council will be
objective and judicious, and ultimately crowned with
success.

