Mr. De Rivero (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): My
country welcomes the President of Timor-Leste, Mr.
Xanana Gusmao, and Foreign Minister Jose Ramos-
Horta, and thanks President Gusmao for his
comprehensive and, above all, candid briefing on the
situation in his country.

We also thank Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Timor-Leste, for his important work at the head of the
United Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL).

In 2005, Timor-Leste continued to progress
towards effective democratic governance in spite of
difficulties in the judicial and financial spheres. Local
elections took place with broad civic participation and
the rule of law was strengthened through Parliament's
adoption of the penal code, the civil procedure code
and other important legislation. Furthermore,
preparations are now under way for parliamentary and
presidential elections scheduled for 2007.

In the area of international relations, Timor-Leste
ratified important human rights agreements and made
significant progress in the demarcation of its land
border with Indonesia. The bilateral Commission for
Truth and Friendship established with Indonesia has
now begun its work. Timor-Leste also signed an
agreement with Australia on the sharing of natural
resources from the Timor Sea, which will provide
resources to improve its fragile socio-economic
situation.

Despite such domestic and external political
progress, there are still few prospects for the economic
and financial viability of Timor-Leste, which continues
to have one of the lowest per capita incomes - some
$400 a year - in the world. That is why the most
important undertaking for the future is to make Timor-
Leste's economy viable. Every effort must be made to
find more development partners for Timor-Leste and to
ensure that the conference of partners in April secures
greater resources.

We note with appreciation the transmission by
President Gusmao to the Secretary-General on
20 January of the report of the Commission for
Reception, Truth and Reconciliation on the violence
and human rights violations perpetrated in Timor-Leste
between 1974 and 1999. We hope that the Secretary-
General will issue an opinion, bearing especially in
mind the statement made by an eminent university
professor, human rights champion and scholar of truth
commissions to the effect that the purpose of such
commissions is not to uncover the entire truth - which
is virtually impossible, given human nature - but to
bring to light that which was kept hidden from our
knowledge in order to ensure justice and reconciliation.
I hope that the Secretary-General will approach this
matter in that spirit.

Moreover, we also note with appreciation the
activities undertaken since August 2005 of the bilateral
Commission for Truth and Friendship established by
Timor-Leste and Indonesia.

Peru agrees that UNOTIL's mandate should be
extended beyond May. We urge Timor-Leste's
development partners to do their utmost to ensure that
the new Government to be elected democratically in
2007 will inherit an economically viable country that
can sustain Timor-Leste's progress towards becoming
an increasingly democratic society.

