Mr. Cho Tae-yul (Republic ofKorea): Let me begin
by thanking the United States presidency for convening
today's meeting and for giving me this opportunity to
take part in the discussion on this important issue. I
would also like to thank Under Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing. Let me also echo
the words of condolences extended to the victims of
Hurricane Florence and those of other natural disasters
in China and the Philippines.

It was about 10 months ago that I made my last
statement at the Security Council meeting convened
to discuss the Democratic People's Republic of Korea-
related issue (see S/PV.7996). Since then, dramatic
changes have taken place on the Korean peninsula
and in North-East Asia. The PyeongChang Winter
Olympics in February provided a much-sought window
of opportunity to defuse tensions on the Korean
peninsula, and the leaders of both Koreas and the
United States did not fail to seize it.

As a result, the two inter-Korean summits took
place in Panmunjom in April and May, respectively,
after a hiatus of 11 years, and the first ever United
States-Democratic People's Republic of Korea summit
was held in Singapore in June, which opened a new
chapter in the relations between the two countries.
Those developments have turned the atmosphere of
regional geopolitics from one marked by escalating
tensions to one marked by diplomatic efforts.

That turnaround was made possible through a well-
measured combination of diplomatic tools. The Security
Council and the international community were united
in fully implementing the Security Council sanctions
regime, sending a clear message to Pyongyang that its
pursuit of a nuclear weapons programme will never be
accepted. At the same time, the door for dialogue was
kept open to bring the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea back to the negotiating table. The United
States took the lead in our efforts to that end, which
was fully supported by the key countries in the region
and the members of the Security Council in particular. I
would like to also commend the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006), under
the able leadership of our Dutch colleague, and the
Panel of Experts in that regard.

Let me emphasize that to achieve the complete
denuclearization of the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea, we need to work to make the most of the hard-
won momentum for negotiations towards a diplomatic
solution. That is exactly what the Republic of Korea has
been working, on in close consultation, with the United
States during the last several months. President Moon
and President Trump have taken the lead themselves
and have been directly engaged in the process.

As part of that process, in a matter of hours
President Moon Jae-in will visit Pyongyang for his third
inter-Korean summit. The summit is expected to add
renewed energy to the current diplomatic process. We
hope and expect that a significant breakthrough can be
made during the summit meeting in Pyongyang, which
in turn will help resume the stalled United States-
Democratic People's Republic of Korea negotiations.

In the meantime, my Government reaffirms that it
will work closely with the international community to
ensure the full implementation of all relevant Security
Council resolutions as we seek to implement the
27 April Panmunjom Declaration for Peace, Prosperity
and Unification of the Korean Peninsula. No doubt, the
road ahead will be bumpy. We must pursue our shared
goal of the complete denuclearization of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea with patience, persistence
and, above all, a united stance and solidarity. In doing
so we must also ensure that sanctions implementation
and engagement work in a mutually complementary and
reinforcing way, like two wheels ofa bicycle spinning in
unison. Mutual trust is essential to make progress in the
negotiations. Therefore, we also need to make efforts
to create an environment conducive to moving the
negotiation process forward by gradually and steadily
building trust. The ongoing inter-Korean dialogue will
help create such an environment, and we look forward
to the continued support of the international community
for such efforts on our part.

Keeping in mind that common goal, and the need
for a united approach to attain it, I must point out that
openly debating the United Nations Command's legal
status or its action on a specific issue that is not part of
the agenda, especially in this official security Council
meeting, seems rather inappropriate.

Before I conclude, I would like to express my
sincere hope that the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea will seize the window of opportunity to ensure
its security and a bright future by seriously engaging
in the negotiations and prove its commitment to
denuclearization by taking further meaningful steps.

