Mr. Giroux (Canada) (interpretation from French):
I should like first to convey the regrets of Ambassador
Michel Duval, who, unfortunately, cannot be here today.

It is with pleasure that I take the floor today when
the Security Council is considering a draft resolution
extending the present mandate of the United Nations
Civilian Police Mission in Haiti (MIPONUH).

The extension of MIPONUH's mandate by the
Security Council is further very concrete proof of the
sustained commitment of the international community in
Haiti. I can confirm that Canada will continue its
contribution to MIPONUH at the same level. This police
contingent joins many other Canadian experts assigned to
Haiti within the framework of our bilateral technical
assistance programme.

Canada supports the people and Government of Haiti
in their efforts to consolidate democracy and strengthen
the rule of law. We welcome the progress made by the
Haitian National Police, in particular regarding respect for
the rights of the individual. However, a great deal remains
to be done, particularly regarding reform of the Haitian
justice system.

 

(spoke in English)

Canada remains very concerned at the absence of an
agreement regarding a prime minister, a cabinet and
governmental programme, and at the negative effect this
has on Haiti's political, economic and social situation. It is
important that this process come to fruition very soon, in
full accord with Haiti's democratic vocation and the rule of
law.

It is also very important that the people of Haiti soon
be able to fully express their will through free, honest and
transparent elections, in accordance with the Constitution.

We believe that it is timely to reflect with our partners
on how to continue to strengthen the Haitian National
Police and, more broadly, the Haitian justice system after
MIPONUH. We note in this regard that the draft resolution
encourages this process to take place and will lead to
recommendations by the Secretary-General on a viable
transition. We look forward to continuing to pursue this
process with all those concerned.

