Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China attaches great importance to the humanitarian situation in Syria and supports the international community in stepping up humanitarian assistance to the Syrian people. It also supports the work of the United Nations in the area of humanitarian assistance in Syria. China, too, has provided a great deal of assistance to Syria through multilateral and bilateral channels and is committed to improving the humanitarian situation there. China has always had reservations regarding the establishment of a Syrian cross-border humanitarian assistance mechanism. We have consistently advocated that in taking any action, the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the country concerned and the will of its Government must be respected. Cross-border humanitarian assistance is a special relief method adopted under specific circumstances. It should be evaluated and adjusted in a timely manner in line with developments on the ground. The Syrian Government bears the primary responsibility for improving the humanitarian situation in Syria. In the current circumstances, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the relevant parties should step up cooperation with the Syrian Government and prioritize the provision of humanitarian assistance from inside Syria. Cross-border humanitarian operations should strictly follow the United Nations guiding principles of humanitarian assistance and relevant international law and observe the principles of neutrality, impartiality and non-politicization. With regard to Syrian cross-border humanitarian assistance, China has been actively engaged in the negotiations on resolution 2504 (2020) and draft resolution S/2020/25, making every effort to bridge differences and encourage the parties to show flexibility and work towards a compromise. We commend the co-penholders, the Russian Federation and Secretary-General Guterres for their efforts and welcome Council members finding a compromise on the issue of the extension. Given the current situation, extending the mandate for two crossing points by six months is realistic and feasible. In addition, these two crossing points are the most important ones and serve the humanitarian needs of Syria. We hope that the relevant parties will continue to have a constructive dialogue on Syrian cross-border humanitarian assistance.
