Mr. de La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French): I
am pleased to welcome Mr. Zebari and to congratulate
him on his confirmation as Minister for Foreign
Affairs. We have taken note of the formation of the
Iraqi interim Government that will begin to function on
30 June. We hope that that Government will be fully
successful in the very difficult task that will be facing
it until the elections. France, for its part, is prepared to
work with the Government of Iraq and to contribute to

the economic and political reconstruction of the
country.

I should also like to tell Mr. Zebari how useful his
presence here today is. The Security Council has for
several weeks been discussing a draft resolution that is
crucial to the future of Iraq, and it must, of course, be
fully aware of the views and expectations of the Iraqi
authorities.

The discussions that we have been having in the
Security Council for several weeks now have
demonstrated, in my view, that all of its members share
the same objective: the full and entire restoration of
Iraqi sovereignty on 30 June; indeed, that is what
Mr. Zebari told us earlier in his statement.

The Iraqi Government that has been formed
should, as of 30 June, have full and complete authority
in all areas.

Aside from the issue of its composition, we
believe that the Government's credibility in the eyes of
Iraqis will depend on its ability to govern fully and in
complete independence. At the same time, we all know
that - as Mr. Zebari has just said - maintaining a
multinational force in Iraq will remain necessary for
some time in order to help stabilize the country and
assist Iraqis in assuming full responsibility for their
security as soon as possible.

We do not think that those two demands are
contradictory - not necessarily, at least. It is possible
to reconcile the restoration of sovereignty with the
maintenance of a significant foreign military presence.
A sovereign Government and the multinational force
can coexist, while respecting both the full authority of
the Government and the operational effectiveness of
the force.

However, from our point of view, it is not enough
to decree that there be cooperation or a partnership
between the Government of Iraq and the multinational
force. Without getting into details and modalities, the
general principles and parameters of that cooperation
and partnership must be specified in the resolution. The
Iraqi interim Government must have complete
authority over its security forces and its armed forces.
It is the Government's decision whether to make those
forces available to the multinational force, if they deem
it necessary or desirable to do so. The Iraqi forces
should therefore not be engaged in the operations of
the multinational force without the consent of the
Government of Iraq.

We also believe that the multinational force
should carry out its mandate in close coordination with
the Iraqi Government. The Iraqi Government's prior
consent must be obtained for certain large-scale
operations that could have significant political
implications. Can we take the risk of repeating the
Fallujah scenario, when one of the major challenges the
new Government will face is the effort for national
dialogue and reconciliation in the run-up to the
elections.

We believe it is critical that the Iraqi
Government - in any case, the Government resulting
from the elections - be able to decide freely to
terminate the mandate of the multinational force. That
decision is up to it alone.

I note that the principles I have just mentioned
have all been the subject of agreeing public statements
by high-level leaders of the Coalition and of countries
not belonging to the Coalition, including mine. It
therefore seems that there is broad consensus on those
principles. Given that situation, it should be possible to
include those principles in the resolution under
discussion if we deem it necessary to send a clear and
credible signal to the people of Iraq that their
Government will be fully responsible and that the
temporary presence of the multinational force does not
mean their sovereignty is being challenged.

Finally, it is the opinion and the expectations of
the Iraqi people that should guide the Council's work.
The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq has already
mentioned several of the points to which I have
referred. We would be very grateful to him if he could
provide us with further information on those points. We
also hope that we will have the opportunity to continue
our discussions with him. We were very happy about
the exchange that we had this morning and about the
exchanges that we will have with other Iraqi officials
in coming days.

