Mr. Yel'chenko (Ukraine): Long before it became
a member of the Security Council, Ukraine was following
closely the developments in Sierra Leone. The important
draft resolution to be adopted at this meeting gives us our
first opportunity to outline the major elements on the
basis of which Ukraine will address the situation in Sierra
Leone as a member of this body.

We highly appreciated the courage and responsibility
shown by Sierra Leoneans which resulted in the taking of
momentous decisions aimed at bringing an end to the
long-lasting civil war in their country. The Lome Peace
Agreement, signed on 7 July 1999 by the parties to the
conflict and by the regional and international mediators,
provided an opportunity for the people of Sierra Leone to
return to the path of reconciliation. At the same time,
Ukraine does not want to conceal its judgement that this
instrument is far from perfect. The blanket amnesty
provisions contained in the document are the major cause
of our reservations. In this respect we fully associate

 

ourselves with the stance taken by the United Nations that
the amnesty and pardon outlined in article IX of the Lome
Agreement shall not apply to international crimes of
genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes and other
serious violations of international humanitarian law.

Ukraine would like to acknowledge the major
contribution of the African countries - first and foremost,
of the members of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), under the leadership of Nigeria
- to the initiation of the peace process in Sierra Leone.
Our country attaches particular importance to the success of
this process since we are convinced that it could help
inspire the restoration of peace in other parts of the
continent. It is the major reason why Ukraine is strongly
determined to encourage the international community to
provide substantive support to the implementation of the
Lorne Agreement. We cannot but emphasize that the
primary role in this endeavour is to be played by the
Security Council.

The Security Council has already heard in this
Chamber words of cautious optimism regarding the
progress achieved so far in the implementation of the Lome
Agreement. As a new member of the Council, we will do
our best to hasten the moment when the peace process will
instead be characterized by the words "steady
advancement". However, the current situation on the
ground is a cause of great concern, as was confirmed by the
briefing of Mr. Annabi.

Ceasefire violations, the frequent harassment of and
attacks on civilians, banditry and weapons smuggling - all
of these seriously undermine the peace process. The fact
that the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme is proceeding at a snail's pace constitutes yet
another source of serious concern.

The decision of the ECOWAS Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG) to withdraw its troops from the territory of
Sierra Leone has certainly been the major incentive for the
draft resolution before the Council today. We understand
the reasons that led the contributing member States of
ECOMOG to take that decision. Under these
circumstances, the United Nations should take increased
responsibility for ensuring that the security vacuum is filled
and to prevent the recurrence of fighting.

Against this backdrop, the decision on the expansion
of the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL)
will be a truly fundamental action by the Security Council.
For its part, Ukraine is willing to make a practical
contribution to this effort. I am pleased to inform the
members of the Council that the Government of Ukraine
has indicated its intention to provide an Mi-24 helicopter
unit to the expanded UNAMSIL.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate my country's
support for the draft resolution before us.

