Mr. Dejammet (France) (spoke in French): This
debate in the Security Council was necessary. We are
grateful to Member States who requested an immediate
meeting. Of course, Security Council members will have to
hear the conclusions of the mission they dispatched to the
territory to decide on future action. But it is only right that,
with any further delay, those who are to take the decisions
should hear the voice of all Member States of the United
Nations and take cognizance of the scope of the concerns
and of the urgent need for a reaction.

We are grateful to the Secretary-General for being
with us today and for his statement, which attests to the
gravity of the situation and which indicates what should be
done.
What is occurring in East Timor cannot be tolerated
any more. The United Nations encouraged, inspired and
accompanied a negotiating process leading to self-
determination and which seemed exemplary. We all had
applauded the efforts of Indonesia, Portugal and the
Secretary-General. We had worked out procedures which
led to a free consultation of the people of East Timor and
which embodied the success of democracy and the
observance of human rights in that part of the world.

Today, suddenly, everything seems to be collapsing
because of the rebellion of one segment - we hope a
limited segment - of the people concerned against
international order and against the commitments of the
Indonesian Government. But whatever the gap between
official Indonesian reactions - which are to respect the
referendum - and the behaviour of the armed gangs, we
must take note of the extremely alarming scale of the
disaster. The information reaching us mentions all sorts of
Violence, assassinations and reprisals by the militias against
the civilian population. The violence has resulted in large
flows of refugees and displaced persons. Dili has been
devastated by the militias. I need hardly reiterate the
consequences, which have been described in such detail
by previous speakers. The question before us today is
really a simple one. Are we back in 1994, dealing with
Rwanda? Are we back in 1998, facing Kosovo? Are we
going to react in time to prevent forced exodus and
massacres?

Yes, the Indonesian authorities have taken certain
steps, but it is clear to us now that they have not been
effective. Security has not been restored. Only yesterday,
the general headquarters of the United Nations Mission
was attacked by the militias. The choice of independence,
which is now being contested by force of arms, is under
threat.

At the beginning of the events, the Security Council,
on your initiative, Mr. President, did react. It decided to
dispatch a mission to the territory, stating that it was
ready to shoulder all of its responsibilities in order to
restore order and security and to ensure full compliance
with the 5 May Agreements. Day after day, a unanimous
Council, through the voice of its President, has been
appealing to the Indonesian Government.

We do not wish to see the Government of Indonesia
isolated. We hope that it will understand the need to
honour its commitments and to ensure order and the
safety of all in East Timor. We know full well that that
is a heavy responsibility, but it is not being shouldered
today. This tragic impasse cannot go on. If the Indonesian
authorities are not capable alone to fulfil their
responsibility to restore order and to implement the 5
May Agreement - and unfortunately the facts seem to
demonstrate this - Indonesia must accept the offer made
to it by the international community to help it to attain
those goals.

The Secretary-General, in a statement made
yesterday, was very clear and very firm. He said:

"The time has clearly come for Indonesia to
seek help from the international community in
fulfilling its responsibility to bring order and security
to the people of East Timor and to allow those who
have been displaced to return home in safety. (...) I
urge the Indonesian Government to accept their offer
of help without further delay."

 

The Security Council yesterday approved that
statement, which the Secretary-General reiterated this
morning. In this context, we have today noted very
carefully the statements made in Indonesia by General
Wiranto.

France hopes, therefore, that the Security Council will
be ready to decide, in the light of the assessment of the
mission dispatched to the territory, on the establishment of
an international security presence - an international force
to help restore peace. If the necessary conditions were
present and the Security Council were to decide to establish
that force, France would participate.

Finally, I should like to pay tribute to the courage of
the personnel of the United Nations Mission in East Timor.
Bearing in mind the security conditions, France appeals for
the maintenance of a United Nations presence in that
territory.

