Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for arranging this
open debate on the situation on the Middle East and
Palestine. We have started a new year, while popular
uprisings and the aspiration of the people in the Middle
East to democracy, the rule of law, independence and
rejection of foreign domination, as well as their
devotion to Islamic values, bear fruit.

One of the prime objectives of our foreign policy
is to strengthen the trust between the Islamic Republic
of Iran and our neighbours and the countries in the
region through active engagement, interaction and
partnership. The countries of the Middle East share a
common interest in the region's security and long-term
stability, and each should play its role in promoting
regional socio-economic development. Obviously, a
stable, economically flourishing and prosperous
Middle East would create an ideal situation for each
and every country in the region to move forward on the
path of development and economic growth. Our
continued commitment towards brotherly relations with
our neighbours and regional partners in the areas of
security and economic development is therefore a goal
seriously pursued by my Government.

Mischievous attempts are being made to sow
discord and create divisions among the nations in the
Middle East region. They have tried to divide peoples
by fomenting sectarian, ethnical and religious
differences. The fact is that the nations of the region,
with their various ethnic and religious diversities, have
lived together in harmony and coexistence for
centuries.

We condemn the continuation of the Israeli
blockade imposed on Gaza by land, sea and air. We
believe that it is an aggressive and savage action that
breaches all international laws and norms, constitutes a
crime against humanity and poses a serious threat to
international peace and security, as well as regional
stability. The blockade also constitutes a collective
punishment that is unconditionally prohibited by the
Fourth Geneva Convention, which deals with the rights
and obligations of belligerent States.

The Islamic Republic of Iran believes that the
settlement of the Palestinian crisis would be achievable
only if the inalienable rights of the people of occupied
Palestine are fully recognized, restored and maintained.
Regrettably, due to the lack of attention to the root
causes of the crisis, the Middle East conflict has
remained unsolved for more than six decades. There
have been numerous reasons for such failure, which
include the continued occupation of the Palestinian and
other Arab occupied territories by the Israeli regime, as
well as its persistent violations of the rights of the
Palestinian people, including the right to self-
determination and, especially, the legitimate and
inalienable right of the Palestinian refugees to return to
their homeland.

We believe that the only solution to the
Palestinian issue and the establishment of peace is the
restoration of the sovereignty right to Palestine and
putting an end to occupation. The Palestinian people
should be allowed to express their opinions freely
regarding their own fate and future and the kind of
State and Government they want to have through a
referendum with the participation of all Palestinian
people.

There are disturbing reports on the worsening
situation of Palestinian political prisoners and
detainees illegally imprisoned and detained by the
Israeli regime, in violation of international law,
including international humanitarian law. Last week, a
number of elected officials were arrested and detained
by the Israeli regime, including Aziz Dweik, Speaker
of the Palestinian Legislative Council. The Council
should condemn this new wave in the detention
campaign against the members of the Legislative
Council and demand that the Israeli regime
immediately release all lawmakers who continue to be
imprisoned or arbitrarily detained.

The Israeli regime has continued its violations of
the land, sea and air space of Lebanon and refuses to
withdraw from the villages it occupies in Lebanon. The
Golan Heights are still under occupation. In spite of the
mounting international calls and efforts to end the
Israeli military occupation of the Palestinian and other
lands under its occupation, the Israeli regime continues
to violate international law. These occupations and acts
of aggression should stop immediately.

Before concluding, I would like to react to the
reference made this morning to my country by the
representative of the Israeli regime. That representative
has repeatedly diverted from the main debate in this
Chamber - that is to say, the issue of Palestine - and
has raised issues that have no relevance to the main
debate at hand, obviously in an attempt to deflect
attention from the long list of crimes and atrocities it
has committed and continues to commit, such as
occupation, aggression, militarism, State terrorism -
including masterminding the assassination of innocent
Iranian nuclear scientists - and crimes against
humanity.

Needless to say, my country is a leading nation in
rejecting and opposing all kinds of weapons of mass
destruction, including nuclear weapons. As a State
party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT), the Islamic Republic of Iran has on
many occasions, including in this Chamber, declared
loudly and clearly that nuclear weapons, being
inhumane, have no place in our defence strategy.
Furthermore, Iran's peaceful nuclear activities are
under the supervision of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA); many inspection teams have
visited our installations, and another team from the
IAEA will visit Iran at the end of this week.
Furthermore, Iran has striven within the United
Nations framework for the realization of the nuclear-
weapon-free zone in the Middle East.

However, what is urgent for the Council to
consider and take action on is the unlawful possession
of nuclear weapons by the most dangerous and biggest
threat to the world - the Israeli regime - which has
always remained the main and unique source of
destabilization in the Middle East. Given its past
history of aggression, war crimes and crimes against
humanity, including ethnic cleansing, which it has
committed over the past decades in the region, it is
expected that the Council shall condemn the occupying
regime for the possession of nuclear weapons, urge it
to abandon such weapons, call on it to accede to the
NPT without delay, and demand that it promptly place
all its nuclear facilities under IAEA full-scope
safeguards. Peace and stability cannot be achieved in
the Middle East so long as the massive Israeli nuclear
arsenals and war rhetoric deployed by the officials of
that regime continue to threaten the region and beyond.

Finally, I also wish to give a short reply to a
reference made to my country in the statement of the
Ambassador of France, who accused Iran of sending
arms to Syria. We are surprised to hear that false and
baseless allegation. This allegation is another attempt
to whitewash the firm and verified report that France,
in line with its hegemonic policies of the past, is
arming illegal armed groups in Syria and is responsible
for fuelling the conflict, the violations of human rights
and the deaths of many civilians in Syria.

