Mr. Hume (United States): I would like to thank
Mr. Vieira de Mello for his briefing of the Council and
in particular for the professionalism, dedication and
simply good service of him and his colleagues in East
Timor. I would also like to thank Mr. Ramos-Horta for
his comments this morning, including the affirmations
he has made regarding his hopes for the future of his
country.

The most important thing for us to do today is to
send a clear, unambiguous signal that the Constituent
Assembly elections scheduled for 30 August are a
major step forward towards a free and independent East
Timor. Everyone here hopes and expects that these
elections will be conducted peacefully and that there
will be a smooth and fair implementation of the results.
We have consistently supported the efforts of the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET) to strengthen the involvement and
direct participation of the East Timorese people with
the Administration of East Timor. The establishment of
an elected Constituent Assembly is a logical, welcome
next step in this process, as is the selection in mid-
September of a new transitional cabinet, reflecting the
election results and the principle of national unity, and
composed entirely of East Timorese.

We have heard from a number of sources that
there is anxiety among the East Timorese people as
they approach this election with the memory of the
popular consultations still fresh in their minds. It is
important for them to look at the differences that those
two years have made. Now nearly all the parties have
signed a pact of national unity, committing themselves
to a peaceful political campaign and to accept the
outcome of elections. Now there are United Nations
peacekeepers and civilian police throughout the
territory. In addition, their fellow citizens are in the
nascent East Timorese Police Service and East
Timorese Defence Force. This election will be
different. It will be safe, and it will set the tone for the
future.

As part of that future, at a later date and when
there are elected East Timorese representatives among
our interlocutors, we will need to talk seriously about
the international presence after independence. In its
resolution 1338 (2001) the Security Council stressed
the need for a substantial international presence in East
Timor after independence. I think I can say that the
Council still firmly holds that view.

The United States Government hopes that this
substantial presence will include a wider range of
United Nations agencies and programmes engaged in
East Timor. We welcome the Secretary-General's
recommendation, contained in paragraph 54 of his
report, that his Deputy Special Representative after
independence should be the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) Resident
Representative in East Timor.

The Secretary-General's recent report also
provides us with the beginning of a useful road map for
getting from where we are now, on the eve of elections,
to where we want to be, next year, on the eve of
independence. In particular my delegation supports the
Secretary-General's intention to adjust downwards
some parts of the UNTAET structure in the upcoming
months. This is both well reasoned and realistic, and
also completely within the Secretary-General's
jurisdiction, independent of Council action.

Today is not the time to get into a protracted
discussion of the Secretary-General's recommendations
on a post-UNTAET presence. The upcoming elections
are our first priority. We will have time later for other
discussions. I would like to say, however, that we have
looked carefully at paragraphs 52 to 60 of the
Secretary-General's current report, and we look
forward to October's more detailed elaboration of the
proposal for fielding a smaller successor mission to
UNTAET. We presume that this follow-on report will
use as a starting point the commitment in paragraph 53
that this will be a substantially smaller presence and
the discussion in paragraphs 58 and 59 of how the
peacekeeping force can be reconfigured and eventually,
in due time, withdrawn.

That brings me to two questions that I would like
to pose to Mr. Vieira de Mello to end my remarks. The
first relates to paragraph 56 of the report, where it
estimates that a certain percentage of the East Timor
Transitional Administration staff and the UNTAET
administrative staff will be reduced at the end of the
current mandate. I wonder if you could give us an idea
of how many international staff work in those two
entities, respectively, at the current time.

The second question relates to UNTAET's
relationship with the Indonesian Government. There
has been progress in some areas, but the report notes
that there are many outstanding issues, including the
refugee and militia situation in West Timor,
cooperation in the judicial sphere, a range of economic
issues, such as pensions, and access from Oecussi to
the rest of East Timor. I would be interested in your
comments and those of Jose Ramos-Horta about
engaging with the new Government on those issues.

