Mrs. Schwalger (New Zealand): I too welcome
High Representative Inzko and the Permanent
Representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We are pleased that the Council has today
reauthorized the European Union (EU) military presence
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The EU-led mission
continues to play an important role in supporting Bosnia
and Herzegovina's efforts to maintain a safe and secure
environment. The mission also offers capacity-building
that helps to ensure that Bosnia and Herzegovina has
the tools it needs to respond to security threats.

As we heard this morning, Bosnia and Herzegovina
has continued to make significant progress toward
its goal of EU membership since the Council last
discussed the situation in the country (see S/PV.7688).
In September, another milestone was reached when
the European Commission was asked to conduct an
assessment of Bosnia and Herzegovina's membership
application. While there is along road ahead, it is another
sign of what Bosnia and Herzegovina can achieve when
its leaders unite around a common purpose. We wish
the country well as it pursues this path of integration in
the months and years to come.

We welcome the progress Bosnia and Herzegovina
has made on its reform agenda. That agenda provides
a road map for strengthening public administration
and improving socioeconomic conditions. However,
maintaining momentum in the implementation of the
agenda will require persistence and determination in
the face of difficult decisions.

As Bosnia and Herzegovina pursues EU
membership, we look forward to regional and
international partners supporting the implementation
of the reform agenda for the benefit of all of its citizens.
We also hope to see accelerated progress on the five
objectives and two conditions that are necessary for the
closure of the Office of the High Representative.

As we have heard today, the High Representative
has reported actions in Bosnia and Herzegovina that
directly challenge the authority of the State judicial
institutions and the General Framework Agreement
for Peace, including the holding of a referendum in
contravention of a ruling of the Constitutional Court.
Those activities are destabilizing and undermine the
rule of law. We urge all political actors to respect State
institutions and constitutional order. Disagreements
should be dealt with through dialogue. We hope that
divisive and inflammatory actions will be left behind
and that leaders will choose to focus on what can be
achieved by working together constructively. Divisive
rhetoric also serves to undermine reconciliation
efforts. More than two decades after the Dayton Peace
Accords brought an end to a devastating conflict, true
reconciliation remains an unfinished project.

We hope that all political leaders in Bosnia and
Herzegovina can move beyond their points of difference
and focus on fulfilling the aspiration of all ofits citizens
for stability and prosperity. An inclusive and united
society will ultimately make the country stronger and
more stable and will improve the welfare of all of its
peoples. That is the future we wish to see for Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

