Mr. Flores (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU).
The countries of Central and Eastern Europe associated
with the EU - Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia
and Slovenia - the associated countries Cyprus, Malta
and Turkey, and the European Free Trade Association
countries belonging to the European Economic Area,
Iceland and Liechtenstein, align themselves with this
statement.

In the past weeks, the EU has condemned in the
strongest terms the relentless cycle of terror and
violence that is afflicting the Israelis and the
Palestinians. Today, we want to reiterate this message
and to express our utmost concern at the continuing
military operations in the Palestinian territories, the
violations of international humanitarian law, and the
increasing and alarming number of casualties among
the civilian population.

The attempts to destroy the Palestinian Authority
and its infrastructure, the isolation of Chairman Arafat,
and the humiliation and confinement of the Palestinian
civilian population are unacceptable and contrary to
international law. Those actions and the
disproportionate use of force must cease immediately.
They are unjustified and do not serve Israel's legitimate
fight against terrorism.

Security Council resolutions 1397 (2002), 1402
(2002) and 1403 (2002) must be implemented
immediately. We deeply regret that they continue to be
ignored, in particular the demands for an immediate
cessation of violence, a meaningful and effective
ceasefire and the immediate withdrawal of Israeli
troops from Palestinian cities and other areas under the
control of the Palestinian Authority.

The lockdowns and restrictions on movement
must end. There must also be an immediate end to
President Arafat's isolation and lack of freedom of
movement. The Palestinian Authority and its President,
the legitimate representatives of the Palestinian people,
must make every possible effort to stop the violence,
dismantle all terrorist organizations such as Hamas and
the Islamic Jihad and guarantee that those responsible
for the most recent brutal terrorist attacks against
Israelis do not go unpunished.

The EU is extremely concerned by the
humanitarian disaster affecting the Palestinian
population. In particular, we are concerned about news
concerning the gravity of the humanitarian situation in
Jenin and Nablus. We reiterate that actions against
medical and humanitarian institutions and personnel
are absolutely unacceptable and contrary to United
Nations Conventions relating to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict and to international
humanitarian law. They must be able fully to perform
their work and given full access to populations in need.
We recall that both parties must respect international
humanitarian standards and protect the lives of
civilians.

The European Union stresses the importance of
the vision contained in President Bush's statement on
Thursday and in that regard welcomes the mission of
Secretary of State Powell to the region in order to work
with the parties to implement Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolution 1402 (2002). The
creation of a politically and economically viable
Palestinian State, security guarantees for the State of
Israel and the support recently offered by the League of
Arab States for Crown Prince Abdullah's peace
initiative are among the elements included in that
vision that the European Union has long called for and
strongly supports.

We urge both parties to cooperate fully with
Secretary Powell, as well as with Special Envoy Zinni
and others, to implement the Tenet work plan and the
Mitchell report recommendations with the aim of
resuming negotiations on a political settlement. We
also urge the parties to accept an impartial monitoring
mechanism. We are convinced that deploying observers
on the ground will serve the interests of both parties.
We stand ready to participate in such a mechanism.

The European Union continues to make every
effort with the parties, the countries of the region, the
United States, the United Nations and Russia to end a
conflict that can have only a political solution. We look
forward to the meeting of the "quartet" at the
ministerial level, with the presence of the Secretary-
General, scheduled to take place in Madrid tomorrow.

The special meeting of the ministers of the
European Union on 3 April decided to send a high-
level mission to the region to meet with Prime Minister
Sharon, President Arafat and other relevant
personalities on both sides. We regret that the Israeli
Government refused to allow the European Union to
meet Mr. Arafat, the elected President of the
Palestinian Authority. It is essential that the "quartet"
of special envoys be given full access to all parties. It
is also imperative that diplomatic and consular
representatives be able fully to perform their tasks, in
particular as regards access to and protection of their
own citizens in the territories.

To conclude, the European Union is extremely
concerned at the volatile situation in the region and in
particular at the recent escalation of violence along the
border between Lebanon and Israel. We call for an end
to the violations of the Blue Line, condemn the recent
attacks originating in Lebanese territory and call on all
parties involved to show the utmost restraint.

