Mr. Le Roy (spoke in French): The interim
period covered by the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA) will come to a close, as we all know,
on 9 July 2011. Much has been accomplished since the
Government of the Sudan and the Government of
South Sudan signed the CPA on 9 January 2005,
including the holding of national elections and the
referendum on South Sudan's self-determination.
Moreover, the security mechanisms agreed to by the
parties under the CPA and implemented with the
assistance of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan
(UNMIS) allowed them to deal with many security
concerns in a peaceful manner, thereby avoiding, in
very many instances, resort to armed hostilities during
this interim period.

However, while much has been achieved, a
number of key CPA issues remain outstanding, as we
all know. These include in particular the status of
Abyei, the conclusion of the popular consultations in
2

the Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile States and the
demarcation of the border. An agreement on issues
linked to the period following the succession of South
Sudan, including wealth-sharing and citizenship, is yet
to be achieved. The parties are negotiating the
remaining CPA issues as a comprehensive package. Of
all these issues, the questions of Abyei and sharing of
oil resources are of course the two most critical
political and economic issues.

(spoke in English)

In a positive development, on 30 May the parties
signed a joint position paper on border security that
they had finalized on 4 April. The parties agreed on the
establishment of a common border zone and the
architecture required to jointly manage this zone.
However, an agreement on a third-party mechanism to
assist the parties in implementing the agreement
remains outstanding.

In this context, and as members of the Council
are aware, the security situation in Abyei has been a
concern for some months. Following clashes in early
January 2011, the parties signed the Kadugli
agreements on 13 and 17 January. These agreements
included provisions to address security and migration
concerns. On 4 March, the parties further agreed to
withdraw all armed elements from the Abyei area
except the Joint Integrated Units and the Joint
Integrated Police Units.

While containing the security situation over some
months, the Government of the Sudan did not withdraw
its oil police, the Popular Defence Forces (PDF) and
Misseriya militias. For its part, the Government of
Southern Sudan did not withdraw the police elements
unilaterally deployed from Juba since August 2010 and
those locally recruited in the Abyei area.

In the meantime, UNMIS observed a build-up of
armed elements from both sides. Since 3 May,
Sudanese Armed Forces (SAF) and Misseriya militia
have blocked key roads linking the North and South
Sudan, inflicting hardship on the civilian population
along the southern side of the border. A number of
incidents were also reported, including a Southern
Sudan Police Service (SSPS) attack on an SAP Joint
Integrated Unit convoy on 1 May at Todach, killing 11
SAP soldiers. On 10 May armed Misseriya attacked an
UNMIS patrol near Diffra, injuring four peacekeepers.
On 19 May, a SAP convoy, escorted by UNMIS, was
attacked in an area controlled by the SSPS.
11-35810

As the Council is aware, the SAF launched an
offensive and captured Abyei town on 21 May. By
22 May, the SAF had taken control of the area up to the
Kiir/Bahr el-Arab River. The civilian population of
Abyei town fled the area before the attack. It is
estimated that more than 40,000 people were displaced
by the fighting in and around Abyei town. On 21 May,
President Al-Bashir issued two decrees disbanding the
Abyei area institutions and relieving its officials from
their positions.

The attack on Abyei was accompanied by large-
scale looting and burning of property, including the
World Food Programme warehouse in Abyei, by
Misseriya and PDF elements. While the SAF in Abyei
assured UNMIS that it would take measures to prevent
such incidents, intermittent looting and arson continue
despite increased patrolling by UNMIS in the area.

Humanitarian organizations are addressing the
needs of displaced persons. Food and emergency items
are being distributed, and medical and nutritional
screening is taking place in 11 health posts and 7
nutrition centres in Warrab State. Recent assessments
indicate that the most urgent needs are food, water,
shelter and non-food items. The World Food
Programme is currently feeding 35,000 internally
displaced persons, and humanitarian organizations
have reported a return movement into the affected area.

The Government of the Sudan has indicated its
willingness to withdraw its troops from the Abyei area
only when new security arrangements are agreed by
both parties and are in place.

As Council members are aware, on 23 May the
Joint Defence Board informed the Sudan People's
Liberation Army (SPLA) of its decision that the
mandate of the Joint Integrated Units in the Southern
Kordofan and Blue Nile States should be disbanded
and requested SPLA cooperation in withdrawing and
redeploying SPLA forces in these areas south of the
1-1-56 border by 1 June. There are approximately
40,000 SPLA troops emanating from Southern
Kordofan and Blue Nile.

On 26 May, the Sudan People's Liberation
Movement informed UNMIS that the security situation
in the Blue Nile State had become increasingly tense
following events in Abyei. UNMIS has received
reports that both SAF and SPLA are building up troops
in Southern Kordofan. We will continue to monitor
11-35810
these areas closely and keep the Council informed of
any developments.

As the Secretary-General stressed in his report of
17 May (S/20ll/314*), which is currently under
consideration by the Council, the overarching
condition for peace and stability in Sudan and the
region remains the establishment of good-neighbourly
relations between the North and South. There is an
urgent need for the parties to address the outstanding
CPA and post-secession issues as soon as possible. As
noted by the Secretary-General, in the absence of an
agreement, the only forums available to the parties to
resolve security issues are the mechanisms established
under the CPA and supported by UNMIS.

It was in this context that the Secretary-General
had urged the parties and the Security Council to
consider a technical rollover of UNMIS that would
have provided a transition period until the parties were
able to reach a settlement on these issues and set up the
requisite implementation mechanisms. While the
Government of Southern Sudan has expressed its
willingness to discuss a technical rollover of UNMIS,
in a meeting with the Secretary-General this morning,
the Permanent Representative of the Government of the
Sudan handed to the Secretary-General a letter from his
Foreign Minister indicating the Government's
appreciation for the work of UNMIS and its decision
that with the end of the interim period, the Government
of the Sudan had decided that the Mission's mandate
should not be continued beyond 9 July 2011.

In light of the Government of the Sudan's
decision not to consent to a technical rollover of
UNMIS, the United Nations stands ready to deploy a
mission in South Sudan as outlined in the Secretary-
General's report. In the meantime, it is imperative that
both parties respect the terms of the Kadugli
agreements, refrain from taking offensive military
action, and work in an open and flexible manner with
the African Union High-Level Panel towards finding a
lasting solution for Abyei and all other pending issues.
The United Nations stands ready, as always, to assist
them to do so.

