Ms. Loj: As Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), I would like to review with the
Council the Committee's activities since the last report
to it, in October 2005. I am pleased to present to the
Council the Committee's eighteenth work programme,
for the current three-month period ending 31 March
2006.

Before I begin, I would like to thank the head of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee's Executive
Directorate (CTED), Mr. Javier Ruperez, and his team,
as well as the Secretariat staff, for their valuable
support.

I would also like to recall that the Committee
declared CTED operational on 15 December 2005, in
accordance with resolution 1535 (2004). Members of
the Council will recall that that decision had long been
awaited. The Committee had been eager to develop the
support structure called for in resolution 1535 (2004)
so as to be better able to carry out mandated tasks such
as monitoring the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001), assisting States to improve their capacity to
implement resolution 1373 (2001) and enhancing the
implementation of resolution 1624 (2005).

We hope we will now be able to make greater
progress to achieve the Committee's mandate. The
Committee also hopes Member States will profit from
the additional resources available to guide and advise
them in fully implementing the provisions of resolution
1373 (2001). I invite States to take advantage of those
valuable tools.

Let me briefly explain what the Committee's
focus has been since my last report to the Council.

First, I am pleased to report that the Committee
has cleared the backlog of reports from States on their
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). Once the
CTED became fully staffed, in September 2005,
clearing the backlog became a priority. Timely analysis
of States' reports allows the Committee to engage in
substantial dialogue with States regarding the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). Such
dialogue is essential if the Committee is to fulfil its
Security Council mandate to monitor States'
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) and to
facilitate technical assistance.

That brings me to the Committee's second
priority during the last quarter, namely, determining
how to fulfil our mandate to facilitate technical
assistance to States that lack the capacity to implement
fully the provisions of resolution 1373 (2001). In order
to create a common understanding about how to fulfil
that role, the Committee discussed and agreed upon
policy guidelines. Those guidelines are accessible on
the Committee's newly redesigned website. In short,
the guidelines stress the importance of engaging with
States that may need help in identifying and
prioritizing needs and describe how the Committee can
work with potential donors to link them to States with
identified and agreed needs. The next step is to convert
those guidelines into action. The Committee is
currently discussing a CTED proposal on how to
ensure that results can be achieved. I would like to
reiterate the Committee's invitation to States to engage
with us on that matter.

In the same vein, I would like to call attention to
the Committee's continuing focus on visiting States.
Those visits, which take place with the consent of the
State concerned, provide an opportunity to engage in
detailed discussions to monitor the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001), in line with resolution 1535
(2004). The objective is to offer additional analysis to
States already engaged in the fight against terrorism
and in implementing resolution 1373 (2001).
Specifically, the visits enable the CTC to get a clearer
picture of where there are capacity gaps and what the
priorities should be in filling those gaps, including
through the facilitation of technical assistance, if
necessary. Such an outcome can be useful not only to
the States that the CTC visits, but also to the donor
community as it decides where to channel its limited
technical assistance.

Since I last reported to the Council on the work
of the CTC, CTED staff members have visited Algeria
and Tanzania and are making advanced preparations
for a visit to the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia. I would like to thank the Governments of
those States for their hospitality, as well as their
cooperation with the visiting team. Also, it has been
almost a year since the first visit to Morocco. The
Committee will make a special effort to ensure
appropriate follow-up to enhance the results of those
visits. In the months to come, the Committee will put
more emphasis on enhancing visits to States, upon their
consent.

Let me say a few words about our work regarding
resolution 1624 (2005). As all members are aware,
when the Council adopted resolution 1624 (2005) it
entrusted the Committee with the task of including in
our dialogue with Member States their efforts to
implement that resolution. The Committee has
developed a few questions to States on how they
implement resolution 1624 (2005). Those questions
have been included in the Committee's ongoing
correspondence with States and can also be found on
the Committee's website. I would like to take this
opportunity to encourage all States to share that
information with the Committee. If States have
received a letter, we would be grateful for a prompt
response, but States need not wait for such a letter - we
would be very happy to receive replies from States
based on the information on the website. The
Committee will also use visits to States to enhance
dialogue about implementation of resolution 1624
(2005).

Before turning to the current work programme, I
would like to point out that the Committee also spent
time in December preparing the Council's
comprehensive review of the CTED, as mandated by
resolution 1535 (2004). The report the Committee
prepared for the Council in connection with the review
sets out an ambitious agenda for the Committee and its
CTED. The Committee, through its guidance to the
CTED, will do everything it can to realize the goals set
out in that report, which the Council adopted.

This leads me to the Committee's current work
programme. There are three top priority areas: revising
the reporting regime; enhancing dialogue with States
on technical assistance; and revisiting and deepening
relations with international, regional and subregional
organizations.

I am happy to report that the Committee is now
taking concrete steps to revise its reporting procedures.
As a first step, the Committee has decided to focus on
analysing individual States' accomplishments in
implementing resolution 1373 (2001). That analysis,
prepared by CTED, will guide the Committee in
determining how to engage most fruitfully with the
States concerned in furthering each State's
implementation.

The Committee may need to make written
requests for more information from a State. On the
other hand, the Committee may suggest that the CTED
seek to visit the State to obtain a clearer picture of the
progress being made and to enable dialogue about what
further steps may be needed, including concerning
requests for technical assistance. Other tools may also
be used, such as encouraging enhanced cooperation
with relevant international, regional and subregional
organizations or working to identify priority needs for
technical assistance. Such a process would allow the
development of a tailor-made approach for each
individual State. I would like to stress that the process
will be guided by the Committee's principles of
cooperation, transparency, even-handedness and
consistency in approach.

It is my hope that the streamlining of reporting
procedures will encourage States to cooperate more
fully with the Committee. Our efforts are designed to
indicate that, while implementing 1373 (2001) and
monitoring that implementation is an ongoing process,
requests for possible further reporting will be based on
very thorough considerations, also taking into account
the resources required to prepare those reports. As
such, the Committee will no longer, as an automatic
response to a State's report, forward a request for
further information. We invite States that have fallen
behind on reporting to re-engage. Also, we hope that
the revised approach will allow the Committee to
engage more substantially with States that seek
assistance and we invite States that have already put in
place the basic tools to implement resolution 1373
(2001) to keep us informed of developments in
strengthening their systems, while placing greater
emphasis on thinking about how to assist and share
experience with other Member States.

The 2005 world summit outcome recommends
that the Security Council look into consolidating
States' reporting under the three regimes, taking into
account and respecting the different mandates of the
Council's counter-terrorism subsidiary bodies.
Therefore, the CTC has asked its CTED, in cooperation
with the experts concerning resolution 1540 (2004) and
the Monitoring Team established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999), to see how that consolidation can be most
efficiently accomplished. The Committee looks
forward to a cooperative effort in drafting a proposal to
the Council in that regard.

On the question of capacity-building, the
Committee will focus especially on States that have
requested assistance, working with them to identify
priority needs and to disseminate information about
those needs to States and organizations that might be
able to meet them.

The Committee has also continued its discussion
of the identification of best practices in areas relevant
to resolution 1373 (2001) in order to assist States
seeking to broaden and deepen their implementation of
that resolution. The Committee is updating its list of
identified best practices to assist States in
implementing the provisions of resolution 1373 (2001).
It is hoped that the updated overview will be posted on
the Committee's website shortly.

Finally, the Committee is reviewing its
cooperation with international, regional and
subregional organizations. The aim is to develop a
closer working relationship. The Committee will
remain committed to previously established
cooperative arrangements with many regional
organizations, while making a special effort to reach
out to other regional groupings that are developing
their own counter-terrorism agenda. I invite such
organizations to work with the Committee.

In that light, I would also like to thank the
Caribbean Community for welcoming CTED to have
discussions about how to enhance cooperation with the
Committee. Over the coming months, it is my hope that
such cooperation will develop further.

The CTC remains a crucial instrument in the
international community's fight against terrorism.
Developments since I reported last have shown once
again that its task remains vital and urgent. Support
from and cooperation with Member States remains
invaluable. I would therefore like to thank Member
States for their important contributions.

