Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I
should like to thank you, Mr. President, for your kind
words about Kuwait. Given your professionalism and
that of your staff, we are certain that the Kingdom of
the Netherlands will preside over the Security Council
in an outstanding manner during the month of March.

I would like to begin by thanking Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO), for her informative first
briefing since assuming the helm of MONUSCO. We
wish her every success in her duties, which she will
undoubtedly carry out very ably. We also welcome
Mr. Leonard She Okitundu, Vice-Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Regional Integration
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Where the political process is concerned, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is undergoing a
critical period with regard to the issues of adhering to
its electoral calendar and holding presidential elections
by the end of the year. We welcome the Government's
efforts in that area and stress the importance of ensuring
that the presidential elections are held according to the
established timetable and without delay. They should
be free, fair and democratic and should include all
political parties in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The presence of the Vice-Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Regional Integration
here today indicates how important the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo considers
the political process, which it should continue to focus
on until political and security stability is achieved and
the elections are held on schedule. That is the best
way to ensure that the Congolese people can enjoy the
decent life that they have waited for so long and that
they deserve.

We support the renewal of the mandate of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo for another year,
as it is providing the Government with important and
vital support in preparing for the next political stage.
It is the largest Mission of its kind within the United
Nations and is operating under many major challenges.
We firmly condemn the attacks on it by armed groups
and stress that those responsible should be held
accountable and brought to justice.

We deplore the dreadful humanitarian situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The 13 million
people currently in urgent need of humanitarian
aid are double last year's numbers, as the Secretary-
General says in his report (S/2018/174). The economic
situation is also seriously worrying, and the blatant
incidents of human rights violations are undoubtedly
linked to the deteriorating security situation in many
parts of the country. However, we are confident that
the implementation of the comprehensive Political
Agreement, the confidence-building measures and
the holding of presidential elections as scheduled
will help to improve the economic, security and
humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We also underscore the importance of
regional and international organizations - particularly
the European Union, the African Union, the Southern
African Development Community, the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region and the
International Organization of la Francophonie - in
support of political stability in the country, which is
crucial to making progress in the political process. The
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework agreement
embodies the hopes of the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the region as it helps to
achieve stability, address the root causes of the conflict
and promote confidence among neighbouring countries.

Lastly, we look forward to seeing the results of
the investigation into the killing of Michael Sharp
and Zaida Catalan. A year after their deaths, we still
do not know who was responsible. We hope that the
investigation will be completed and the perpetrators
held accountable as soon as possible. We also call on the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to pursue those responsible for the incident in December
2017 that resulted in the deaths of one Pakistani and
15 Tanzanian peacekeepers and the disappearance of
another Tanzanian peacekeeper, as well as the incident
that resulted in the deaths of 27 Congolese. We continue
to be particularly concerned about the loss of life in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

