The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Algeria, Azerbaijan, Cuba,
Egypt, Finland, Israel, Lebanon, Malaysia, Morocco,
Norway, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Spain, Sudan, Tunisia
and Yemen, requesting to be invited to participate in
the consideration of the item on the Council's agenda.
In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the consideration of the
item, without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Carmon
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table; the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side ofthe Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter dated
8 November 2006 from the Permanent Observer of
Palestine to the United Nations, which will be issued as
document S/2006/873, and which reads as follows:
"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council being held
on Thursday, 9 November 2006, regarding the
situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting in accordance with the rules
of procedure and the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mansour
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.


The President (spoke in Spanish): I should also
like to inform the Council that I have received a letter
dated 8 November 2006 from the representative of
Senegal, which reads as follows:

"Under rule 39 of the provisional rules of
procedure of the Security Council, I have the
honour to request to be invited, as Chairman of
the Committee on the Exercise of Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, to participate in
the debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question."

In accordance with past practice in this matter, I
propose that the Council extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to the
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite His Excellency Mr. Paul Badji to take the
seat reserved for him at the side of the Council
Chamber.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Ms.
Angela Kane, Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
06-60930

The Security Council is meeting in response to

the requests contained in letters dated 6, 7 and 8

November 2006 from the representatives of Qatar,

Azerbaijan and Cuba addressed to the President of the

Security Council and circulated as documents
S/2006/868, 869 and 871, respectively.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Ms. Angela Kane, Assistant Secretary-
General for Political Affairs.

I now give her the floor.


