Mr. Marn (Slovenia): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the members of the Human Security
Network (HSN), a cross-regional network made up of
Austria, Chile, Costa Rica, Greece, Ireland, Jordan,
Mali, Norway, Panama, Switzerland, Thailand, my own
country, Slovenia, and South Africa, which is an HSN
observer. The Human Security Network is an informal
group of States that advocates a people-centred,
holistic approach to human security to complement
the more traditional understanding of national and
international security.

I would like to thank today's briefers for their
briefings, and the Malaysian presidency for convening
today's open debate on children and armed conflict, an
issue that has long been a priority for the Network.

Twenty years after Graca Michel presented her
report (see A/51/306) on the impact of armed conflict
on children, the Human Security Network observes
with growing concern the increasing numbers of
children that are negatively affected by situations of
armed conflict and other situations as referenced in
the latest report (S/2016/360) of the Secretary-General
(S/2016/360) and in today's briefings.

Millions of children continue to be caught in the
middle of armed conflicts, not only as bystanders but as
recruits or as targets of multiple acts of violence, such
as attacks against schools and hospitals, abduction,
mutilation and sexual abuse, as well as the use of
hunger, disease and exploitation as tools of war. We also
note with concern that, according to the latest report of
the Secretary General, attacks on schools and hospitals
and related personnel were prevalent in 2015, which
demands our immediate and collective attention. In
that regard, we call for the implementation of resolution
2143 (2014), which contains important provisions to
ensure and protect the right of education for children.

Child protection in all situations remains the
responsibility of every State in accordance with
obligations under international law. It is essential that
national accountability mechanisms be strengthened in
order to ensure that perpetrators, including members
of non-State armed groups, members of national armed
forces and peacekeepers, who commit grave violations
against children are brought to justice. It is the
responsibility of all States to investigate and prosecute
those responsible for violations against children, put
pressure on the perpetrators and support the necessary
measures to address these violations.

It is necessary for the United Nations to work in
close cooperation with the Governments concerned. In
many armed conflicts where non-State actors commit
horrific crimes against children, the United Nations
must be fully aware of the sensitivities on the ground
and needs to work closely with those Governments to
address the situation and provide assistance to children
and their families.

The International Criminal Court (ICC) may also
have an important role to play in this regard. The
existence of grave violations against children in armed
conflict must be determined impartially and objectively
based on facts on the ground. Convictions and sentencing
by the ICC have marked a critical turning point for all
children victims of rape and murder in armed conflict,
as the Court acknowledges rape as a weapon of war and
the concept of command responsibility.

Monitoring and accurate and timely reporting
are crucial to ensuring that perpetrators are held
accountable for violations. The monitoring and reporting
mechanism established in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions is a key mechanism of the
United Nations child-protection mandate. The integrity
and credibility of the mechanism and the authority of
the Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict must be strengthened and supported, especially
by engaging with Member States and using accurate,
objective, reliable and verifiable information, thereby
ensuring the impartial and evidence-based listing of
perpetrators.

The Human Security Network furthermore
highlights the importance of focusing on the prevention
of future violations and rehabilitating and reintegrating
those who have been affected by conflict through
medical and psychosocial care.

Reiterating the call of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict in May 2016, we would like to see the universal
ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in
armed conflict. We remain deeply concerned about the
safety of children in all armed conflicts, and therefore
urge all Member States to keep the concerns of children
and their well-being high on the international agenda.

Allow me now to add few words in my national
capacity as representative of Slovenia.

Slovenia aligns itself with the statements delivered
by the observer of the European Union and by the
representative of Canada, who spoke on behalf of the
Group of Friends on Children and Armed Conflict.

Slovenia has been concerned by the attacks against
schools and hospitals. In April 2016, we expressed
support for the Oslo Safe Schools Declaration and
the Lucens Guidelines for Protecting Schools and
Universities from Military Use during Armed Conflict.

We encourage other countries that have not yet done so
to support and implement the Guidelines.

We believe that education presents an important
element of the psychosocial rehabilitation of children
affected by armed conflict. We therefore support
several projects being carried out by a Slovenian
humanitarian non-profit organization, the International
Trust Fund Enhancing Human Security, and other
Slovenian non-governmental organizations, aimed at
addressing the needs of children in Lebanon, Palestine
and Ukraine.

Last autumn, many people, including children,
sought refuge in Slovenia. We highly value the
cooperation with UNICEF, which offers psychosocial
and other assistance to these children.
The latest annual report of the Secretary-General
reminds us that we have not yet succeeded in protecting
children from grave violations committed against them
in conflicts. We are appalled that in many of the 20
countries addressed in the report the situation has
actually deteriorated. We call for a scaling up of efforts
to protect the most vulnerable - the youngest among
us - and with them our future.

