Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): I would like to thank
the French presidency of the Security Council for
having convened this meeting to reiterate the Council's
commitment to addressing the destabilizing effect of
drug trafficking in West Africa and the Sahel. We are
also grateful to the Secretary-General for his briefing
and for presenting his report on transnational organized
crime and illicit drug trafficking in West Africa and
the Sahel region (S/2013/359). I also thank Mr. Yuri
Fedotov, Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, and Mr. Said Djinnit,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Office for West Africa, for
their contributions to the discussion.

Azerbaijan welcomes presidential statement
S/PRST/2013/22, adopted earlier today, in which
the Council expresses growing concern about the
serious threats posed by drug trafficking and related
transnational organized crime to peace, stability,
governance, social and economic development and the
rule oflaw in the countries ofWest Africa and the Sahel
region.
Over the past years, there has been significant
international mobilization against the growing
impact of illicit drug trafficking and related criminal
activity in West Africa and the Sahel. The report
of the Secretary-General provides both a detailed
update on the progress made thus far in the region
and important recommendations for further actions.
Indeed, more should be done at the national, regional
and international levels to effectively address drug
trafficking and organized crime. The need for an urgent
response is compounded by growing political, security
and humanitarian vulnerabilities affecting the region,
including political instability, weapons proliferation
and increasing linkages between criminal networks and
terrorist and armed groups.

It is commendable that the States and leaders
of West Africa and the Sahel region have adopted
a number of important initiatives and measures at
national, regional and subregional levels, to tackle
the threats of organized crime and drug trafficking,
enhance national capacities and strengthen border
and maritime security. However, it is clear that most
of the countries of West Africa and the Sahel cannot
overcome existing and emerging transnational threats
in isolation. Even successful national and regional
initiatives cannot ensure a comprehensive solution if
they are not supported by the United Nations system
and the broader international community. It is critical
that bilateral and multilateral actors continue to
contribute to the ongoing regional and national efforts
aimed at combating drug trafficking in West Africa and
the Sahel.

It is important to ensure effective coordination and
mutual accountability for results, which can be provided
through integrated and multidisciplinary responses and
the enhanced collaboration of all relevant actors, based
on the principle of common and shared responsibility.
Obviously, the centre of all assistance efforts must be
a beneficiary State, which identifies its vulnerabilities
and national security concerns, considers ways to
tackle them and sets priorities. Therefore, it is an
absolute necessity for international and regional actors
to tailor their initiatives to address the individual needs
of States, taking full account of their national security
concerns and international obligations.

Serious attention should be given to the appeals of
the respective countries and regional and subregional
organizations for capacity-building assistance and
funds to counter the threats and address the challenges
affecting the region. We agree with the Secretary-
General that additional resources are needed to sustain
the fight against drugs and crime in West Africa and in
the Sahel.

Since this the last scheduled meeting ofthe Security
Council which Azerbaijan is addressing as a member
of the Council, I would like to take the opportunity
to once again thank the States Members of the United
Nations for having given my country an opportunity
to contribute to promoting international peace and
security through our presence in the Council. We thank
all Council members and other delegations and partners
for their excellent cooperation and support over the past
two years. I also wish to thank the Secretariat for its
assistance and the interpreters for their professionalism.
It has been two years' unique experience of handling
peace and security issues and of great collective work.
We wish the incoming members all the best during
their terms.

I would also like to express our appreciation to you,
Mr. President, and to your delegation for your excellent
leadership of the Council's work in December. We also
wish the delegation of Jordan a successful presidency
in January.

