Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We are grateful to
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his comprehensive briefing
on the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question, which was very helpful, as always.

The peace and security situation in the Middle East
remains a matter of serious concern for international
peace and security. Issues ranging from the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict to the Syrian and Yemeni crises
and the situation in Libya have dominated much of
our discussion in the Security Council over the past
year. The combined effects of long-standing and
unresolved disputes, the challenges of governance,
the effect for a long time time of low oil prices and
economic stagnation, the youth bulge and high rates
of unemployment, the collapse of State institutions,
sectarian strife, geopolitical rivalry, the threat of
terrorism and violent extremism, the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction, including the use
of chemical weapons, a massive influx of refugees
and migrants, and humanitarian crises have been
threatening to destabilize the whole region, with
enormous consequences for international peace
and security.

The geostrategic importance of the Middle East
region is well known. But for us in the Horn of Africa
the situation in that region has a direct implication for
our peace and stability. We are already witnessing the
impact of the Gulf crisis in our region, and the fallout
from the Yemeni conflict is being felt across the Red
Sea. The fact that the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant/Da'esh is trying to establish cells in Somalia
has been a major concern in that regard. More broadly,
however, that there are developments taking place that
could potentially undermine the gains made in recent
years, and further complicate peace and security in the
Horn of Africa region, is very clear. We believe that
requires serious attention and follow-up.

The Israeli-Palestinian conflict has been one of
those disputes at the core of the dangerous situation
that has essentially defined the Middle East for the past
several decades. The conflict has been compounded
further by the recent conflicts plaguing other countries
of the region. Unfortunately, peace has so far remained
elusive, to the detriment of all as well as to the peace
and stability of the Middle East region.

The same known obstacles to the removal of the
logjam to peace persist, with no movement forward
to speak of - a situation that is hardly conducive
to sustainable peace and security for all concerned.
In the meantime, the quest for justice keeps being
postponed, with all its implications. Without genuine
efforts towards removing those obstacles, there cannot
be any meaningful progress towards realizing the two-
State solution.

Our position on the Israeli-Palestinian dispute has
always been consistent and, we believe, principled. As
much as we support the right of Israel to exist in peace
and security, we also support the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people to self-determination and the
right of Palestine to exist as a free and independent
State. Accordingly, we fully support the goal of two
States living side by side in peace and security as the
only viable option to resolving the Israeli- Palestinian
dispute. We believe that is not only in the best interests
of both Israel and Palestine, but it will also significantly
advance peace and security in the Middle East region.

Any obstacle to that goal should be addressed in
order to pave the way for progress in the peace talks.
While it is the parties that should show flexibility
to engage in direct and meaningful negotiation to
reach a final settlement on all issues, we believe the
international community, and in particular the Security
Council, should help and encourage the two sides to
do so. That is all the more timely and urgent in the
light of the circumstances of the moment. At a time
when terrorism is a major challenge in the region
and sectarian violence is on the rise, the absence of
any meaningful progress will be a recipe for disaster
and increase further radicalization, which creates
favourable conditions for extremists to thrive.

Therefore, it is imperative that the two sides
resume direct and meaningful negotiation to achieve
a comprehensive, just and lasting solution, on the
basis of mutual trust and a spirit of compromise, that
ensures Israel's security and Palestinian aspirations for
statehood. That is what the situation calls for, and it
is in the best interests of the two parties as well as of
the international community as a whole. We hope that
the extraordinary meeting of the international donor
group for Palestine, the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee,
that is expected to convene in Brussels by the end of
this month will provide an opportunity to bring all the
parties together to discuss measures to speed up efforts
that can underpin a negotiated two-State solution.

