Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I join other speakers in
welcoming Prosecutor Bensouda to the Security Council
and in expressing our appreciation for her briefing,
which we have listened to intently. My delegation takes
note of the activities of the Office of the Prosecutor as
outlined in Ms. Bensouda's twenty-second report to
the Council as well as the decision of the International
Criminal Court's Trial Chamber IV on the Prosecutor's
request for a finding of non-compliance in the case of
Prosecutor v. Abdallah Banda Abakaer Nourain, dated
19 November 2015.

While noting that there has been a considerable
decrease in the number of clashes among Government
forces, militia and armed movements in Darfur, Malaysia
remains concerned that the security situation might yet
worsen with the onset of the dry season. Intercommunal
clashes, largely due to competition over resources,
have continued to have an impact on and displace the
civilian population. These confrontations - and the
ensuing human cost in terms of deaths, injuries and
displacement - have negatively impacted the overall
security situation in Darfur. We are concerned that an
escalation of such clashes may further destabilize the
Darfur region. Accordingly, there is an urgent need for
the Government of the Sudan to identify and effectively
address the root causes ofthe intercommunal conflicts.

The humanitarian situation in Darfur as a result of
the continued precarious security situation remains a
concern for us. The conflict has resulted in an increase of
more than 430,000 displacedpersons since the beginning
of the year, in addition to the more than 2 million long-
term internally displaced persons in Darfur. We call
on all parties to immediately cease all attacks on the
civilian population. All parties to the conflict must
abide by their obligations under international human
rights and international humanitarian law.

We are further concerned that insecurity in Darfur
has had a negative impact on the safety ofUnited Nations
staff, particularly those of the African Union/United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and on
humanitarian personnel. We unequivocally condemn
attacks against UNAMID, which have resulted in the
deaths of peacekeepers and a national staff member.
We call on the Government of the Sudan to conduct
an investigation into those attacks and bring those
responsible to justice.

The security situation in Darfur is also compromised
by the proliferation of small arms and light weapons
and criminality in the area. In that regard, we are
encouraged to note that emergency security measures
have been introduced by the Governor of South Darfur
in an attempt to improve the security situation in his
jurisdiction. At the same time, we join other Council
members in calling on the Government of the Sudan
to discharge its primary responsibility to investigate
allegations of human rights violations and abuses,
including extrajudicial killings, abduction of civilians,
acts of sexual and gender-based violence, violations
and abuses against children and arbitrary arrests and
detentions in Darfur.

In conclusion, Malaysia remains convinced that
the conflict in Darfur cannot be resolved militarily.
In that regard, we call on all parties to remain guided
by the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur and to
continue their constructive engagement towards fully
implementing the provisions ofthe Document. Malaysia
is of the view that efforts by the Government of the
Sudan to demonstrate its compliance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions and its commitment
to hold accountable those responsible for violations
of international human rights and international
humanitarian law would contribute positively and go a
long way towards building trust and confidence.

