Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): At the outset, I would like to thank Special Envoy Pedersen and Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for their briefings and their tireless efforts to restore peace in Syria. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines remains deeply troubled by the reports of violence and escalating tensions in north-west Syria. We are disheartened to hear that the situation has intensified, as have the humanitarian consequences. What was intended to be a de-escalation zone is now the potential epicentre for anguish. We therefore call for the immediate cessation of all hostilities to prevent further human suffering. Continuing along the path of combat will serve only to impede humanitarian access to those in desperate need of it, trigger a further displacement of civilians and - if calmer heads do not prevail - continue to result in the loss of life. We strongly condemn attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure, particularly health and education services, and we implore all parties to the conflict to recommit to a ceasefire. At the same time, we appreciate the steps being taken by the Russian Federation and Turkey to enhance the coordination of their respective countries' actions in Syria. It is our hope that those efforts will promote a de-escalation and help to preserve life. We also remind parties that military and counter-terrorism operations must comply with the fundamental principles of international humanitarian law. Distinction, proportionality and precaution ought to guide all activities. We therefore reiterate that peace and justice are interdependent. Atrocities committed in violation of international law should not be ignored, and perpetrators must be held accountable. As the conflict rages on and the humanitarian situation worsens, it is apparent now - more than ever - that there is a need for a Syrian-owned and Syrian-led political solution. We reiterate our support for all efforts in that regard, as a political solution is the only path towards lasting peace and stability. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines reaffirms its respect for the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity of Syria. The actions of the international community must have regard for the perspectives of the Syrian Government, as it is upto the Syrian people to determine the future of their country. Indeed, it is the Syrian people who are paying the highest price in the conflict with their suffering, as they have lost their safety, their stability and their calm. The Security Council must continue to speak up for them.
