Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would like to be
brief. I have 10 points, so please forgive me if they
come across rather bluntly.
First, I would like to welcome Special
Representative Riicker, Prime Minister Ceku and
Ms. Sanda Raskovic-Ivic. They are very welcome in
the Council.

Secondly, the United Kingdom condemns,
unreservedly, the violence in Kosovo and elsewhere in
the region. The perpetrators - be they Kosovo
Albanian, Kosovo Serb or of another ethnicity - must
be brought to justice. But I would caution against
concluding from this that the Kosovo authorities
themselves are guilty of that violence.

All sides should refrain from violence and respect
the rule of law and the Contact Group Guiding
Principles, which have been endorsed by the Council.
If violence happens once status is settled, there will be
consequences for Kosovo's Euro-Atlantic integration.

Thirdly, it is clear from the contributions of the
Special Representative and members of the Council
that there has been progress on standards
implementation, and that is extremely welcome. The
Kosovo authorities and Mr. Riicker deserve our thanks
and our support for making further progress.

Fourthly, standards do not end with status
settlement. They are part of the integral framework for
European Union and NATO integration. Should there
be a breakdown post-settlement, there will be
consequences for that integration.

Fifthly, with regard to participation, it is
disappointing that, once again, members of the Council
are having to call on Belgrade to allow Kosovo Serbs
to take part constructively in negotiations about their
own future. Belgrade is not protecting the Kosovo
Serbs by not letting them participate. What it is
protecting is its own hard line, and members of the
Council have said today that they do not find that
acceptable. We have called on Serbia several times to
encourage the Kosovo Serbs to engage. It is extremely
disappointing that once again they continue to defy the
Council in this matter.

Sixthly, I would like to say that the United
Kingdom considers itself a friend of Serbia. We want
to help Serbia to integrate into Euro-Atlantic
institutions. We have recently joined with our NATO
colleagues and allies in welcoming Serbia and other
countries in the region into Partnership for Peace. It is
disappointing that the hand of friendship extended by
NATO and by countries like my own in bringing Serbia
into Partnership for Peace is not matched by a
reciprocal willingness on the part of Serbia to assume
its rightful place in Europe and to engage in good-
neighbourly relations.

If I may, Mr. President, I would like to refer to
the letter sent to you today by Prime Minister Ceku of
Kosovo, in which he says, "We do not seek to avoid
Serbia, we seek to meet them as neighbours in a stable
and mature partnership". We call on Serbia to
reciprocate that. It is important to have a Europe that is
whole and free. We cannot do that without Serbia, but,
equally, we are not responsible for Serbia's isolation,
which is being imposed by Belgrade.

As my seventh point, I very much welcome what
Ms. Raskovic-Ivic said about the rule of the law
governing Serbia's actions. That is extremely welcome,
but it needs to be put into practice. In particular, we
call on Belgrade to transfer Mladic and Karadzic to the
Hague Tribunal. Those two men are responsible, and
have been indicted, for the massacre at Srebrenica of
7,000 Muslim men and boys. We also call on Belgrade
to stop encouraging the separatists in Republika Srpska
and to stop interfering in Bosnia's internal affairs. The
Dayton Peace Agreement has established what Bosnia
is: a State with two entities, one of which is Republika
Srpska. There is no read across - nor will we let there
be any read across - between the settlement of
Kosovo's status and that of other countries in the
region, including Bosnia.

A number of speakers today have raised the issue
of status. The important thing is that the Council must
back our Special Envoy, Martti Ahtisaari, whose
appointment by the Secretary-General we endorsed.
Ms. Raskovic-Ivic mentioned the Serbian Constitution
and the Serbian platform. We respect the right of the
Serb people to express their views. But in terms of the
settlement of Kosovo's status, the Serb platform and
the Serb Constitution are sideshows. The only show in
town is the Ahtisaari status process and the Contact
Group's January and July statements, with which the
United Nations, the EU, NATO and the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, as well as
members of the Contact Group, have associated
themselves. That is a substantive and substantial body
of States Members of the United Nations. It is an
important set of documents. We look to Belgrade to
stop its campaign of vilification of Mr. Ahtisaari. It
achieves nothing and only diminishes Serbia in the
eyes of the United Nations and its Member States.
My next point is to note that we have taken this
long to settle Kosovo's status out of a wish to be able
to bring Belgrade along. But I think it is becoming
increasingly clear that Belgrade does not wish to

engage with us and does not wish to engage with the
Status Envoy in settling the status. That is a pity, as
many members of the Council have said today. We
would far prefer a negotiated solution. But the Contact
Group has also laid down an alternative route, if that is
not possible.

Finally, on the nature of the status settlement
itself, it is not for me or anyone in the United Kingdom
to say what the status should be. As I have said, that is
for Mr. Ahtisaari to do. At the same time, I think that
we should all recognize that there is a growing
consensus on the part of many observers that any
settlement is likely to be based on some form of
independence for Kosovo, supervised by a robust
international civilian and military presence and with
cast-iron guarantees protecting the rights and security
of Kosovo's minority communities. Such an outcome
would be consistent with the Contact Group Guiding
Principles and Contact Group ministerial statements,
echoed by many in the Council today, regarding a
settlement that is acceptable to the majority of people
in Kosovo. It is difficult to identify any sustainable
alternative options that provide a better basis for
developing Kosovo's democratic future and wide
regional stability. And, of course, any settlement must
enshrine the standards that we have discussed today -
standards on which the international community rightly
remains focused, and which form the bedrock of any
country's integration into Euro-Atlantic structures.

