Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I would like to thank
Special Representative and Head of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), Sandra
Honore Braithwaite, for her briefing on the situation in
the country.

Ukraine welcomes the fact that the long period
of institutional instability that plagued the electoral
process in Haiti appears to be behind us. Despite the
significant difficulties, we are pleased that the country
has returned to constitutional order, based on the will
of voters.

We commend the Haitian authorities on their
positive steps to restore democratic institutions and
congratulate the Haitian people who, while facing many
political, economic and social challenges and natural
disasters have managed to bring the country back to
order. We underline that the efforts of all political
stakeholders should be focused on ensuring stability
and security as a crucial element for further democratic
consolidation. Broader unity is indispensable to
achieve goals such as strengthening national human
rights institutions, ensuring respect for human rights,
combating criminality, sexual and gender-based
violence, putting an end to impunity and providing
accountability.

Ukraine commends the important role MINUSTAH
has played for the past 13 years in ensuring stability
and security during particularly difficult times, such as
the most recently held elections or Hurricane Matthew.
Its contribution to strengthening the capacity of the
Haitian National Police is indispensable.

In April, the Security Council adopted resolution
2350 (2017), extending the mandate of MINUSTAH
for a final six months. The resolution also outlined the
legal framework for the transition to the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH).
We welcome the special attention given in the recent
Secretary-General's report (S/2017/604) to the planning
for MINUJUSTH, in particular on the issues of the rule
of law and human rights.

During its recent visit to Haiti, the Security Council
reviewed the implementation of resolution 2350 (2017),
focusing on the smooth transition from MINUSTAH to
MINUJUSTH. The Council saw that while the security
situation in this Caribbean country has improved, it
is still fragile. Thus, it is important to ensure a well-
prepared continuity of United Nations presence so that
the mistakes of the past are not repeated.

We consider continuing work to strengthen the
Haitian National Police essential. The recent report
of the Secretary-General highlighted the gains made
over the years in developing the capacity of the Haitian
National Police. At the same time, further consolidation
of those achievements is vital.

On the other hand, we would like to underline
the necessity of continued efforts of the international
community, multilateral agencies, Haiti's regional
partners and individual States in supporting the long-
term security and development of Haiti. Those actors
and the United Nations national and international
bodies constitute the basic three pillars supporting the
country's stability.

We recognize that considerable national, regional
and international efforts have been made in combating
cholera. However, Haiti continues to face significant
challenges that affect these efforts. In this vein, we
welcome the consensus adoption on 13 July of General
Assembly resolution 71/161 B, which reaffirmed support
for the Organization's new approach to cholera in Haiti,
including the establishment of the United Nations
Haiti Cholera Response Multi-Partner Trust Fund, and
invited Member States, donors, financial institutions,
the private sector and others to extend financial support
for the initiative.

Taking this opportunity, we would also like to
welcome the appointment of Ms. Josette Sheeran as
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Haiti.
We wish her every success in the challenging task of
implementing the United Nations new approach to
reducing the impact of cholera in Haiti and supporting
national efforts to fulfil Haiti's 2030 sustainable growth
and implementation plan.

