Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): I would like to thank
Indonesia for convening today's open debate.

As we all know, 2019 marks the seventieth
anniversary of the adoption of the 1949 Geneva
Conventions and the twentieth anniversary of the
Security Council's decision to put the issue of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict on its agenda.
It is therefore an important time to review and reflect.

The rules for the conduct of hostilities in armed
conflicts are clearly codified in the 1949 Geneva
Conventions and their Protocols Additional. They
constitute the bedrock of international humanitarian
law governing the protection of civilians and victims of
armed conflict. Yet we would all agree that we continue
to witness the flouting of international humanitarian
law whenever and wherever hostilities break out, with
women often bearing the brunt of these atrocities. The
cardinal principles of distinction and discrimination
between civilians and combatants, military necessity
and proportionality continue to be violated, and warring
parties continue to operate with impunity. Whether one
believes it is plausible deniability or abuse, the grim
reality is that when the beast of conflict roars, legal
regimes fall silent.

The violation of international humanitarian law
triggers cycles of endless violence. It ostracizes and
divides. Today targeted attacks, sexual violence, forced
conscription, torture, indiscriminate killings and gross
human rights violations are used cynically as tools
of war in conflicts. In Indian-occupied Jammu and
Kashmir, the occupying forces continue to show utter
disregard for human life by systematically violating
the fundamental norms of international humanitarian
law and using civilians as human shields. Worse, the
perpetrators of such crimes are not only protected under
black laws but are honoured by the military command.
Reports of the use of torture as an instrument of
repression in Indian-occupied J ammu and Kashmir have
been verified by the Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial
executions and torture, and by prominent rights groups
in India. For example, a recent evidence-based report
once again draws attention to the culture of impunity
and lists multiple cases involving chilling methods
used to torture civilians.

Civilians, who should be the primary subject of
protection, have become the principal objectives of
attack. Last year alone, according to the Secretary-
General's report on the protection of civilians
(S/2019/373), more than 22,000 civilians were killed,
injured or maimed as a result of direct or indiscriminate
attacks by parties to conflicts, while 1.4 million people
were made refugees and a further 5.2 million displaced
internally. I would quickly like to underscore five
specific points in that regard.

First, the protection of civilians is a system-
wide undertaking, but host countries bear the
primary responsibility for protecting all civilians,
without discrimination.

Secondly, the protection of civilians, wherever
mandated by the Council, should be a priority for
United Nations peacekeeping operations. As one
of the world's leading troop contributors to United
Nations peacekeeping, Pakistan sends well-trained
and professional peacekeepers who have protected
civilians, provided them with much-needed medical
care and rebuilt communities.

Thirdly, violations are neither inevitable nor
insurmountable. They can be mitigated by consistent
use of the entire range of national and international
judicial and non-judicial means for promoting
compliance with international humanitarian law and
ensuring accountability.

Fourthly, a lack of the political will needed to fully
respect humanitarian law and other applicable rules
is the primary impediment to protecting civilians in
armed conflict. Sustained pressure from those with
influence over parties to conflicts can obviously rectify
that wrong.

Fifth, the Security Council, as the primary body
tasked with maintaining international peace and
security, should focus on the root causes of emerging
and long-standing conflicts, including those in
Palestine and Jammu and Kashmir, and find just
solutions. Inaction by the Council in cases of foreign
aggression or occupation comes at a high human cost,
but unfortunately we continue to see legal and moral
values sacrificed at the altar of political expediency.

I would like to conclude by saying that we should
be mindful that the spirit of the Geneva Conventions
is about upholding human dignity even in the midst of
war, and it is as important today as it was 70 years ago.
After all, conventions are law, and the law must always
be upheld. The goal of the protection of civilians can
best be achieved by preventing the outbreak of armed
conflict in the first place. Anything short of that would
be to treat only the symptoms and not the disease.

