Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): I also
want to thank High Representative Petritsch for his briefing
to us today and to welcome him back here. We applaud the
fact that he has been aggressive and effective in addressing
some of Dayton's most difficult issues.

We note in particular Bosnia's recent municipal
elections, which were conducted peacefully despite
inflammatory rhetoric from certain quarters. The results
reflect some important positive trends. Bosnia is finally
beginning to transcend the excessive influence of ethnicity
in its political life, and we hope that the Ambassador is
correct that the everyday interests of ordinary people are
starting to come to the fore.

We commend High Representative Petritsch for his
strong leadership and for the close and effective
relationship he has forged with the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). We encourage
him to continue to draw on the full authority of his office
to ensure that the parties live up to their international
commitments.

In that regard, I would note that for all of our success
in working out the New York Declaration last November,
implementation remains critical. Some of the important
commitments have been carried out, but more needs to be
done. It will take the active efforts of Ambassador
Petritsch, Special Representative Klein and OSCE
representative Robert Barry to ensure that these important
commitments are respected.

As noted by Ambassador Petritsch in his comments to
us today, the international community must maintain its
focused attention on priority areas such as economic
reform, refugee return and the consolidation of central State
institutions. The Security Council itself must maintain its
commitment to the peace process, including continuing our
strong support for the efforts of the United Nations Mission
in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) to carry out its
difficult and dangerous mandate.
With the help and support of High Representative
Petritsch, Special Representative Klein has made important
progress in strengthening Bosnia's police institutions. We
welcome that, but we remain concerned about the security
situation as the international community continues its more
aggressive approach.

We applaud High Representative Petritsch's efforts
to push the parties on economic reform. This is essential.
Progress on this front is the best way to support
responsible reformist leaders who have focused on peace
and prosperity rather than on rekindling old hatreds.

We note also the progress that has been made in
reducing defence expenditures. The positive electoral
results in Croatia are accelerating this welcome
development, which will help strengthen Bosnia's fiscal
health and advance key common State institutions.

I want to draw special attention to the conclusion of
Ambassador Petritsch's report to us today. He suggested
that the tide has turned against the forces of nationalism
in the Balkans, and that if we can assist the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to live peacefully with one
another again, we can achieve that goal elsewhere in the
Balkans. That is a crucial point. Our aim is, and must
continue to be, regional stability and peace. We must send
a clear message to all, inside and outside Bosnia and
Herzegovina, who would undermine this effort - the
extreme nationalists, the indicted war criminals, the
promoters of ethnic politics, the underground elements -
that the Security Council and the international community
will not be diverted and that we will not tolerate
continued efforts to undermine the Dayton Agreement
and, more broadly, lasting peace.

I thank Ambassador Petritsch for reminding us that
the price of failure is too high.

