Mr. Gonzalez de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to begin by welcoming Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Nicholas
Haysom to the Security Council and by thanking him
for his briefing on the situation in Afghanistan and
the activities of United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA). I would also like to welcome
and thank Ambassador Tanin of Afghanistan for his
words.

I take this opportunity to express our thanks to the
other members of the Security Council for entrusting
us with the responsibility of being the penholder on
the Security Council's work regarding the situation
in Afghanistan. For me and for my delegation, it is an
honour that we are very happy to assume, and I can
guarantee Spain's firm commitment to Afghanistan.
That has always been the case, particularly in our
bilateral relations. On 1 January, the same day that
Spain assumed its responsibility as a non-permanent
member of the Security Council, Afghanistan began
a new stage in its recent history of the past 13 years,
and the Council indicated that this is the transformation
decade aimed at bringing about economic sustainability
and security in the country. Once that transformation is
achieved, there will be a national unity Government,
which will represent the first democratic transition of
power in the country.

With those changes, Afghanistan has fully
recognized its sovereignty and, in our view, its
ownership and leadership of its own process of national
reconstruction and economic and social development,
including peace and reconciliation between the
members of its national community. There is, however,
something that did not change on 1 January, and that is
the commitment of the international community to the
country and our common desire to continue to support
Afghanistan, its institutions and its citizens in the
processes I have mentioned. We have just adopted the
new resolution 2210 (2015), which extends UNAMA's
mandate for an additional year in accordance and in
consultation with the Afghan Government. The members
of the Council view the adoption of the resolution as a
recognition of a new era and as an expression of the
support of the international community.

I would like to take opportunity to highlight the
fact that the resolution includes important changes with
regard to previous resolutions. First, it recognizes and
reflects an adaptation to the new situation following
1 January. Secondly, it underscores the sovereignty,
ownership and leadership of Afghans. Thirdly and
finally, it recommends that the Secretary-General
begin examining the structures and activities of the
United Nations in Afghanistan in full consultation and
cooperation with the Afghan Government and with all
interested parties, particularly the donor community.
Spain feels that those three elements form the starting
point in this new stage, and we would like to call
upon all parties participating in the process to ensure
that everyone, acting in accordance with their own
responsibilities, will be cooperative, constructive and
responsible in their actions. That is what we intend to do.
Accordingly, I would like to endorse the statement to be
delivered later by the observer of the European Union
on the subject. Spain fully endorses that statement.

In conclusion, while fully supporting the new
authorities in Afghanistan and their citizens, I would
like to issue two calls. On the one hand, I would like
to call on the Afghan institutions and authorities
to continue their progress with the urgency and
responsibility that the process deserves in their pursuit
to form the national unity Government. We trust that
the Government will soon and decisively carry out
its announced programme of reforms and that it will
reinforce the progress of the past 13 years in the areas
of democratization, good governance and human rights,
in particular the rights of women. We also trust that the
Government will persevere in its efforts to bring about
national peace and reconciliation and will continue to
work closely with its neighbours in order to address all
common challenges.

I would also call upon the citizens of Afghanistan
to persevere in the democratic process with a View to
designing and building their common future - as we
saw them do in the electoral process last year. Challenges
remain, but the achievements are concrete and the
capacity ofthe Afghan people in overcoming difficulties
has been more than proven. We should not risk any
backsliding, particularly in the area of democratization
and the rights of men and women in Afghanistan.

