Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation would like to express its
gratitude for the convening of this meeting and to
Mr. Mark Lowcock and his entire team for the work
they are doing. We assure him once again ofthe ongoing
support of the Government of Equatorial Guinea for
the activities of humanitarian organizations in Syria,
including United Nations agencies and international
non-governmental organizations.

While it is true that the active conflict in Syria
has somewhat abated, ongoing clashes in the north
and south-east of the country continue to cause many
casualties and the destruction of civilian infrastructure,
as well as large-scale displacements. Indiscriminate
artillery attacks against civilians and civilian targets,
regardless of who is responsible for them, undoubtedly
lead to an increase in humanitarian needs and reaffirm
the need for civil protection. Moreover, humanitarian
access to the areas affected by the fighting is still
very restricted, and the Government of Equatorial
Guinea remains very concerned about the civilians
who continue to be trapped in areas controlled by the
Islamic State. As Mr. Lowcock once stressed, the fate of
millions of Syrians depends on the restraint exercised
by the parties. To that end, further efforts are needed to
protect the civilian population.

There are also ongoing concerns about protection
for people who have been moved to displaced persons
camps. The Rukban camp, as has been stressed at
this meeting, houses approximately 42,000 internally
displaced persons, who are de facto hostages of the
terrorist factions operating in the area and are now
facing very low temperatures and a lack of attention.
As Under-Secretary-General Lowcock underscored,
because ofthe cold and these difficult living conditions,
in just one month eight children died, most of them
under the age of four months. More children could
suffer the same fate in the coming weeks if they do not
receive medical assistance, protection and shelter.

Faced with these dire conditions, Equatorial
Guinea is pleased to see the process under way to
deploy a second humanitarian convoy to Rukban, as
recommended by United Nations teams in the most
recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/1104).
We also urge all the parties to the conflict to urgently
guarantee the deployment to Rukban of the humanitarian
convoy, including mobile hospitals, in accordance with
resolution 2449 (2018).

The announced gradual withdrawal of United
States troops from Syria should not be a green light
for further clashes. Indeed, a Turkish offensive against
the Kurdish militia of the People's Protection Units
could further exacerbate the war situation. It should
be remembered that the priority in both northern and
south-eastern Syria is to neutralize all terrorist factions
of the Islamic State.

The very high sums disbursed so far for the
reconstruction of the country - approximately
$109 million - and the alarming figures of the
conflict, which include more than 300,000 dead since
the beginning of the war, more than 6 million displaced
persons in the country, more than 5 million displaced
persons around the world, and more than 6 million
people suffering from acute food insecurity, among
other statistics, demonstrate the horror of the war and
the need to put an end to this incessant struggle.

In conclusion, as the eighth year of this conflict
draws to a close, as has been emphasized, the only way
out of the situation in Syria is to find a peaceful and
diplomatic solution. This unbearable conflict must end
for the sake of the Syrian people and for the future of
the region.

