Mr. Ouane (Mali) (interpretation from French):
Before I make my statement, I am duty-bound to express,
on behalf of my country, Mali, our sentiments of
friendship to the People's Republic of China. I wish to
convey once again to the representative of China our
heartfelt words of condolence to him on the passing of
Deng Xiaoping. China's loss is also Mali's.

Mr. President, the delegation of Mali is pleased to
see the Council meeting under your leadership during this
month of February. Likewise, my delegation associates
itself with previous speakers in congratulating your
predecessor, Ambassador Owada, on the competence and
authority with which he presided over the work of the
Council last month.

My delegation would like to welcome here General
Carneiro, the head of the Angolan delegation. We listened
carefully to his enlightening and constructive statement.

I should like also to associate myself with previous
speakers in conveying our gratitude to the Secretary-
General of our Organization, Mr. Kofi Annan, for his
exhaustive, clear and instructive report on this agenda
item.

Finally, might I convey the congratulations of my
delegation to the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General in Angola, our compatriot, Maitre Alioune
Blondin Beye, and to the members of the troika, as well
as to entire personnel of the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III) for their tireless
efforts to advance the peace process in Angola.

Since our last meeting, the situation in Angola has
seen considerable progress, which indicates that the peace
process in that country is at a decisive turning-point. That
is why this meeting is so important, because in the
opinion of my delegation, it must take the peace process
to its final phase. All hopes are now pinned on the full
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol, signed by the
Government of Angola and UNITA on 20 November
1994.

The international community has allocated major
resources in support of these hopes, notably through the
establishment of UNAVEM. III. It is imperative that these
efforts bear fruit.
 

The Government of Angola, which my delegation
warmly congratulates, has made considerable efforts to
discharge its obligations under the Lusaka Protocol.
Unfortunately, this good will has not always been
demonstrated by UNITA, whose delaying tactics my
delegation strongly deplores. In this respect, my delegation
once again appeals to UNITA to implement on a priority
basis the military obligations it undertook to fulfil many
months ago.

My delegation sincerely hopes that the aspirations of
the international community will not be disappointed once
again and that UNIT A will prove itself in the days to come
on the occasion of the formation of the Government of
National Unity and Reconciliation.

With regard to the current situation in Angola, the
delegation of Mali welcomes the extension of the mandate
of UNAVEM. III, which remains the guarantor of peace and
stability. My delegation therefore supports the firm,
clear message sent to UN ITA through the threat of
sanctions to convince that movement to stick more
faithfully to the peace process. That attitude alone, in the
view of my delegation, can help the people of Angola to
achieve their desire for peace and to build a better future
geared towards development and democracy.

