Mr. Akram (Pakistan): We are grateful to the Vietnamese presidency for convening this timely debate on international peace and security. The world order established 75 years ago on the basis of the fundamental principles of the Charter of the United Nations is rapidly eroding today. Pakistan has a vital stake in the preservation and promotion of this order and in the building of a structure of world peace and cooperation on the foundations of the United Nations Charter. Pakistan hopes that, in Afghanistan, the United States-Taliban talks, which we have facilitated, will soon result in an agreement that enables the withdrawal of foreign forces, a cessation of violence, a comprehensive intra-Afghan dialogue and the elimination of terrorism from Afghanistan. Prime Minister Imran Khan has also deployed personal efforts to reduce the tensions in the Gulf region. Pakistan will not become party to any regional conflict. We will always be a partner for peace. Recent events have amplified the multiple and complex threats to peace and security in the Middle East - the denial of self-determination to the Palestinian people and the disruption of the sovereignty and stability of Iraq, Syria and Yemen. It is now over 150 days that 8 million people in the Kashmir Valley have been kept under a cruel curfew and a communication blackout by an Indian occupation force of 900,000 troops. All Kashmiri leaders remain in jails across India. Thousands of young boys have been abducted, arbitrarily detained, tortured and maimed; women subjected to sexual harassment, humiliation and intimidation; and all protest violently suppressed. My delegation has circulated a dossier of reports filed by independent journalists and observers, which vividly illustrate the climate of fear and the reign of terror that India has imposed on the Kashmiri people. The signals from India of aggressive intent towards Pakistan are also unmistakable. India has issued new political maps that lay claim not only to Indian occupied Jammu and Kashmir, but also to Pakistan-administered Azad Kashmir and Gilgit-Baltistan. India's Foreign Minister has boasted that they will one day take physical control of that territory as well. India committed over 3,000 ceasefire violations along the Line of Control last year. It has now cut the fencing along the Line of Control in five places and deployed Israeli Spike anti-tank and BrahMos cruise missiles along the Line. The incoming Indian Army Chief has claimed the right to launch a pre-emptive attack against Pakistan. India could stage another false-flag terror incident to create a casus belli for an attack. India's military doctrine envisages fighting a "limited war (with Pakistan) under the nuclear overhang". It has built the capacity for a so-called cold-start - that is, surprise - strike across the Pakistan-India border. On 18 August 2019, the Indian Defence Minister held out a thinly disguised threat of a pre-emptive nuclear strike against Pakistan. Pakistan does not want war with India, but, as we demonstrated last February, if attacked Pakistan will respond resolutely and effectively. The February aerial exchanges were contained due to Prime Minister Imran Khan's gesture to unilaterally return the Indian pilot we captured after shooting down two Indian fighter aircraft. We may not be so fortunate next time. Pakistan requests the Security Council and the Secretary-General to act decisively to prevent a disastrous war between Pakistan and India, to call for an end to the grave human rights violations in occupied Jammu and Kashmir, and to enable the Kashmiri people to exercise the right to self-determination promised to them in the resolutions of the Council.
