Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
open meeting, which provides another opportunity for
Member States to express their views and concerns
with regard to the issue of the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons. I should also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2003/12l7) on this
subject. In addition, I cannot fail to express our thanks
and appreciation to Mr. Nobuyasu Abe, Under-
Secretary-General for Disarmament Affairs, for
introducing the Secretary-General's report.

The 2001 United Nations Conference reaffirmed
that the problem of the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons is extremely complex and difficult. It
threatens the lives of innocent people, particularly
children, women and the elderly, who continue to fall
victim to such weapons. That is why we have called
upon all States - particularly manufacturing and
exporting States - to make every possible effort,
through international cooperation, to find effective
solutions that will put an end to this tragedy.

The catastrophic damage caused by small arms
and light weapons has become obvious in the conflicts
that continue to afflict a number of African States as
well as in conflicts in States in other regions. In this
regard, we renew our appeal to all Member States to
respect the embargoes imposed by the Security Council
on the export of small arms and light weapons to
African countries suffering from conflict situations.

Here, I should stress that addressing the issue of
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons must in
no way mean setting aside the priorities established by
the United Nations in the disarmament field. Those
priorities were clearly and unanimously set out by the
international community in the Final Document of the
first special session of the General Assembly devoted
to disarmament, held in 1978. That document
emphasized that top priority must be given to
disarmament in the area of nuclear weapons and the
other most lethal weapons of mass destruction.

Syria participated in the conference organized by
the Department of Disarmament Affairs, in cooperation
with the League of Arab States, a few weeks ago in
Cairo, Egypt, to study the needs and difficulties of
Arab States in confronting the issue of the illicit trade
in small arms and light weapons.

We hope that the outcome of the Conference will
be reflected in a future report of the Secretary-General.
In that regard, I underline that the difficulties faced by
Arab States are a result of the current situation: Israel's
occupation of Arab land and Israel's massive arsenal of
all types of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons,
in addition to its many advanced conventional weapons
systems.

Out of its desire to make the Middle East a region
free of all weapons of mass destruction, Syria has
submitted a draft resolution, which remains before the
Security Council, calling for the elimination of all
weapons of mass destruction in the region. We hope
that the situation will ripen, allowing all Council
members to vote in favour of that draft resolution.

Given the importance of regional and
international interaction and cooperation in confronting
the problem of the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons, Syria has signed many agreements with
friendly and sister States to confront the problem and
maintain our common security.

While we affirm the importance of the role of the
Security Council in maintaining international peace
and security, we nevertheless believe that the Council
must address the root causes of the conflicts in which
such weapons are used. It should deal with those
causes and stress the vital need for compliance with its
resolutions in those situations. The Council could also
encourage initiatives aimed at mobilizing resources and
expertise in order to strengthen the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects. It could also, if so
requested, provide assistance to States to overcome the
difficulties they face in implementing the Programme.

Allow me to stress once again that Syria is ready
for fruitful cooperation with all States within the
framework of the United Nations to seek reliable
means for eradicating the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons. That would surely promote the role of
the United Nations in setting out the rules of
multilateralism in all aspects of international relations.

