Mr. Ibafiez Ferrandiz (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I would first like to express my gratitude for the
convening of this meeting on the occasion of the tenth
nniversary of the adoption of resolution 1540 (2004).
We are debating an issue of great importance for
international security. I would also like to take this
opportunity to thank the Republic of Korea for its
contribution to the discussion on non-proliferation in
international forums, highlight its work as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) and to wish it success in its presidency of the
Security Council for this month.

I would like to voice our support for the statement
delivered on behalf of the European Union, to which we
fully subscribe.
On 28 April we marked the tenth anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1540 (2004). As a member of
the Security Council at the time, Spain contributed to
it through its extensive accumulated experience in the
fight against terrorism. In the years leading up to the
resolution, the international community had witnessed
the appearance of new threats linked to weapons of
mass destruction. In particular, those were the potential
use of technologies and related materials by terrorist
groups and non-State actors, which represented a
great challenge. The resolution offered an appropriate
response, establishing a series of obligations under
which States had to take steps, establish controls and
develop legislation in order to prevent proliferation and
physically protect nuclear, chemical, biological and
radiological materials. Spain has complied with the
resolution and worked in an effective manner in all of
the following areas.

We presented our first report in 2004, and we have
updated it since. We have worked on the gradual review
and development of our capabilities in order to deal with
our security requirements. We have developed a broad
legal framework aimed at preventing proliferation and
the illicit trade of weapons and dual-use goods. We
have developed national and international coordination
efforts and appropriate technical capabilities. Spain
is currently working on developing a national plan
in accordance with the recommendations of the 1540
Committee. I would like to highlight the following
priorities of the plan, which are developing and updating
a legal framework; protecting critical facilities;
controlling sensitive transfers, including that of
intangibles, and the protection of transport protection;
establishing intervention and response mechanisms in
case of an incident; and international cooperation.

Global threats require global responses. Spain
has therefore made particular efforts in the area
of international cooperation. First, to the extent
that we are able, we have responded to requests for
assistance channelled through the 1540 Committee.
We have developed cooperation with various friendly
countries for preventing nuclear, radiological, chemical
and biological threats as well as for mitigating the
consequences in case of an incident. As an example, this
year, together with Mexico, we organized a seminar in
Madrid on the various aspects of the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), in which we had participation
from countries of Latin America and the Caribbean
as well as the support of the Committee's Group of
Experts, the Office for Disarmament Affairs and the
International Atomic Energy Agency.
We have also intensified our cooperation efforts
through multilateral forums. In that regard, I would like
to emphasize Spain's coordination efforts during three
years in the technical programme of the Global Initiative
to Combat Nuclear Terrorism, which today includes 85
countries and four international organizations. That
multilateral and bilateral cooperation has also resulted
in an action plan for the prevention of threats relating
to weapons of mass destruction, which we are currently
developing with Morocco, with whom we recently
carried out a joint exercise of response to a terrorist
attack with a radiological impact.

The risks and threats frequently evolve more quickly
than States' preventive activity can. Moreover, growth
in the peaceful uses of nuclear, radiological, biological
and chemical technologies, materials and installations
increases the possibility that non-State actors, and
terrorist organizations in particular, can gain access
to such materials and installations and commit crimes,
factors that might facilitate attacks with a huge impact
that could result in serious human and material damage.
One example is the vulnerability of certain critical
facilities where, whether through conventional means
or cyber systems, a terrorist group could cause incidents
with serious consequences, including radioactive,
chemical or biological impacts. Therefore, the security
concepts that gave rise to resolution 1540 (2004) should
be continually updated through the introduction of such
elements as the protection of critical facilities against
terrorist attacks, biosecurity and cybersecurity.

Resolution 1540 (2004) represented a historic
initiative in the international community's commitment
to combating the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and fighting terrorism. In that regard,
the tenth anniversary is also a unique opportunity to
reaffirm its principles and goals. Today, therefore,
Spain wishes to express its commitment to those
principles and goals, as well as to reaffirm its readiness
to develop dialogue, joint efforts and cooperation with
other countries and international organizations in order
to confront our global security challenges decisively.

