Mr. Vale de Almeida (spoke in French): I wish to
thank for you for providing the European Union with
this opportunity to address the Security Council at this
briefing. This meeting is a further clear expression of
the international community's support for the Group of
Five for the Sahel (G-S Sahel) and for the fight again
terrorism in the Sahel. The European Union and its
member States have long enjoyed close ties of friendship
with the G-5 Sahel countries. We are neighbours, and as
neighbours we share not only challenges but also hopes.
For that reason, the European Union will continue to
play its full part, standing shoulder to shoulder with our
neighbours in the Sahel.

On behalf of the European Union, I should like to
pay tribute to the efforts of the G-5 Sahel countries to
foster regional cooperation in the framework of the
G-5 Sahel format. We firmly support these cooperation
efforts in all their dimensions.

Allow me to focus my remarks on the European
Union's support for the operationalization of the G-5
Sahel Joint Force. That support is at the heart of not
only our bilateral relations with the region, but also of
the strategic partnership between the European Union
and the United Nations on the maintenance of peace
and crisis management. It is also a key component of
the trilateral cooperation between the United Nations,
the African Union and the European Union.

Since the conference held in Brussels on
23 February, at which the international community
pledged more than €400 million, and with the technical
arrangement between the G-5 Sahel, the United Nations
and the European Union now set up, the G-5 Sahel
now has the international support necessary to make
headway in the deployment and operationalization of
its Joint Force.

We hope that the disbursement by the European
Union of €10 million euros to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) will allow for the rapid rollout of
effective support for the Joint Force. We invite other
partners to use this fully operational mechanism to
channel their own financing to MINUSMA. This is
key, as the kind of support that MINUSMA can provide
on the ground to the Joint Force cannot be delivered
directly by any other means or channel, including
bilateral ones. The European Union is also preparing
a €10 million contribution for the establishment and
implementation of a human rights and international
humanitarian law compliance framework. We have also
provided €70 million for the provision of equipment,
infrastructure and services to the Joint Force.

The European Union is convincedthat the Joint Force
must be firmly embedded within a broader political and
institutional framework to guide its operations and to
ensure that is but one part of a broader regional strategy.
The EU has therefore pledged €5 million to support
the G-5 Sahel in the operationalization of its trust
fund and the establishment of the support and steering
committees and the Defence and Security Bureau of the
Permanent Secretariat. We welcome this new dynamic,
which bodes well for the ongoing leadership and
integration of the G-5 Sahel at the national and regional
levels. We welcome the efforts made in that respect by
Mr. Sidikou, whose presence here today I welcome.

In this respect, it is vital to bear in mind the recent
memorandum of understanding concluded recently
between the African Union and the G-5 Sahel, which
gives the African Union a coordination role and sees
the Joint Force as part of the larger African peace
architecture. In addition, the European Union will
continue to manage the coordination hub for as long we
deem it necessary, in order to help the Joint Force and
the Permanent Secretariat of the G-5 Sahel to organize
and ensure coherence in the voluntary international
contributions to the Force. The hub meets once a
month in Brussels, with the participation of G-S Sahel
representatives and all international partners, to take
stock of existing support and identify shortfalls. It is
also in contact every two weeks with the G-5 Sahel
Permanent Secretariat in Nouakchott, the G-5 Sahel
presidency in Niamey and the Joint Force in Bamako.

In addition to the financial and institutional
support that I have just outlined, European efforts to
build defence and security capacities in the region,
particularly in Mali and the Niger, are currently being
reviewed in order to extend such efforts to include
training and advisory functions to the Joint Force, with
full respect for the prerogatives and authority of the
G-5 Sahel. To that end, we are working in very close
cooperation with the Commander of the Joint Force,
General Dacko.

The European Union is also a strong supporter of
the development and operationalization of the police
component of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. We believe
this to be the key to ensuring to ensure a sound legal
framework for any efforts to counter organized crime
and terrorism. We believe also that this will help to
ensure that the desired results are achieved and ensure
appropriate protection for the civilian population.

The security-capacity-building missions of the
European Union in Mali and the Niger are focused
on the setting up by the authorities of Mali and the
Niger of police components within the Joint Force, in
coordination with the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime and other partners.

It is also important not to lose sight of the
security dimension of the European contribution to
the economic, social and political development of the
region. In this respect, the European Union has provided
68 billion in aid to the Sahel over the past seven years.
The European Union is also a strong supporter of the
Sahel Alliance, which was set up to promote, expand
and accelerate this integrated approach to security and
development and to deliver tangible results. However,
we must be clear. There can be no lasting progress if no
concomitant headway is made on the political track. We
must more than ever before use all forms of leverage at
our disposal to encourage the Malian parties to fulfil
their commitments.

Allow me to conclude by noting, as the Secretary-
General rightly points out in his report (S/2018/432),
that just one year after the African Union Peace and
Security Council authorized the deployment of the
Joint Force, our collective efforts have made it possible
to achieve significant progress in the mobilization of
resources and support for the G-5 Sahel Joint Force.
Looking ahead, it will be vital that we all continue
to play our respective roles and show our support for
the Force, including by providing ongoing support
to MINUSMA. In so doing, we must also ensure
coherence in our pledges and assistance to the Force
and work with full transparency and full respect for the
authority and participation of the G-5 Sahel.

Rest assured of the unflagging support of the
European Union as we stand shoulder to shoulder with
our neighbours in the Sahel.

