Mr. Buallay (Bahrain): Allow me at the outset to
express our deepest thanks to the Secretary-General for his
useful report concerning the United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH). We should also like
to pay tribute to the Swedish delegation for drafting the
draft resolution now before us.

The presence of UNMIBH in the field has played a
large role in the achievement of an atmosphere of stability
and peace and Bosnia and Herzegovina. That role has
increased lately, which pleases us.

A great deal of progress has been made in the
restructuring of police forces in the Federation and in the
Republika Srpska. That progress has been closely linked to
the comprehensive progress in the implementation of
peace, although some difficulties and obstacles remain -
as was, in any case, to be expected. We hope that the
efforts of the Mission in training police forces in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and restructuring police forces in the
Federation and in the Republika Srpska will succeed.

On another front, the International Police Task Force
(IPTF) has been making strenuous efforts in cooperation
with the Stabilization Force (SFOR) to implement the
Operation Harvest programme, through which individuals
who hand over weapons in their possession to SFOR or
IPTF are granted immunity. My delegation welcomes the
achievement made in this field, whereby SFOR has been
able to collect 6,799 mines as well as tens of thousands
of weapons and related equipment. This is most
encouraging indeed.

My delegation expresses its regret regarding the
incidents that have taken place in the last three months,
including acts of violence against refugees and returnees,
as well as other incidents that have taken place from time
to time in various parts of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
urge the officials concerned to take the necessary
measures to avoid any further incidents of this kind.

On the other hand, my delegation supports the close
cooperation between UNMIBH and other international
organizations, including the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, particularly within the framework
of preparations for the national elections scheduled for 13
September 1998.

My delegation expresses its great appreciation to the
United Nations system for its efforts in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as well as for the important role undertaken
by related agencies and organizations.

My delegation urges all parties in Bosnia and
Herzegovina to closely implement the Dayton Peace
Agreement with regard to setting up the Federation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and to cooperation with the
international community, as represented by the United
Nations, its missions and the various bodies acting in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

My delegation reaffirms its support for the important
role played by UNMIBH, SFOR and the IPTF, and
wishes to stress its support for efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Coordinator
of United Nations Operations in Bosnia and Herzegovina

 

and the important role of the Commissioner of the
International Police Task Force.

While reaffirming its support for the Dayton
Agreement, Bahrain wishes to renew its condemnation of
all repressive Serbian practices and of the excessive use of
military force against other ethnic groups in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We condemn in particular crimes committed
against Muslims in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In that regard,
my country believes that all Serbian war criminals must be
prosecuted for their crimes, as an example to others. This
is especially true because what took place in Bosnia also
takes place elsewhere; witness, for example, the ongoing
events in Kosovo, which is now the scene of excessive
Serbian violence against Kosovar Albanians.

In conclusion, my delegation supports the draft
resolution before the Council today, by which the Council
would decide to extend the mandate of UNMIBH for an
additional period terminating on 21 June 1999. We shall
vote in favour of the draft resolution.

