Mr. Ja'afari (Syria) (spoke in Arabic): The sad
images we are seeing tug at the feelings of Syrians
everywhere in the world. The political situation is
increasingly dire and perilous, inflicting more pain on
Syrians, tormenting Syrians everywhere and further
entrenching their suffering.

The second paragraph of the presidential statement
adopted today (S/PRST/2015/10) states:

"The Security Council reaffirms its strong
commitment to the sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity of Syria and all
other States affected by the Syrian conflict, and to
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations."

Those noble words are being constantly violated today
by States that are members of the Security Council,
whose Ambassadors approved the statement.

Much of what has been said today is important.
We heard similar statements prior to the adoption of
resolution 1973 (2011), concerning Libya, which,
members will recall, served to open the door to the
dismemberment of Libya, causing it to become a failed
State and turning its destiny over to groups of terrorists
who spread terrorism throughout Africa, as well as
in Syria, Iraq, Lebanon and Egypt. In addition, Libya
has now become the central hub for gangs engaged in
human trafficking. Many have spoken of that fact with
deep feeling, and have been right in saying that this has
led to the loss of thousands of lives, including many
youths, in the waters of the Mediterranean.

The main problem we are encountering today has
to do with the fact that some people are exploiting, in an
evil way, the extremely painful humanitarian situation
in order to interfere in the internal affairs of others.
I shall explain that very clearly in the course of my
statement.

However, before proceeding with my statement,
I should like kindly to commend to all members the
second part of a report whose first part I mentioned
to the Council a few months ago, which contains
the names and photographs of thousands of foreign
terrorist fighters killed by the Syrian army inside
our country. I have part two here in my hand. It lists
thousands of names of terrorist from various parts of
the world, including all the Member States represented
in the Security Council, with the exception of Angola
and Venezuela. This is the "moderate armed Syrian
opposition".

Let us imagine that the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) or the Al-Nusra Front - or any other
terrorist organization mentioned in this report - were
to storm a city in a country that refers to terrorist
groups in Syria as the "moderate armed opposition".
Let us furthermore imagine that such a group began
to wreak havoc and kill people. How would those
countries react? How would they deal with such a
"moderate" situation? Would they extend bouquets
of flowers and shower them in perfume? Would they
provide them with humanitarian aid and medical
treatment? Above all, would they in the first place
accept calling them - American, British, French or
Turkish- "moderate armed opposition"? Would they?
Of course not.

What absurd irony it is that those same States
turn the world upside down whenever they discover
even a single terrorist on their own territories. They
also use military force in the territories of other States,
thousands of miles away, under the pretext of protecting
their national security against the threat of terrorism.
However, the deny us Syrians our legitimate right
and duty to fight the very same terrorism targeting
our people on our own land and within our own
borders - not in places thousands of miles away from
us. To make the situation even worse, the terrorists
whom we target on our national territory suddenly
become, in their eyes, innocent civilians exposed to
what they call "barrel bombs". Similarly, cross-border
foreign terrorism - condemned by resolution 2178
(2014) e miraculously becomes the result of the Syrian
crisis, rather than the cause.

Moreover, even today, a speaker described the
situation in Syria in an absurd manner and politically
immature way, stating that the Government and ISIL
were targeting civilians. In that regard, it seems
necessary for us to remind the colleague in question
that his country's air force bombed a centre for deaf-
mute children in the city of Raqqa, destroying it and
killing scores of innocent children there under the
pretext of fighting ISIL in an open-ended time frame.

Another speaker, a colleague of ours, said that the
political solution in Syria must not include President
Bashar Al-Assad. However, he then said that his State
supports the mission of Mr. de Mistura. That strange
paradox in itself shows a lack of understanding of
the content of the presidential statement just adopted
(S/PRST/2015/10) and a very primitive reading of the
current political situation in Syria, in addition to which
it violates the Charter of the United Nations, which
prohibits States from intervening in the affairs of other
States.
Can anybody explain to us the relationship between
the crisis in Syria and the presence of tens of thousands
of foreign extremists and terrorists on our land? These
terrorists have come through international borders
and airports with official entry visas issued in dozens
of States, including Australia, the United States of
America and the countries of Europe, to my country,
with the assistance of the intelligence services of those
countries. Some of those intelligence services are
quite known to us; some even belong to members of
the Security Council. Those facts have been confirmed
by the report of the Council's Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team (see S/2014/815, annex) on
the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters. That is,
then, what the Council is saying.

So, could the Council explain to us exactly what the
Syrian crisis has to do with the smuggling of all types
of weapons from Libya, Lebanon, Turkey and other of
Syria's neighbours in the very early stages of the crisis?
Is there a relationship between the crisis in Syria and the
religiousfatwas based on a state ofjahiliyyah that were
issued in Saudi Arabia, Qatar and other countries on
jihad, on fighting infidels in Syria and on the slaughter
of so-called minorities?

It is not possible to talk about ending the suffering
and pain of Syrians inside and outside Syria and about
ending the humanitarian crisis in the country while
remaining silent about the fact that some countries
continue to allow their territories to be used as a base
and a crossing point for terrorists heading into Syria.
It is not possible to end the humanitarian crisis while
some continue to use terrorism as an instrument
to implement their own political agendas. It is also
obvious that an end to this crisis will not be achieved
as long as some persist in refusing to believe that the
solution can only come through Syrian-Syrian national
dialogue led by the Syrians themselves without any
external interference. The sponsors of terrorist groups
caused the Geneva 11 conference to fail and sought to
make the first and second meetings in Moscow also fail,
and recently even caused Special Envoy de Mistura's
proposal to "freeze" the conflict in the city of Aleppo
to fail, whereas the Syrian Government had agreed to
it in the hopes that it would improve the humanitarian
situation there.

Last but not least, is it consistent for certain
countries to claim to be eager to improve the
humanitarian situation while they impose illegal
coercive measures on the Syrian people? Is that
eagerness to improve the situation also consistent with
the fact that some countries prefer to generously - very
generously - fund so-called moderate terrorism rather
than fund the humanitarian response plan, which has
only received 16 per cent of the funds pledged for 2015?

Some colleagues in this Chamber insist on claiming

that the Syrian Government is besieging some areas and
preventing the entry of humanitarian aid to civilians
there. Such claims are both naive and misleading. The
areas in question were previously safe and stable, with
no crises - humanitarian or non-humanitarian - at
all, until so-called moderate terrorist groups entered
those areas, using civilians as human shields, and
seized or prevented the delivery of humanitarian aid.
Those areas then became besieged from within rather
than from without - by those moderate terrorist
groups, including ISIL and the Al-Nusra Front. Faced
with that situation, it was necessary for the Syrian
Government, pursuant to its duty - like that of any
responsible Government - to protect its citizens, to
fight the terrorist groups and work to prevent them
from expanding into other secure civilian areas, thus
preventing them from creating new humanitarian crises
in those areas.

The best evidence of the validity of what we have
been reporting to the Council in that regard is what
happened recently in the Yarmouk camp, which some
here have accused the Syrian Government of besieging.
How could that camp be under siege by the Government
when it was ISIL that managed to break into it with
the help of the Al-Nusrah Front? If the camp was being
besieged by the Syrian Army or the Government, how
did the Al-Nusrah Front manage to enter it?

Among those who accuse the Syrian Government of
besieging the Yarmouk camp, is there anyone who can
answer that question? Is there anyone who can explain
to us why terrorist groups continue to get into and out
of those areas, including Yarmouk camp, areas that are
referred to as being under siege by the Government?
Is there anyone who can explain to us how it is that
civilians are being displaced from within those areas
that are said to be besieged and that those people find
their way out, seeking refuge in areas controlled by
the Government? If the Syrian Government is the one
that is shelling those people, why are those people then
seeking refuge in areas under the control of the Syrian
Government in order to flee the acts of terrorists?

I would like to explain the facts to those who are
trying to distort the situation in Yarmouk today and who
are trying to mislead people through their poisonous
attempts to demonize the Syrian Government. In the
Yarmouk camp before the crisis, that is, before 2011,
there were 500,000 people, 200,000 of whom were
Palestinian refugees from the Israeli aggression in
Palestinian lands, people who had been expelled from
their land; the remainder were Syrian citizens. In other
words, the number of Syrians in the Yarmouk camp was
larger than the number of Palestinian refugees in that
camp. The Syrian Government helped all the residents
to safely leave the camp after it was stormed by the
terrorists. The Government provided them with shelter
and basic living necessities.

The Government of Syria, and not the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs nor Ms. Amos,
secured a decent livelihood for the 500,000 inside the
Yarmouk camp. Today, there are only 1,000 people in
the camp, and not 18,000, as has been alleged. There are
no children or women among the residents there. There
are only terrorists and some male citizens, totalling
fewer than 1,000. They are the ones in the camp today,
at the very moment that I am speaking here before the
Security Council.

Syria has hosted millions of refugees from several
neighbouring countries. I shall not name those countries,
as this is not charity that we extend. We have never
used the plight of our brothers for financial or political
manipulation. We have not established refugee camps
along our borders - something that the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East have both acknowledged.
Unfortunately, however, it seems that some States have
not benefited from this noble Syrian experience. On the
contrary, since the beginning of the crisis, some have
sought to create a refugee and displaced persons crisis
in Syria in order to use it as a pretext to exert political
pressure and financial manipulation and in justifying
their interventionist agendas.

I have already mentioned that the storming of the
safe neighbourhoods by the armed terrorist groups
is what forced the residents in those areas to leave
their homes and become internally displaced persons
or refugees in camps that were prepared for them in
advance. I say in advance because we have evidence
of that fact, the latest of which comes from a recently
published book by a former French Ambassador,
entitled Tempete sur le Grand Moyen Orient. In it, the
author tells of visiting Iraqi Kurdistan in 2009, where
he saw many camps being built. When he asked why
the camps were being built, he was told they were for
the Syrian refugees who would come to Kurdistan later.
At the time, there was no crisis in Syria and no Arab
Spring. There was nothing at all in 2009.

Asylum-seeking and displacement happen only
in areas infiltrated by terrorists, as is the case in Idlib
and Aleppo and several other cities. The best way to
help Syrian refugees and displaced persons is to enable
them to return to their homeland by addressing the
reasons that led to their displacement or their becoming
refugees. To that end, there must be serious and full
implementation of resolutions 2170 (2014), 2178 (2014)
and 2199 (2015). It also requires genuine political will
on the part of some powerful Member States on the
Security Council to exert pressure on States such as
Saudi Arabia, Qatar, Turkey and others to stop funding,
arming, training and providing logistical support to
terrorists. Would it not be better to spend the funds
pledged to the response plan on helping Syrian refugees
and displaced persons return to their homeland?

Once again, I would like to reiterate that the
Syrian Government is committed to its duties and
responsibilities to alleviate the humanitarian burden of
its people. We are fully ready to take all the necessary
steps at the national level to achieve that. In that
regard, we will continue our cooperation with the
United Nations and to facilitate its tasks. However,
that cooperation is not a one-way street; the United
Nations is required to abide by the Organization's
guiding principles on the delivery of humanitarian
assistance, as set out in General Assembly resolution
46/182. It must also cooperate and coordinate with
the Syrian Government on the various humanitarian
issues, rather than resorting to suspicion, provocation
and criticism, which are fruitless. The United Nations
and other international organizations did not succeed
in delivering humanitarianmanitarian assistance
to around 4 million Syrians per month without the
cooperation and facilitation of the Syrian Government.

Finally, I heard no comment or criticism of the
relationship between Israel and the Al-Nusra Front in
the area of disengagement in the occupied Syria Golan.
I heard no comment or criticism of the relationship
between Turkey and the terrorists, in particular given
that, as mentioned by one of our colleagues, the head
of one of the biggest terrorist gangs in the Douma
suburb of Damascus is now carrying out a secret visit
to Turkey to meet with the intelligence services with a
view to perpetrating further terrorist acts in Damascus.
By the way, that man is responsible for the killing of
scores of innocent civilians in Damascus via rockets
and shelling.

I heard no comment or criticism 4 or even a
statement by the Security Council - two days ago
(see S/PV.7430) in connection with the Saudi arrogance
and insolence in threatening my country here in the
Council, including the intention on the part of that
country's rules to carry out in my country the same
absurdity that they carried out in Yemen. I heard no one
stopping that Ambassador and telling him that he had
transgressed the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations. 1 have not heard the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs speak about the barrel bombs
in Yemen. Why should Yemenis die as a result of
Saudi barrel bombs? Why would the Under-Secretary-
General remain silent on the killing of Yemenis? I am
not comparing, as barrel bombs are not in the military
terminology. But cruise missiles do exist, and they can
kill hundreds and even thousands of innocent civilians.

Last but not least, I would like to remind
representatives of the scandal of the leaking of an audio
recording that took place in the office of the Foreign
Minister of Turkey, who is now Head of the Government,
in the presence of the Chief of Intelligence of Turkey
and the Chief of Staff of the Turkish army, wherein they
discussed a plan to order operatives within the Syrian
Government to launch mortars against the tomb of
Suleyman Shah in order to create a pretext for a Turkish
attack on Syria. And what is the status of Turkey's - and
neighbouring countries' - implementation of the
criminalization of the facilitation of the movement of
foreign terrorist fighters into Syria? Is it possible that
Turkey enjoys the silence of the Council merely because
it is implementing NATO policies?

