Mr. Ettalhi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): I will speak briefly in view of the fact that this
has been a long day for the Council. Hence, I will not
answer the accusations made against my country by
one of the speakers, because we are accustomed to that
country levelling provocative accusations instead of
focusing on substantive issues. The aim of those
actions is well known to all and I will not promote it.

I do hope, however, that I misunderstood the
representative of the United States of America when he
said that the Charter does not protect the folly of
States. I would like to ask: Can the act of sending
humanitarian assistance to people who are subject to an
unjust siege be called folly? If that is folly, then what
can we call the defence of the inhuman and illegal
practices undertaken by the Israeli authorities against
the Palestinians? I do not wish to recall all those
practices here.

It is regrettable that the representative of the
United States of America has ignored the facts on the
ground, as if the Israelis had not closed all border
crossings and even prevented United Nations personnel
from delivering assistance. That representative is
ignoring the fact that, since calm was established in
June 2008, it has not been breached by the Palestinian
resistance in Gaza, which has simply reacted to
repeated breaches of that calm by others.

I requested the convening of this meeting because
of a specific incident. I felt that the Council should
meet to consider that situation. The Council responded
and I thank Council members for that. What has the
firing of missiles from here and there to do with that
situation? A ship was subjected to the threat of force by
gunboats and forced to go in a specific direction on the
high seas in international waters. Is that not a grave
action that deserves the attention of the Council? Has
the Council grown inured to such incidents or the way
they relate to an issue, even if the issue is directly
08-63224
relevant to developments in the occupied Palestinian
territory? Is speaking of such an issue prohibited and
considered folly? I will confine myself to those
remarks.

