The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Croatia in which he requests to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nobilo
(Croatia) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the further
report by the Secretary-General on the situation of human
rights in Croatia pursuant to Security Council resolution
1019 (1995), document S/1996/109.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the further
report of the Secretary-General of 14 February 1996
(S/ 1996/ 109) submitted pursuant to its resolution 1019
(1995) on Croatia.

"The Security Council recalls the statement of its
President of 8 January 1996 (S/PRST/1996/2). The
Council acknowledges that the incidence of human
rights violations has been greatly reduced. However,
it expresses concern that isolated incidents of killings
and other violations of human rights have been

reported. The Council also acknowledges the
significant progress made by the Croatian
Government in alleviating the humanitarian plight of
the mostly elderly Serb population who remain in
the former sectors in the Republic of Croatia. The
Council looks to the Croatian Government to ensure
the security and well-being of that population and to
ensure the provision of basic humanitarian
assistance, including access to medical facilities,
pension allowances and property. The Council also
looks to the Croatian Government to pursue
vigorously prosecutions against those suspected of
past violations of international humanitarian law and
human rights against the local Serb minority.

"The Security Council calls upon the Croatian
Government to give due consideration to granting
amnesty to local Serbs remaining in detention on
charges arising from their alleged participation in the
conflict.

"The Security Council reiterates that all States
must cooperate fully with the International Tribunal
and its organs established pursuant to its resolution
827 (1993). It notes that Croatian legislation
providing for full cooperation with the International
Tribunal is reported to be imminent. The Council
urges the Government of the Republic of Croatia to
uphold its obligations with respect to the
International Tribunal unreservedly and without
delay.

"The Security Council remains deeply
concerned at the situation of those refugees from the
Republic of Croatia who wish to return. It condemns
the fact that effective measures have not so far been
taken in that respect. It calls upon the Croatian
Government to ensure the expeditious processing of
all requests from refugees. It underlines that the
exercise by members of the local Serb population of
their rights, including their right to remain, leave or
return to their homes in safety and dignity, and
reclaim possession of their property, cannot be made
conditional upon an agreement on the normalization
of relations between the Republic of Croatia and the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. The Council
demands that the Croatian Government take
measures forthwith to ensure that those concerned
may fully exercise these rights. The Council also
calls upon the Croatian Government to rescind its
earlier decision to suspend articles of the
constitutional law affecting the rights of national

 

minorities, and to proceed with the establishment of a
provisional human rights court. It reminds the Croatian
Government once again that the promotion of strict
respect for the rights of persons belonging to the Serb
minority is relevant to the successful implementation
of the Basic Agreement of 12 November 1995 on the
Region of Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western
Sirmium (S/1995/951, annex).

"The Security Council welcomes and supports
the Croatian Govemment's agreement to the
establishment by the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe of a long-term mission with a
view to monitoring respect for human rights
throughout the Republic of Croatia. The Council pays
tribute to the valuable work carried out by UNCRO
and the European Community Monitoring Mission in
this field over the past year.

"The Security Council requests the Secretary-
General to keep the Council regularly informed and to
report in any case no later than 20 June 1996,
drawing inter alia on information available from
other relevant United Nations bodies, including the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
and the European Community Monitoring Mission,
on the progress of measures undertaken by the
Government of the Republic of Croatia in the light
of this statement.

"The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1996/8.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 4.30 pm.

