Mr. Mohammed (Ethiopia): First of all,
Mr. President, I wish to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council. Your
initiative, as President, to focus attention this month on
African issues is a most welcome sign of hope in the
Council in addressing the often-justified criticism of its
record in handling African issues. We wish you success in
your endeavours.

To come back to the issue before the Council, namely
the impact of AIDS on peace and security in Africa, much
has been said by representatives and participants in today's
Council meeting in stressing the fact that combating AIDS
is of vital importance and urgency to all nations, as this
scourge poses socio-economic as well as political and
security challenges with serious implications.

Since the time of its emergence, the spread of HIV
and AIDS has been dramatic, especially in Africa. Of the
estimated more than 34 million HIV-positive people
worldwide, about 21 million are from the African continent.
What this means is that the demographic, economic and
social effects, as well as the national security impact, of
AIDS on our countries in Africa are enormous. The
epidemic consumes our potential and forces us to divert our
meagre resources from our development endeavours to
AIDS-related activities.

AIDS affects every social group in our societies. It is
taking the lives of our citizens, be they old or young,
educated or uneducated, rich or poor. AIDS does not
discriminate, but the young are the most frequent victims of
this disease. As this sector of the population constitutes the
skilled manpower in any nation, the impact of the loss of
the young on economic and social development can
hardly be over-emphasized. The number of children
infected or orphaned by AIDS is ever increasing.

In sum, AIDS is a threat to present and future
generations. Here lies the seriousness of the challenges
and of the threat it poses to human security and survival,
if not met with an urgent and adequate response. The
AIDS epidemic undermines our efforts to build our
economy and frustrates our people's hopes and aspirations
to make a decent life. Above all, it deprives our children
of their parents, our men and women of their ability to
care for their families, and our countries of the enterprise
and ingenuity of a whole generation.

Although AIDS can be seen largely as a medical
problem, its consequences and impact on nations are
complex and alarmingly serious. Therefore, the
responsibility for finding solutions requires a
comprehensive approach at all levels. As underlined by
many speakers, in order to fight AIDS effectively,
partnership between Government agencies, non-
governmental organizations, the business community,
private citizens, HIV-infected people and AIDS activist
groups is essential. Communities and Governments should
work hand-in-hand to find a solution.

In Ethiopia, efforts to contain the spread of
HIV/AIDS through public awareness campaigns have
been made since the mid- 1980s. Accordingly, in 1987 a
National AIDS Control Programme was established within
the Ministry of Health. To complement the effort of the
Programme some civic groups undertook awareness-
creation activities on effects of AIDS. However, the
efforts could not produce the desired results. In
recognition of this reality the Government of Ethiopia
formulated an HIV/AIDS policy aimed at creating an
environment conducive to enhanced partnership among
the Government, the civil society and the international
community to fight the disease. Currently, in order to
mobilize all resources of the society, the Federal
Government is focusing on a comprehensive programme
and is in the process of establishing a national council to
monitor its implementation. To bring about the desired
results, these efforts require international support and
assistance. This is also true of all other African countries.

As the Secretary-General pointed out this morning,
the HIV/AIDS epidemic is not only an African problem.
It is global, and as such its prevention and eradication
require the commitment and action of all nations. It is our
earnest hope that this meeting of the Council, opened by

 

the Vice-President of the United States of America, with
the participation of heads of important institutions such as
the World Bank, the United Nations Development
Programme and the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) will pave the way for more effective
and coordinated international cooperation and action in the
fight against HIV/AIDS. We welcome the announcement by
Vice-President Gore that the United States will devote
additional resources to the fight against AIDS worldwide.

International support and assistance to Africa is
indispensable to its efforts to fight the HIV/AIDS scourge.
While Africa at present faces the heaviest burden of
HIV/AIDS of any part of the globe, the assistance and
support it has received thus far is very disappointing, as
rightly illustrated by Dr. Peter Piot, Executive Director of
UNAIDS.

The response by the international community to the
HIV/AIDS challenge in Africa should be concrete and
practical. While support to African countries to prevent the
spread of HIV/AIDS is important and urgent, ensuring
affordable access to effective treatment and addressing the
various socio-economic impacts of HIV/AIDS remain
urgent tasks to be undertaken.

