Mr. Menon (Singapore): Thank you, Mr. President,
for giving me the floor. This is an important issue. All
voices should be heard.

None of us at the General Assembly's fifty-ninth
session could have imagined what was in store when
we asked the Office of Internal Oversight Services
(OIOS) to conduct a management audit of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations. All we
wanted was to investigate allegations of fraud and
mismanagement, so that we could address problems in
the system.

More than a year later, the 45-page OIOS report
has become a source of much inspiration. It has
inspired the Secretariat to place eight of its staff on
leave without charge. The draft was also leaked,
inspiring journalists to write about the story and to
print the names of those staff. A senior United Nations
official was inspired to bypass the General Assembly,
to call a press conference and to speak about corruption
in the United Nations. Member States and one
grouping of States were then inspired to question that
official's motives and to ask about due process and
equal treatment. Two members of the United States
Congress were inspired to misinterpret the motives of
that grouping. Now, we find that both the General
Assembly and the Security Council are inspired to deal
with the issue and to define the limits of their
respective mandates.

I like to be positive. I am inspired to believe that,
despite the tensions, this episode will have been a good
one if it motivates us to look seriously at reform and
the sanctity of the reform process. This is not about
making particular countries happy; this is not about
providing a platform for people to grandstand and
show off. This is about making the United Nations
work for its entire membership. A well-run, legitimate
and credible United Nations assists in areas as diverse
as development, humanitarian relief and conflict
prevention. We should all be committed to making the
United Nations work, because it is our servant and
because our success or our failure will be collective.

In that spirit, let us look at the OIOS report. Its
conclusions are dire. Apparently, according to the
report, there is substantial evidence of abuse in
procurement for peacekeeping operations, leading to
financial losses and significant inaccuracies in
planning assumptions. Numbers as high as $300
million overall have been cited by the OIOS. The scale
of this, assuming it is true, demands a quick and
thorough investigation. We need to get to the bottom of
this. But at the same time, the investigations require
probity and unquestioned fairness. To have legitimacy,
they cannot be seen as a selective witch-hunt or as a
means for personal profiling. Unfortunately, we have
fallen short here.
I state outright that a Singapore national is among
the eight staff members placed on administrative leave.
That said, has due process been followed?

First, the staff members were placed on
administrative leave in mid-January without being
given copies of the draft report on which their leave
was ostensibly based. How does one defend oneself
without knowing the charges?

Secondly, the draft OIOS report was leaked,
leading to the publication of the names of the staff
members. To make matters worse, a senior Secretariat
official called a press conference thereafter and spoke
of apparent fraud and corruption in the United Nations.
This must, at the very least, prejudge the
investigations. The curious decision to speak to the
press also bypassed the very body, the General
Assembly, which called for the report in the first place.
Member States were only provided copies of the OIOS
report at their request, more than a week later. This
would be comical if it were not so tragic. It also
spurred a broader debate on the relationship between
the Secretariat and the General Assembly.

Thirdly, there are questions about equal
treatment. The OIOS report dealt primarily with
alleged wrongdoing in procurement activities in
peacekeeping operations. I understand that those
operations are under the management of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and
that authority had also been delegated to senior DPKO
staff to conduct procurement activities in the field up
to a predetermined level. Yet the highest ranking
official placed on administrative leave is the Assistant
Secretary-General for Management. It seems
incongruous to us that his counterpart from DPKO, in
whom delegated authority was vested, was not treated
in the same way. Even a member of the OIOS team
which drafted the report had recently said during a
lunchtime briefing, "Any delegation of authority comes
with accountability".

Perhaps it is our zeal to reform that has led us to
forget the process on occasion. But we need to
remember that the process is important if we want our
actions to be legitimate and enduring. And while I
certainly support scrutiny into the Department of
Management and DPKO based on the OIOS report, this
is not the only report in town. The Volcker Commission
has also come up with a voluminous report on a larger
topic. Perhaps some of our reform zeal should be
apportioned to looking into how billions of dollars seem
to have been mismanaged in the oil-for-food programme.
This is an issue I believe the Security Council is aware
of. As H.L. Mencken once said, "Injustice is relatively
easy to bear; what stings is justice". Perhaps we need
to apply the stings more evenly.

Moving back to the OIOS report, there comes a
point where we have to cease crying over spilt milk.
Some peculiar decisions have led to a fair amount of
damage being done both to individuals and to the
relationship between the Secretariat and Member
States. To move forward, I can only ask that the
investigations be carried out thoroughly and as quickly
as possible. If the evidence points to charges, then
make them, so that the staff members in question can
defend themselves. If they are unable to do so, then
find them guilty of wrongdoing and deal with them
accordingly. Conversely, if they are exonerated, they
should be reinstated and given a full apology.

This should be done before the current Secretary-
General steps down. I say that because investigations
in the United Nations have an odd habit of dragging on
to become another person's problem. So let us
approach the issue of reform and its various facets with
even-handedness and equal fervour. As Martin Luther
King, Jr., once wrote, "Injustice anywhere is a threat to
justice everywhere".

