Mr. Eliasson: I thank the members of the
Security Council for their support of the political
process and the joint approach of the United Nations
and African Union to find peace in Darfur.

Mr. Kumalo asked me a direct question about
how the Member States could assist those efforts, so
allow me to list a few steps that we would welcome
very warmly. I must also say that these aspects were
also covered by Mr. Guehenno. But as some have
stated here today, there is a clear interdependence
between the peacekeeping and political tracks.

My first appeal to Council members is that they
do everything they can to influence regional stability in
that dangerous area. Chad/Sudan relations need to be
normalized so that we can diminish the very negative
consequences that could follow, in Darfur, from that
relationship and the tragic events of last week.

Secondly, more than ever there is a need to
urgently demand a cessation of hostilities by the
parties. I have just received, this minute, reports from
the field about attacks on villages by Sudanese army
entities and militia groups. Those reports are not yet
detailed or confirmed, but it seems that hundreds of
people may have been killed in those attacks, and they
continue at this moment. So that is a dramatic
reminder, at this meeting, that there is a clear need to
urgently demand of the parties an immediate cessation
of hostilities.

Also, whatever members can do to influence the
quick deployment of troops - and Jean-Marie
Guehenno will expand upon this - will be of direct
significance for the work that Salim Salim and I are
carrying out, since we must instil a sense of security in
the people of Darfur. If they do not see increased
security and improved conditions, they will lose their
hope and their belief in the political process and in the
peacekeeping operation.

More specifically in my realm of responsibility,
we welcome the fact that we are now dealing with five
movements instead of the much greater earlier number.
That is a step forward. The Sudan People's Liberation
Movement (SPLM) is also doing its part to help in that
process. But we also need the encouragement of all
Member States and for them to send messages, through
the various channels that they are able to utilize, that
the movements must choose the political track.

We are now seeing an enormously dangerous
development, which is tragically evident today. We must
step back from the escalation of hostilities; the situation
is dangerous enough. I see growing frustration, anger
and disillusionment in the camps. One can imagine a
13-year-old boy who came to the camps four years ago;
he is now 17, he sees his father unemployed and his
mother running the risk of being raped when she goes to
gather firewood. There is also the fact that different
villages are now taken over by people who do not own
those villages. But if we have an escalation now, the
entire humanitarian operation will be in danger. The
escalation must be stopped, or we will be faced with
another huge tragedy in Darfur and Sudan as a whole.
The mass killings are behind us - and still must be
addressed via other channels - but we have new
problems that could erupt into huge tragedies.

Members should do everything they can to send
that message to all concerned parties - the
Government of Sudan, the movements - but also to
the regional actors. Several speakers highlighted that;
we cannot have peace in Darfur without the
cooperation of the neighbouring countries in the
region. We had some very productive meetings with
Libya, Chad, Eritrea and Egypt. We had three very
productive meetings, but now, as members understand,
with the recent events in Chad, that regional
cooperation is going to face difficulties. We need their
cooperation. The borders there were drawn in 1895 in
Berlin, and between Chad and Sudan they certainly do
not reflect tribal and ethnic realities. We pay a price for
that today, or rather the people of Darfur and of Chad
pay a price for that today.

My last point is on an economic issue. It does not
only concern humanitarian assistance, that is, the
extremely great need to continue the humanitarian
assistance. I would also state that Member States,
particularly the donor community but also perhaps all
of us, should think about the need to start planning now
for recovery efforts. There is a long road between
humanitarian assistance and development programmes.
We need to become more active in post-conflict
recovery efforts.

I was at a village less than a month ago, in an
area patrolled by a movement, and I strayed into the
village after the talks with the movement leaders. It
was a very depressing sight; it was even worse than the
situation in the camps. The market had nothing but
onions, as I recall, and the school had 12 or 14 books
for about 300 children. The children had gray faces and
women had to walk for two or three hours to get water,
as the well was dry. If a woman was pregnant and was
to give birth to a child, she would have to ride a mule
for four to five days to a village called Qutum.

Those are the realities, and we need to understand
that Darfur is a neglected part of Sudan. There is a
great need for the economic dimensions to also be
taken into account. That could help us in the
negotiations, since we would then have a ray of hope to
give to the people of Darfur, if we were coming from
negotiations that would lead to a fair distribution of the
wealth of Sudan - which is still there.

Those are my comments, and I would also like to
thank the Council members on behalf of my friend and
colleague, Salim Ahmed Salim, for the solid support
they give us in the work we try to conduct under very
difficult circumstances. We are grateful for their
understanding of the complicated nature of our work.

