Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): I thank Ambassador
Mahiga for his comprehensive briefing, and I reiterate
today my delegation's firm support for his difficult
work. I also welcome the presence of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Kenya and thank him for his
statement, which, as rightly observed by Ambassador
Susan Rice, had a very strong impact on all of us. I
also welcome the presence of the Permanent
Representative of Somalia among us this morning.

Less than one year before the conclusion of the
transitional period in Somalia, we must make an
objective assessment of where we stand and where we
are headed. It is undeniable that some progress has
been made, the most important elements of which are
the preservation of the Transitional Federal
Government (TFG) and the resumption of
parliamentary activity. At the same time, it is clear that
the challenges remain daunting. The heinous attacks in
Kampala and the recent violence perpetrated by
Al-Shabaab in Mogadishu - in defiance even of

10-5364]
Ramadan - provide compelling evidence of this. It is
also disturbing that the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) has not yet been able to move
from the initial phase of its original plan to stabilize
the country.

In order to overcome the current deadly
stagnation, there is a need to more firmly combine
enhanced political efforts and increased military power.

Regarding the first aspect, it is very positive that
the TFG has been able to reach agreements on
cooperation with Ahlu Sunnah Wal J ama'a and regional
administrations. Yet, for the past several months, the
transitional federal institutions have been mired in
disputes within and among themselves. This has
deviated attention from the priorities for peace and
stability in Somalia, such as expanding political
outreach to further broaden the TFG's support base and
completing outstanding transitional tasks. The unity,
resolve and public spirit of the transitional federal
institutions are indispensable elements of any
successful strategy for the stabilization of Somalia. An
inclusive and genuine process of consultations, as
envisaged for the drafting of the constitution, can also
serve as an excellent opportunity to re-energize the
political process.

With regard to security, AMISOM. is to be truly
commended. It has been able to ensure the survival of
the transitional federal institutions in Mogadishu under
relentless attack, secure strategic infrastructure and
facilitate the provision of humanitarian assistance. This
would not have been possible without the sacrifices
made by Uganda and Burundi. We also welcome the
decision by the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) to deploy 2,000 troops and
enable AMISOM. to reach its authorized strength, and
the current planning of the African Union (AU) on new
phases for the strengthening of AMISOM.

It is clear, however, that the Mission needs more
help from us. The Security Council, the United Nations
and the international community as a whole should
complement the subregional and regional efforts.

We appreciate the progress towards a light
footprint of the United Nations in Mogadishu and
elsewhere in Somalia, and on the provision of the
support package by the United Nations Support Office
for AMISOM. Brazil looks forward to the Secretary-
General's proposals on an integrated United Nations
presence in the country as a means to enhance the
effectiveness and coherence of United Nations
activities on the ground.

One major concern is the lack of comprehensive,
coherent, predictable and sustainable financial support
to AMISOM. and the TFG security forces. It is
worrying that, one and a half years after the Brussels
Conference, the pledges made there are still not fully
disbursed. In addition, the usual multiple earmarks and
caveats with respect to the funds disbursed undermine
the effectiveness of AMISOM. and the TFG security
forces in a very challenging environment. We urge
donors to consider lifting them without delay.

Financial predictability is of particular
importance with regard to the remuneration of soldiers.
If a steady flow of funding for salaries is not ensured,
there is a real danger that efforts and expenses
undertaken by donors in training troops may be
squandered through their desertion to others who pay
better and more regularly. This must be avoided.
Raising the standards of support for AMISOM. to those
of United Nations peacekeeping missions is also
important to secure additional troops, especially when
we consider the current IGAD/AU plan for increasing
the Mission's authorized strength.

We should certainly also do more on the human
dimension of the conflict in Somalia. We welcome the
discussions among the United Nations, the AU and
AMISOM. on strengthening the protection of civilians.
The proposal to document the most serious violations
of human rights and humanitarian laws is worthy of
support, especially in a situation where Al-Shabaab is
recruiting children as young as nine years old and
imposing cruel and degrading punishments such as
beheadings, stonings and amputations.

Here as well, financing is a serious problem, as
we know. Significant gaps remain in humanitarian
funding for Somalia, which further worsens the
situation of a people already deeply affected by years
of violence and lack of effective government. The fact
that key activities such as nutrition, health care and
water are less than 40 per cent funded is rather
troubling. Brazil is trying to do its part. We recently
made a voluntary contribution to the World Food
Programme (WFP), to be used in Somalia. We hope
that WFP can soon be in a position to safely resume its
activities in southern central Somalia, beyond
Mogadishu.
Next year will not only mark the end of the
transitional period in Somalia; it will also be the
twentieth anniversary of a conflict that has already
created a generation of Somalis who do not really
know what peace is. It is time for decisive action to put
an end to this situation.

