The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Plurinational State of Bolivia.
Bolivia thanks the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Jean Arnault, for his briefing
and for his good work as Head of the United Nations
Mission in Colombia. We would also like to welcome
the Permanent Representative of Colombia to the
United Nations, Ambassador Ms. Mejia Velez, to the
Security Council.

On 27 June, the Government of Colombia and
the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-
Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP) reached another
historic milestone in their peace process. The members
of the FARC-EP completed the process of surrendering
their individual weapons, thereby demonstrating that
the peace process in Colombia is irreversible. In that
regard, Bolivia welcomes the road map approved on
29 May and commends both parties on their attitude
to the process - calculating each step, establishing
committees, analysing each stage, meeting to address
challenges and reaching consensus on the way forward.

The process met with success because, in spite
of their differences, the Government and the FARC-
EP are engaged in ongoing talks to achieve their
shared goal of peace. It is vital that they maintain and
strengthen their attitude towards dialogue and common
understanding as they enter the most difficult stage of
the process. The road map stipulates that the members
of the FARC-EP must surrender all of their weapons by
20 June. That step has been achieved. For its part, the
Government promised to guarantee the physical, legal
and socioeconomic safety of the former members of the
FARC-EP, as stipulated in the Peace Agreement. We
trust that that commitment will be gradually honoured.

This phase poses a genuine challenge. The murders

of community leaders, human rights defenders and
relatives of people with links to the guerrillas or
dissidents; people who spread a message of hate
instead of reconciliation and the illegal economy, inter
alia, are all challenges that illustrate the complexity
of the reintegration phase. Peace should be the
cord that binds Colombians, and the support of the
international community will play a fundamental role
in that endeavour.

Bolivia believes that the parties to the conflict made
the right decision when they requested that the Security
Council establish a mission to verify the reintegration
of ex-combatants. Once again, the Government and the
FARC-EP have put their trust in the Security Council
and the United Nations. We believe that the members
of the Council will continue to provide firm and
unanimous support to the peace process in Colombia.
I would also like to highlight the remarks made by the
Post-Conflict Minister of Colombia, Mr. Rafael Pardo,
who, during his recent visit to New York, mentioned
plans to deliver on one of the main objectives of the
Peace Agreement, which is to raise the standard of
living in rural areas and to bridge the existing gap
between rural and urban areas.

We believe that measures to formalize land
ownership in rural areas and improve social security for
farmers and other residents of rural areas are important
in the medium term. We hope that the international
community and financial institutions can provide the
necessary cooperation.

Finally, as expressed by my country's Minister for
Foreign Affairs in a letter dated 28 June, we reaffirm
the resolute support of the Bolivian Government for
peacebuilding efforts in Colombia as part of fostering
a culture of peace and dialogue to ensure the peaceful
coexistence of its people. In that regard, in addition to
the leadership and the political capital demonstrated
by the Government and the leaders of the FARC-EP,
we must underscore the third angle of this virtuous
triangle, which is the support provided to the victims
throughout the peace process. Leadership, boldness
and the spirit of reconciliation make this process an
example for the world to follow.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Colombia.

