Mr. Tidjani (Cameroon) (spoke in French): At
the outset, my delegation would like to associate itself
with the comments made by the President in conveying
best wishes to Ambassador Mamady Traore. We also
wish to say how pleasant it has been to work with
Ambassador Traore. We have been enlightened by his
thoughts, both professionally and on a more personal
level, and we hope to be able to continue to benefit
from them. I hope that in his future endeavours he will
have experiences as edifying as those he experienced in
the Security Council.

I would also like to thank the Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, Mr. Kenzo Oshima, for his
excellent presentation concerning the progress that has
been made and the challenges that remain six months
after the holding of a debate in the Council on this
matter in December 2002.

My delegation expresses its great appreciation for
the Organization's tireless efforts to encourage the
parties to armed conflicts to respect their obligations
and responsibilities with regard to protecting civilians.
During the Council's last meeting on this issue, on 10
December 2002, Secretary-General Kofi Annan very
pertinently pointed out that civilians make up the
majority of casualties in armed conflicts. They are
subjected to horrifying violence and violations of
human rights, and they are refused the assistance that
must be extended in times of war. Strengthening the
protection of civilians is essential for peace and
security throughout the world. During that meeting, we
proposed taking concrete measures and adopting a
more systematic approach with respect to this problem.

Yesterday's challenges continue to be today's
challenges: all kinds of violence against women and
children, who are usually the first victims,
humanitarian crises, the exploitation of conflicts for
terrorist and commercial purposes - I do not want to
go through the full extent of the tragedy that civilians
experience. Mr. Kenzo Oshima gave us a very
expressive picture of all this, particularly in Central
and West Africa.

The international community has not failed to
react - far from it. The road map for the protection of
civilians supported by Council resolutions 1265 (1999)
and 1296 (2000) has now given States a framework of
concrete measures to be implemented for the protection
of civilians in times of conflict. We should also
welcome the Council's adoption on 31 October 2000 of
resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security, which constitutes an integral part of the
relevant provisions.

The delegation of Cameroon therefore expresses
its genuine satisfaction with Mr. Oshima's excellent
briefing. It has the merit of placing the Council's
current debate in its real context. He has described the
efforts of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) to implement the aide-
memoire adopted by the Council on 15 March 2002
(S/PRST/2002/6, annex), which is without doubt one of
the major instruments for understanding issues related
to protecting civilians in armed conflict, since it
provides a broad framework for understanding and
analysing such issues. His efforts have been notable in
the holding of regional workshops open to civil society,
non-governmental organizations and State entities to
raise awareness of the complexity and interdependence
of the problems created by the vulnerability of civilians
in armed conflicts and to create a real political will. We
believe that those regional workshops are an effective
means for identifying the specific difficulties
encountered on the ground in protecting civilians and
for seeing how we can establish links and coordinate
the actions of the various organs working on the
ground for the protection of civilians. In that context, I
share the observations of Ambassador Duclos on the
need for a more rational approach by each actor with
respect to the protection of civilians and the
maintenance of peace.

Those regional workshops must encourage the
various parties to a conflict to face up to their
responsibilities. They must also make clear to them the
consequences of acts they commit in violation of
human rights and of other norms of humanitarian law.
Impunity can in no way be permitted.

The progress made also extends to the appropriate
measures taken, for example, to separate armed
elements from civilians in refugee camps, to facilitate
humanitarian personnel's access in safe conditions to
populations in distress, to assist in the restoration of
the rule of law, and to set up a comprehensive
programme of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration. Enormous progress has been made, but
much remains to be done. The Council's efforts must
therefore be supported by the genuine collective will of
the international community and increased cooperation
among all actors.

The Secretary-General announced in his third
report (S/2002/1300) that OCHA will devote itself,
with other agencies of the United Nations system, to
exploring further the ideas underlying the road map for
the protection of civilians. My delegation wishes to
know what stage that project is at. What major
characteristics have been identified? How can it assist
States in their actions to help civilian populations?

I cannot fail to conclude without paying tribute to
Mr. Oshima for all his work at the head of OCHA. I am
convinced that this reflection on the progress made, to
which he decisively contributed, and the suggestions he
made at the end of this mandate will be made use of in
a positive manner by the Security Council.

