Mr. Elnour (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I will begin
by congratulating you personally, Mr. Minister, as
well as the delegation of your brotherly country, the
Republic of Poland, for holding this meeting on such
an important topic during Poland's presidency of the
Security Council this month. We wish also to thank the
Secretary-General, Mr. Guterres; the Director-General
of the International Committee of the Red Cross; and
Ms. Hanaa Edwar, Secretary-General of the Iraqi
Al-Amal Association, for their very pertinent briefings.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2018/462) and its recommendations.

My delegation endorses the statement delivered
earlier by the representative of the Bolivarian Republic
ofVenezuela on behalfofthe Movement ofNon-Aligned
Countries. I would also like to make some points in my
national capacity.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
by the Secretary-General in his condemnation of attacks
against civilians in armed conflicts all over the world.
We reaffirm that the protection of civilians is, first and
foremost, the responsibility of the countries affected by
conflict before it is a mandate and a duty entrusted to
peacekeeping missions. That is why in discharging their
mandates, peacekeeping operations and international
non-governmental organizations active in that area
must respect the sovereignty of the host country, its
laws and its traditions while respecting the principles
of impartiality, integrity and international law in order
to safeguard mutual confidence on an ongoing basis.

After taking action alongside the international
community to settle the conflict in western Sudan,
we came away with some lessons. That conflict came
to a positive end when we saw the establishment of
peace, and I would like to share the lessons we learned
from the experience. First, we want to emphasize
the importance of cooperating with all parties in the
human rights domain - that is to say, international,
regional and civil-society organizations as well as
United Nations entities. Secondly, we must make
collective and unilateral announcements to ensure that
ceasefires are not interrupted. Thirdly, we must teach
our armed forces the principles of international human
law and the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
Fourthly, the various public bodies, the United Nations
and the international community at large should
exchange information so as to have regular institutional
communication. Fifthly, I stress the importance of
establishing a shared political and legal framework
such as the 2011 Doha Document for Peace in Darfur,
We must abide by such agreements and invite those
who oppose them to join us.

There is a panacea for dealing with violations
against civilians - a peaceful settlement through
inclusive, unfettered negotiations. That is what we
used, as the Government of the Sudan, and have
done for years. Furthermore, as part of our regional
effort to protect civilians and promote peace in South
Sudan, we have renewed an agreement to provide
humanitarian access to those affected by war in South
Sudan, using four road and river crossing points with
the cooperation of the World Food Programme and the
Government of South Sudan. Last year, we provided
cereals from our own strategic stockpiles to the World
Food Programme and also allowed the Programme to
purchase humanitarian aid items locally in order to
alleviate the impact of the famine in South Sudan. I
would also like to recall that the memorandum of
understanding extending the agreement on the delivery
of international humanitarian assistance to South
Sudan through the Sudan was signed in July 2014. We
renewed that agreement and we have done so each year
to strengthen our efforts to protect civilians affected
by the conflict in South Sudan. We are also hosting
more than 1 million refugees from South Sudan across
our territory, providing them with various services,
such as health care, education and housing. Many of
the refugees we host are from Yemen, Syria and other
African countries.
In conclusion, protecting civilians, promoting
humanitarian action, consolidating peace, making peace
and reconciliation sustainable and fostering sustainable
development are at the forefront of our priorities in the
Sudan, with the cooperation of the United Nations and
the international community. We hope to deliver on
those priorities through that cooperation.

