Mr. Ayewah (Nigeria): Mr. President, permit me to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council for the month of November. You can count
on the support of the Nigerian delegation.

The humanitarian situation in the former Yugoslavia,
particularly the plight of innocent civilians in areas of
conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina and recently in
Croatia, remains a serious concern to the international
community, and rightly so. From what we have read, seen
and been told, the worst atrocities committed against
innocent and unarmed civilians in this theatre of war
constitute a gross violation of international humanitarian
law.

It is for this reason that the Security Council decided
to establish an International Criminal Tribunal for the
former Yugoslavia. Unfortunately, this Tribunal has
experienced operational difficulties. This is
understandable, given the fact that it is the first of such
tribunals established by the United Nations. We note,
however, that the Tribunal has now handed down its first
indictment, and we call on the parties concerned, as well
as the States of the region, to extend the necessary
cooperation to it, so as to enable it fully to discharge its
responsibilities.

Concerning the present draft resolution, it is a matter
of regret that the Bosnian Serb authorities, as well as the
Government of Croatia, have not heeded our call to them
in several resolutions and presidential statements to
strictly comply with their provisions and to respect the
rights of the persons in their areas of control, irrespective
of their ethnic, cultural or religious affiliations. In this
regard, the events in Zepa and Srebrenica, and recently in
Banja Luka and Sanski Most, represent only the latest in
a long series of condemnable acts by the Bosnian Serbs.

With respect to the Croatian authorities, their
treatment of ethnic Serbs living in Croatia, particularly in

 

former sectors North, West and South, is contrary to their
repeated claim of belief in a multireligious and multi-ethnic
society. To date, conditions do not exist that would
demonstrate to the outside world and convince the minority
Serbs that their rights would be protected by the rulership
in Zagreb. Some of the legislation that has been enacted
does not facilitate the voluntary return of the many Serb
refugees who have fled or are being forced to flee their
homes.

It is against this backdrop that this draft resolution is
a necessary reminder to all the parties to the conflict in
former Yugoslavia of their obligations to cooperate with the
United Nations, the International Committee of the Red
Cross and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees in investigating and
determining reports of serious violations of international
humanitarian law. It is also appropriate to restate the
obligations of all States, and in particular those in the
region of the former Yugoslavia, to comply fully with the
provisions of Security Council resolution 827 (1993) by
cooperating fully with the International Tribunal.

As a general observation, let me state that my
delegation rejects any attempt to strike a balance or
compare the atrocities of one side to that of the other. All
acts of violations of international humanitarian law stand
condemned and should be judged individually. No act of
violence by one party justifies a similar act committed by
the other. Furthermore, the passion of war, the fear of
defeat or loss of territory cannot justify the violation of the
basic rights and freedoms of non-combatants.

Finally, let me appeal to all the parties to give peace
a chance and enhance the success of the ongoing peace
talks by refraining from any action that could destabilize
the fragile truce on the ground.

On the basis of the foregoing, my delegation will vote
in favour of the draft resolution.

