Mr. Makayat-Safouesse (Congo) (spoke in French): I, too, would like, on behalf of my delegation,
to thank the Presidents of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda and of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, as well as the two
Prosecutors, for their briefings. My country reaffirms
its commitment to the administration of justice in
societies in conflict and emerging from conflict.

By ensuring justice for the many victims of grave
crimes committed in the territory of Rwanda and in the
former Yugoslavia, those Tribunals, in addition to
fighting impunity, are helping to consolidate peace and
foster national reconstruction and the rule of law. We
once again reaffirm our fullest support for them -
support that they need if they are to carry out their
work diligently and complete their mandates by 2010,
as recommended by the Security Council.

An assessment of the activities of the Tribunals
shows that the pace of their work has increased during
the period under consideration. A significant number of
cases have been dealt with by both the Trial and the
Appeals Chambers, thanks to the hard work that has
made it possible to substantially reduce the backlog.
That is the case in particular with regard to cooperation
with national jurisdictions, which has allowed for the
reabsorption of a considerable number of cases. Other
measures taken up by the Tribunals have allowed for
the streamlining of the Chambers. These include
internal reforms aimed at enhancing procedural
effectiveness in accordance with the recommendations
of the working groups, the better use of
computerization and modifications to the rules of
procedure.

We would like to stress one particular advance:
the Rwanda Tribunal's informational programme. We
are especially interested in that programme because,
above and beyond its purely informative character, it
will enable the Tribunal to play a role that includes the
fight against impunity, training for students, inter-
ethnic reconciliation and, to some extent, help to
prevent the recurrence of similar tragedies.

We welcome the progress made, but it is clear
from the reports before us that that positive
development needs to be strengthened further as the
Tribunals approach the final stages of their work. A
number of constraints that are having a negative effect
on the achievement of the completion strategies must
be lifted. First of all, States must cooperate in
accordance with their international obligations, both in
terms of arresting persons suspected of grave crimes
and of pursuing fugitives.

In this regard, we note with regret that, despite
the repeated appeals of the international community,
those that are responsible for genocide in the former
Yugoslavia are still at large. Failure to bring to justice
those responsible for the gravest of crimes will mean
that the many victims in the former Yugoslavia and in
Rwanda will never have the chance to have their
suffering acknowledged or their cases heard. We must
help the two Tribunals that we have set up to complete
their mandates.

We must also ensure that the two Tribunals have
sufficient resources, both human and financial, so that
they can carry out their activities on a regular basis
until they have completed their work.

Finally, my delegation would like to know
whether, given the unknown factors to which the
President of the Yugoslavia Tribunal referred and the
various problems described by the Prosecutor of the
Rwanda Tribunal - in particular concerning the
transfer of accused and the search for fugitives - it
would be possible to extend the terms of the judges or
to have new elections in order to continue the work of
the Tribunals in the future, since in this crucial phase
developments over the coming months will be critical
for the timely implementation of the mandates that we
entrusted to the Tribunals.

We would like once again to pay tribute to the
Tribunals for the important work that they have carried
out in advancing the cause of criminal justice. The
work of the Tribunals will always be a source of
inspiration for the United Nations and the rest of
international community.

