The President (China) (spoke in Chinese): Are
there any other members of the Council who wish to
make statements? If there is none, I shall now make a
statement in my national capacity.

China highly appreciates the important role that
the African Union has played over recent years. In
mediating the conflicts in Africa by deploying
peacekeeping operations in the hot spots in Africa, the
African Union has made important contributions to
easing regional tensions and resolving regional
conflicts.

At present, the African Union faces a lot of
difficulties in its peacekeeping operations in Darfur
and Somalia and needs the assistance of the
international community. The United Nations should
continue to consolidate its partnership with the African
Union in the field of peacekeeping operations and carry
out long-term cooperation with the African Union by
assisting it in the fields of technology, financing,
logistics and training. China supports efforts to further

strengthen communication and cooperation between
the AU and the Security Council and looks forward to
receiving feasible proposals from the Secretary-
General in that regard.

On the question of the Sudan, China appreciates
the initiative of the Sudanese Government to invite the
Security Council mission, and its full and
unconditional acceptance of the hybrid plan. There are
still many difficulties and challenges as regards the
next phase of the deployment of peacekeeping
operations in Darfur. Full implementation of the plan
requires cooperation and coordination between the
international community and the Sudan. The United
Nations and the African Union should start by
addressing the many priority issues that exist - such
as those relating to the mandate, the financing of
troops, equipment and logistics.

At the moment, the Security Council is holding
consultations on a draft resolution regarding the
mandate of the hybrid operation. The draft resolution
should focus on the mandate and on financing as the
priorities of the hybrid operation, so as to reflect the
international community's consensus on this issue and
the cooperation that exists among the United Nations,
the African Union and the Government of the Sudan, as
well as the current positive momentum. The draft
resolution should contribute to maintaining that
momentum while avoiding irrelevant issues that would
produce new controversies and delay the process of
deployment.

A comprehensive and lasting solution to the
question of Darfur not only calls for steadily advancing
the deployment of peacekeeping operations; it also
calls for accelerating the political process and attaching
due importance to development and reconstruction in
Darfur in order to eradicate the root causes of the
conflict. At the moment, the political process is lagging
behind the deployment of peacekeeping operations.
The Security Council should take practical steps to
move the process along. Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon has repeatedly called upon the international
community to focus on long-term development in
Darfur in order to eradicate the root causes of the
crisis. That shows that the international community is
developing a deeper understanding of the question of
Darfur, and it deserves the attention of all parties.
China is concerned about developments in Cote
d'Ivoire. During the Security Council's mission to Cote
d'Ivoire last month, all parties reiterated their
commitment to the peace process. China would like to
express its appreciation in that regard. Of course, the
peace process in cote d'Ivoire is still fraught with
challenges. The top priority at the moment is to
consolidate consensus among all parties, improve
mutual confidence and implement commitments and
the Ouagadougou agreement, with a view to
establishing conditions for the general election.

In the current circumstances, the United Nations
should continue to strengthen its coordination and
cooperation with the African Union and the Economic
Community of West African States in support of their
good offices at the regional level.

The continued presence of the United Nations
Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI) is important for
the maintenance of stability on the ground. China
supports extending UNOCI's mandate as appropriate
and is ready to join all other parties in their efforts to
fully restore peace and stability in cote d'Ivoire at an
early date.

China congratulates the Democratic Republic of
the Congo on the important progress made in its peace
process. The top priority for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo now is to safeguard its stability and
security and to achieve economic development as soon
as possible. With regard to the difficulties and
challenges in the political and security fields, China is
confident that all parties in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo will put the overall interest of the country
above everything else and settle their differences
through dialogue and consultation.

The security situation in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo remains fragile. We
hope that, while speeding security sector reform, the
Government will also pay attention to economic
development, creating more jobs and improving the
welfare of the people, in order that former combatants
can truly be disarmed and reintegrated.

Since some of the armed groups in the eastern
part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo operate
across the border, we hope that concerned countries of
the region will act within the framework of the Pact on
Peace, Security and Development in the Great Lakes
Region, strengthening communication, building mutual
trust and jointly participating in seeking a solution to
the issue through dialogue.
The peace process in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo will depend upon ongoing attention from the
international community. China will join the rest of the
international community in continuing to provide all
possible support for the peace process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Cote
d'Ivoire.

