Mr. Bouchaara (Morocco) (spoke in French):
I would first like to thank Mr. Farid Zarif, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Kosovo,
for his briefing on recent developments in Kosovo. I
welcome the presence here and participation of the
Prime Minister of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Daeie, and thank
Mr. Hashim Thaci.

Progress has been made on the situation in Kosovo
in various areas, which, while they may be technical,
are politically highly symbolic. In fact, the joint
agreement on the integrated management of crossing
points, the highway construction project and the
appointment of liaison officers for the European Union
delegation offices are measures that will have a direct
effect on Kosovo's communities and their daily life.
This progress has been achieved under the auspices
of the High Representative for Foreign and Security
Policy of the European Union, whose commitment and
perseverance enabled high-level talks to be held between
the parties. In that context, we encourage the parties to
continue to negotiate in a spirit of compromise so as
to reach a satisfactory result as quickly as possible. It
is predictable and understandable that implementation
of these measures may meet with resistance and create
friction, but it is crucial that the leaders on both sides
stay the course and move forward by soothing fears
and, if necessary, adjusting the arrangements agreed
on. The momentum of reconciliation of the various
interests and building trust must be maintained and
strengthened.

That the progress that has been achieved in this
way unquestionably marks an important stage in the
negotiation process between the parties should in
no way mask the persisting tensions on the ground,
particularly in northern Kosovo, where incidents
affecting minorities continue to occur. Where these
include, in particular, incidents of disrespect for
cultural and religious sites, which are still a frequent
source of tension, it is essential that a spirit of religious
tolerance be maintained and peaceful existence between
communities promoted. In that regard, we commend
the role of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo in restoring and protecting minority
religious sites.

Regarding the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo, that body continues to investigate
issues connected with organized crime, war crimes and
corruption. In that context, the allegations of trafficking
in human organs are still extremely worrying.

This region has endured many conflicts that have
claimed many victims, who continue to suffer the
consequences of war and fratricidal conflict. Today it
is up to the parties to continue to strive to resolve their
differences and to work towards what we hope will
be a prosperous future for the generations to come. In
that regard, we commend the commitment and efforts
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo and the Kosovo Force, which continue to
play a very important role between the parties with
the goal of moving forward on the issues that divide
them and, above all, to work towards a political solution
that is comprehensive, inclusive and in accord with the
provisions of resolution 1244 (1999).

