Mr. Wittig (Germany): I would like to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, Jan Kubis, for his briefing. My delegation
appreciates the courage and the energy with which he
has taken up his new position, and we would like to
assure him of our support - for him, for his office and
for the many able and dedicated men and women at the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and the valuable work of the United
Nations in that country.

We would also like to welcome Ambassador
Tanin and to thank him and his delegation for their
close cooperation in the preparation of the draft
UNAMA mandate that the Council is scheduled to
adopt this Thursday.

My Government aligns itself with the European
Union statement to be delivered later on.

Today, I would like to touch upon three points,
namely, follow-up to the international Afghanistan
Conference in Bonn, the review process undertaken by
the Secretary-General at the Security Council's request
in last year's UNAMA mandate and the upcoming
UNAMA mandate renewal.

I would first like to refer to the follow-up to the
Bonn Conference, in line with the strategic consensus
reached between the international community and the
Afghan Government to affirm our mutual commitments
with regard to the transition process and the
transformation in the following decade - until
2024 - all of which now requires further spelling out
in concrete terms. The upcoming summit and
12-26920
conferences, especially those in Chicago and Tokyo,
will be opportunities in that regard.

While the international community will be
extending additional, much-needed tangible and
predictable support for the Afghan Government's
development efforts, we note the equally high
expectations on the part of the international community
as to the continued progress on the Afghan side,
including in areas such as governance, democracy and
human rights.

In view of the transition calendar, Germany
wishes to reiterate its position that fiscal sustainability
must increasingly be at the centre of our joint efforts in
Afghanistan. Germany shares the view of the
Secretary-General that growth-oriented policies must
be a high priority. At the same time, the Afghan
Government's leadership will be essential in designing
and sequencing its national priority programmes.

Secondly, I would like to thank the Secretary-
General for the comprehensive review of UNAMA's
mandated activities and of the United Nations support
undertaken in response to the request by the Council in
last year's UNAMA mandate resolution. Germany's
particular appreciation goes to the review team
comprising representatives from the United Nations
Department of Political Affairs, the United Nations
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
the United Nations Development Programme and the
United Nations Department of Safety and Security, as
well as to all those in and outside the United Nations
system who have contributed to the review.

The review was well received because it took
concerns about Afghan leadership and ownership very
seriously and because, at the same time, it carefully
analysed questions with regard to the United Nations
own coherence. The review concluded that the
emphasis of international support must be increasingly
on enabling and strengthening the role of Afghan
institutions in performing their mandated services for
the Afghan people.

Thirdly, UNAMA's renewed mandate was
informed by important developments over the past
year, namely, the beginning of transition; important
progress on regional cooperation at the Istanbul
Conference; the strategic decision at the Bonn
Conference to enter into firm, mutual commitments
and to chart out an internationally supported decade of

transformation; increased momentum towards a
political process and the decision of the Council to
split the sanctions regime established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999).

All of these developments have far-reaching
ramifications that the Council will reflect in the
renewed UNAMA mandate. I am very pleased to report
the continued, very high degree of consensus in the
Council regarding the UNAMA mandate, which
exemplifies the continued importance that the Council
attaches to the situation in Afghanistan.

The other important component informing the
mandate renewal is obviously the outcome of the
comprehensive review contained in the observations
section of the report (S/2012/l33) of the Secretary-
General of 5 March. Germany fully supports the
recommendations made therein. While consultations
are ongoing, let me inform participants about the
Council's clear consensus that the United Nations good
offices in support of the Afghan-led and Afghan-owned
processes should remain the essence of the United
Nations political mandate. That includes, increasingly,
the important field of regional cooperation. In that
context, Germany shares the view of the Secretary-
General that the United Nations has a lot to contribute
to the inclusiveness of the political process and in
support of Afghan institutions. That also holds true for
the continued improvements in the electoral process, to
which the Afghan Government is firmly committed.

Germany also shares the opinion of the Secretary-
General that the protection, promotion and fulfilment
of the human rights of all Afghans should become
increasingly central to UNAMA's mandate. The draft
mandate includes important provisions in that regard,
with a view of the role of women and girls in political
processes and the implication of those processes for
human rights, a subject on which the Council puts
special emphasis this year.

The new mandate represents a true milestone in
the relationship between the United Nations and
Afghanistan. It has been customized according to both
the imperatives of the transition process and the
comparative advantages of the United Nations. At its
core lies the strong consensus between the Government
of Afghanistan and the United Nations about the
invaluable contribution of the United Nations to a
secure, strong and democratic future for Afghanistan.
To conclude, Germany would like to emphasize
particularly the constructive spirit of all Council
members in the mandate negotiations and to once more
thank its Afghan partners for their close cooperation
and friendship.

