Mr. Kim (Korea): At the outset, let me express
my appreciation for the work of the Security Council
and its Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict to end violations against children in armed
conflicts. My delegation would also like to commend
the Secretary-General's Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict for her dedication to the
alleviation and ultimate resolution of the plight of
children in armed conflict.

A statement by the President of the Security
Council adopted in February this year
(S/PRST/2008/6) underlined the importance of the full,
safe and unhindered access of humanitarian personnel
and goods and the delivery of humanitarian assistance
to all children affected by armed conflict. It also
expressed concern about the widespread and systematic
use of rape and other forms of sexual Violence against
children - in particular girls - during situations of
armed conflict.

The prevalence of sexual violence in armed
conflict has become horrible. The Secretary-General's
report highlighted the fact that girls, and sometimes
boys, have been targeted with various forms of sexual
and gender-based violence, including rape, during
armed conflicts. Alarmingly, close to 60 per cent of the
Victims of sexual Violence are children in various areas
of armed conflict, and sexual Violence - in particular
rape - has been deliberately used for political and
military purposes in some conflict areas.

Unless the international community -
specifically, the Security Council, which is the only
body capable of taking forceful measures - responds
with strong determination to end such Violations, the
situation cannot be improved. In that regard, the
adoption of Security Council resolution 1820 (2008) on
women and peace and security, and sexual Violence in
situations of armed conflict, is a very positive
development.

The scope of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism of resolution 1612 (2005) should be
expanded to include sexual violence as a trigger for
listing a party in the Secretary-General's annexes. That
is why many delegations welcomed the adoption of last
February's presidential statement, which demonstrated
the Security Council's readiness to review the relevant
provisions of resolution 1612 (2005). We anticipate
that a result will appear soon in the form of a new
resolution.

Ending impunity is a critical element in
addressing any kind of Violations. Impunity for parties
to an armed conflict, as well as for individual
perpetrators, should be ended. In order to do so, the
Security Council must refer systematic and persistent
Violators of children to the International Criminal
Court, while paying full attention to the development
of national justice mechanisms.

Effective implementation of resolution 1612
(2005) is also part of the critical work being done by
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict
and of the consideration of the Security Council itself.
The role of the Working Group could be further
strengthened if it addressed concrete measures, such as
the recommendation of targeted measures to the
Security Council, in addition to monitoring their
implementation.

Important new actors are emerging in the area of
addressing the issue of children in armed conflict.
Peacekeeping operations and political missions -
particularly their child protection advisers - are
included on the list. My delegation believes that their
role is very important not only for the full
implementation of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism, but also for the effective prevention of
Violations and for more comprehensive protection of
children.

In that regard, the Security Council and the
Secretary-General should send a strong message to the
head of each mission to provide solid leadership.
Above all, each national Government should take
ultimate responsibility for protecting its own children.

In that connection, technical and financial assistance
should be provided for capacity-building, and
Governments should cooperate fully with the Security
Council in preparing and implementing action plans,
including by establishing an effective and transparent
justice mechanism.

Finally, my delegation would like to discuss the
development approach, as emphasized in the concept
paper. We fully agree that the international community
needs a broader strategy for the protection of children
from the perspective of both prevention and
development. If we are to effectively address the
complex issue of children in armed conflicts, ending
Violations, carrying out recovery and reintegration
processes and protecting children over the long term
require the full cooperation of all relevant bodies,
including the Security Council; the Office of the
Secretary-General; peacekeeping operations; political
missions; the Peacebuilding Commission; humanitarian
agencies such as UNICEF, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and non-
governmental organizations; and development actors.
That is especially true at the field level; community-
based programmes and the participation and
contributions of non-governmental organizations are
critical.

Today's open discussion on children and armed
conflict should make a substantive contribution to the
deliberations of the Security Council, as did the most
recent open debate on that subject. The Republic of
Korea looks forward to a new draft resolution that will
move that most critical process forward.

