Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): Allow me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
would also like to thank you for scheduling today's
debate on the situation in Afghanistan and the United
Nations Assistance Mission in that country. This is of
immediate and abiding interest for India, both as a
close neighbour and a civilizational partner of
Afghanistan.

We are grateful for the latest report of the
Secretary-General (S/2010/ 127) and are appreciative of
the briefing by Under-Secretary-General Alain Le Roy.
We are also thankful to Ambassador Zahir Tanin,
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, for his
statement. We welcome the appointment of the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Steffan de Mistura. He has taken over at a particularly
challenging time for the United Nations in
Afghanistan, with major concerns, even regarding the
security of its personnel, requiring to be addressed.

The international approach to Afghanistan in
recent months, in particular the London Conference in
January, has focused on security, reintegration,
development, governance and regional and
international cooperation. The forthcoming political
processes - the Loya Jirga, the Kabul conference and
the parliamentary elections scheduled later this year -
will be important milestones in this context. If these
are processes to be enduring, Afghan ownership should
go hand in hand with Afghan leadership. With respect
to both the military and the civilian efforts, while
working complementarily and within indicative
timelines, the international community must reaffirm
its long-term commitment to stability, peace and
development in Afghanistan.

Without tangible and sustained improvements on
the security front, it would be too much to expect the
Afghan Government to exercise greater responsibility.
Indeed, improved security could create an enabling
environment for accelerated progress on development
and governance issues. This is also critical in
expanding the footprint of the Afghan Government and
ensuring the greater ownership of these processes by
the Afghan people.

The latest report of the Secretary-General
highlights the fact that the deterioration in the security
situation has continued, with 2009 being the most
volatile year since the fall of Taliban in 2001. Despite
the reinforced presence of the International Security
Assistance Force, asymmetric warfare and complex
terrorist attacks have increased. There has been a spate
of such recent attacks all over Afghanistan, including
in urban centres such as Kabul and Kandahar, that have
killed innocent Afghans and foreigners, including
Indian experts and workers involved in our
development partnership. Such acts of terrorism will
not deter us, but will only strengthen our resolve to
fulfil our pledges towards the reconstruction of
Afghanistan and to cement our traditional friendship
with the Afghan people.

In the interest of stabilizing the security situation
in Afghanistan, it is essential to ensure that support,
sustenance and sanctuaries for terrorist organizations
be ended forthwith. The security and stabilization of
Afghanistan will remain a distant goal unless we are
able to isolate and root out the syndicate of terrorism,
which includes elements of Al-Qaida, the Taliban,
Lashkar-e-Tayyiba and other terrorist and extremist
groups operating from within and outside
Afghanistan's borders.

Therefore, in addition to the strengthening of the
International Security Assistance Force, it is critical
that the Afghan National Security Forces be enlarged
and developed in a professional manner and at a much
faster pace. They should be provided with appropriate
resources, combat equipment, enablers and training
before considering any plan for a phased, province-by-
province transition to Afghan-led security. We
welcome the expansion of the capacities of the Afghan
National Security Forces and also appreciate the efforts
being made by third countries to strengthen the
capacities ofthose Forces.

Against the backdrop of today's worrying
security situation, the issue of reintegration should be
tackled with prudence, the benefit of hindsight,
foresight and caution. We believe that any integration
process in Afghanistan should be Afghan-led and
include only those who abjure violence, give up armed
struggle and terrorism, and are willing to abide by the
values of democracy, pluralism, human rights and
women's rights, as enshrined in the Afghan
Constitution. The process must be inclusive and
transparent.
A sustainable strategy for the stabilization of
Afghanistan must focus on development and
governance issues. In order to strengthen governance
and institution-building, priority should be accorded to
building adequate capacity to deliver on development
objectives.

Presently, the overall civilian approach remains
fragmented. The Secretary-General's report strikingly
points out that, even after the last eight years of
engagement in Afghanistan, 80 per cent of
international community assistance still bypasses the
Afghan Government and is not closely aligned with
Government priorities. This trend must be reversed and
our efforts must concentrate on the strengthening of
Afghan Government institutions, particularly through
the Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board which
has endorsed new initiatives in agriculture, private
sector development, technical assistance and capacity-
building.

India's efforts towards the stabilization of
Afghanistan have focused on socio-economic
development. The principal objective of India's
development partnership, covering the entire country
and straddling all sectors of development, is to build
indigenous Afghan capacities and institutions. This will
enable an effective State system to improve the
delivery of goods and services to the Afghan people
and contribute to stability.
36

Our assistance, now over $1.3 billion, is spread
over a large number of provinces in Afghanistan. In
addition to several small and medium development
projects, India has built the Zaranj-Delaram road and
the power transmission line from Pul-e-Khumri to
Kabul. We are also constructing Afghanistan's new
Parliament building, a symbol of our common
commitment to pluralism and democracy. At the recent
London Conference, we announced new initiatives in
the agriculture sector and in institutional capacity-
building.

Perseverance and tenacity are critical to
effectively confronting the challenges facing
Afghanistan and to ushering peace and security into the
region. There are no quick-fix solutions and it is
imperative that the international community remain
engaged in Afghanistan in a sustained manner,
providing assistance on the security side and
development and nation-building support for as long as
it takes. We support the good work of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan.

We need to be clear that a stable Afghanistan is in
the interests not only of all of us in the neighbourhood,
but for the international community as a whole.

