Mr. Gambari: I wish first of all to thank you,
Madam President, for having convened this very
productive open meeting and for the skilful manner in
which you have conducted the proceedings. I wish also
to seize this opportunity to thank my brother, Minister
Malungo, for his excellent statement, and I wish to
express through him our appreciation to the
Government of Angola for sending him to participate
in this meeting. This is evidence of the importance that
the Government of Angola attaches to the proceedings
of this meeting.

May I also thank all members of the Council and
all of the other delegations for their important
contributions to these discussions. I wish to assure all
present that the Secretariat will intensify its efforts to
work with the Government and people of Angola in the
search for durable peace and sustainable development.

The message we have heard from the discussions
in this open meeting today is that the Secretary-
General, the Secretariat, United Nations agencies and
the international community must redouble their
efforts, first, to tighten the sanctions against UNITA;
secondly, to complement those of the Government of
Angola to respond more fully to the needs of the large
percentage of Angolans who are in distress and require
urgent humanitarian assistance; and thirdly, to support
civil society, the Government and all those who
promote the political settlement of the conflict in
Angola. The goal which we all share is to end all
fighting everywhere in Angola sooner rather than later,
and to ensure the success of the work of the United
Nations Office in Angola under the leadership of the
new head of the Office, who is expected shortly to take
up his appointment in Luanda.

Meanwhile, may I, with your permission, Madam
President, add a few words to what I said earlier with
respect to the humanitarian situation and related
matters in Angola, and the contributions being made
specifically by some United Nations agencies.

First, in response to a request from the
Government of Angola, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
decided in May 2000 to expand UNHCR's existing
operation in Angola, which provides assistance to
13,000 refugees, mainly from the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, to include protection and humanitarian
assistance to some 300,000 internally displaced persons
and returnees, particularly in three provinces of Uige,
Zaire and Luanda.

Because UNHCR is operational it can translate
legal principles which protect the rights of internally
displaced persons into concrete actions in these three
provinces. UNHCR will also assist in meeting urgently
needed humanitarian requirements such as health care,
shelter, water, education, clothing and so on, while
working to promote a degree of self-sufficiency among
the beneficiary population.

However, the financial requirements for UNHCR
for the rest of the year 2000 for Angola amount to $8.4
million, and approximately $12 million for the year
2001. Therefore, UNHCR has made an appeal to
donors, as part of the recently launched United Nations
Consolidated Appeal, for $154 million to address the
needs of an estimated 2.7 million people. We urge the
donor community to respond positively and very
generously.

May I also say a word about security. In the last
few weeks UNITA has made additional threats to
humanitarian workers, and I believe this needs to be
strongly condemned, not only by the Secretariat but by
the Security Council.

Furthermore, UNDP and OCHA are working with
the Government on a strategy to alleviate the situation
of internally displaced persons. This needs the support
of the international community. There is need, for
example, to continue to support the Angolan people
with food aid until March-April 2001. Support is
needed to provide seeds and tools for the next
agricultural campaign. Support for the non-
governmental organizations is also needed in the very
important work of demining. As several delegations
pointed out, this is a very critical issue. Also, the
United Nations system is supporting the Government
of Angola in its strategy for poverty reduction and
alleviation.
I also am delighted to report that the Secretary-
General has directed me to go on missions to Zambia
and Namibia next week and the following week for
consultations with the authorities there on the negative
consequences of the spread of the war in Angola to
these neighbouring countries. I hope that at some point
I may be in a position to report back on my findings to
the Council and to recommend ways in which we can
respond to some of the issues.

Finally, I wish to convey, on behalf of the
Secretary-General and on my own behalf,
congratulations to Ambassador Fowler for the excellent
work which he has done not only as the Permanent
Representative of Canada but in particular for the truly
path-breaking contribution he has made to the search
for peace in Angola through his extraordinary
leadership of the sanctions Committee on Angola. We
wish him success in his new assignment in Rome, and
he can be sure that some of us will look him up as soon
as possible - not all at one time, but one after the
other. Mr. Fowler can leave here fully convinced that
he has made a difference to the work not only of the
Security Council but of the United Nations as a whole.
His valuable work on the issue of sanctions against
UNITA has greatly helped to restore the credibility of
the Security Council and of the United Nations as a
whole.

I must confess that I personally have benefited
from the good work he has done, because it has helped
in many ways in my own efforts to restore the trust and
confidence between the United Nations and the
Government of Angola. I believe there are also other
beneficiaries of his work - the people of Sierra Leone,
who will shortly be relieved to note that illegal
diamonds will now be difficult to export for sale to
finance the war activities of the Revolutionary United
Front (RUF). The Democratic Republic of the Congo
will also be a beneficiary of the work of Ambassador
Fowler in terms of monitoring and control of illegal
exploitation of mineral and other natural resources in
that country.

We all owe you a debt of gratitude, Mr. Fowler.
Good luck in your new assignment.

