Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): Sierra
Leone has come a long way since the bleak prospects of
a year ago, and the thanks for that are due first and
foremost, I think, to the forces of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) who defended Freetown
and prevented its fall to the rebels. So it is important that
we begin today by giving credit to the ECOMOG forces.
But the draft resolution we are about to pass marks a key
transition from the ECOMOG stage. It marks the
international community's readiness through the United
Nations to take over ECOMOG's role and together with
that the full responsibility for the provision of security in
Freetown and at the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) camp, as well as for many other
aspects of the Lome peace process.

Sierra Leone may be a small country, but this is an
enormous challenge for the United Nations. It is in effect
no less of a test of the United Nations commitment to
conflict resolution in Africa than what we are
contemplating for the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

 

It is a test not just of our willingness to intervene - the
deployment of the first phase of the United Nations Mission
in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) has shown that - but of the
United Nations actual ability to deliver effective
peacekeeping of lasting impact and value.
As the six new UNAMSIL battalions deploy and move
out into the north and east of the country, we will be asking
them to ensure the disarmament of hard-core rebels in their
own heartlands, and we will all need to stay in close touch
with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO),
as the United Kingdom will, about UNAMSIL'S capacity
logistically and militarily to do this.

UNAMSIL is not a Chapter VII peace enforcement
operation, but we all recognized in formulating the mandate
for the force, as set out in the draft resolution before us,
that this task will require a robust and serious stance
against possible threats. UNAMSIL must act with the
determination and the flexibility to see this through. The
UNAMSIL Commander will need the full support of the
Secretariat here in New York, and all UNAMSIL troop
contributors must ensure that their troops are of a high
standard, ready and able to meet the challenges that they
face. In this respect we were very concerned at the DPKO
report of the recent incident affecting certain UNAMSIL
contingents.

I want to turn attention now also to the role of the
wider international community. Without our continued
determination and support, even an expanded UNAMSIL
force cannot keep Sierra Leone on its current positive path.
Sierra Leone will need sustained outside assistance for
some time. The United Kingdom is committed to continue
to be a significant player. Since March 1998 we have
contributed nearly $65 million to Sierra Leone. We will
press ahead with the substantial programmes of assistance
which we have already established, in particular in the
security sector, rebuilding and retraining the Sierra Leone
armed forces.

But we and other current donors cannot shoulder the
burden either indefinitely or alone. Wider and more
substantive international support is needed. The first urgent
requirement is funding for the DDR programme. The vast
effort and expenditure involved in mounting this 11,000-
strong United Nations force will be wasted if the DDR
programme which they there to help implement is not fully
funded. A further $23 million is needed now.

The international community also has a task in
ensuring that the parties, and Mr. Foday Sankoh in
particular, fulfil their commitments. We must press for
this relentlessly. The leaders of the West African region
have a particular responsibility and influence. If properly
implemented, the Lome Agreement will enable the
Government of Sierra Leone to establish control over the
whole of the country and its own resources for the first
time in eight years. This is important not just for Sierra
Leone and its people, but for the stability and prosperity
of the whole subregion.

In substantively expanding UNAMSIL and widening
its mandate, the Security Council today is acting again to
help give the people of Sierra Leone the means to achieve
the peace they so desperately need. We must assure that
over the next crucial months we will give the United
Nations force and the Government of Sierra Leone all the
support and assistance they need in this to sustain the
progress made in 1999.

