Mr. Hasan (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): Mr. President, we
are pleased and honoured to see you presiding over this
open meeting of the Security Council. We wish to extend
our thanks to you and to the delegation of Namibia for
taking the initiative of convening this meeting while
Namibia is presiding over the Council. We hope that the
Views to be expressed by States during the course of this
open meeting will lead to breaking down the wall of silence
surrounding this important subject.

We also wish to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Mr. Olara Otunnu, and the United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF) and its Executive Director, Ms. Bellamy, for
their strenuous efforts made for the protection of children.

The subject of protecting children in armed conflict is
at the heart of the purpose for which the United Nations
was created, that is, saving coming generations from the
scourge of war and affirming belief in man's basic human
rights and in the individual's dignity and destiny. The
international community has adopted much legislation
designed to safeguard the child's protection and well-being,
particularly in cases of armed conflict, such as the 1989
Convention on the Rights of the Child, the 1949 Geneva
Conventions and their 1977 protocols. Regrettably, that
legislation is not being implemented.

We believe serious progress in making children a zone
of peace stems from a more comprehensive objective:
making the entire world a zone of peace and prosperity
through harnessing the efforts of the international
community to redress the root causes of conflicts. These
are particularly poverty and deteriorating socio-economic
situations, which are worsening due to the international
financial crisis that in a global economy widens the gap
between the States of the North and the South. The North
alone possesses authority, power, money and advanced
technology, leaving States of the South with the poverty,
illiteracy, hunger, unemployment and intolerance that are
fertile ground for violence and conflict.

Debate on this topic in the Security Council must
not in any way detract from the competence and views of
the organ in which all United Nations Member States are
represented: the General Assembly. Given its structure
and the present balance of power, the Security Council is
unable to offer creative solutions. Since the issuance of its
presidential statement on this subject on 29 June 1998, the
Council's conduct only gives rise to false hopes. The
Security Council itself constitutes part of the problem.
The proverb says: First, one cannot give what one does
not have. For instance, under United States pressure, the
Council insists on the continued enforcement of
comprehensive sanctions against Iraq. These sanctions
have caused the deaths of 500,000 Iraqi children under
five years of age, as indicated in the recent UNICEF
report. Sanctions have also been the cause of death of
more than a million Iraqi citizens from the other groups,
particularly women and the elderly. Yet, the crime
persists.

This situation makes sanctions effectively equal to
threats emanating from armed conflict. Is this the
objective of sanctions, as provided for in the Charter?
Definitely not.

Prior to the imposition of sanctions on Iraq,
according to statistics of the United Nations and its
specialized agencies some of which are contained in
Ambassador Amorim's report submitted to the Security
Council on 30 March 1999 - Iraq succeeded in
achieving a level of socio-economic development that
surpassed the average development indicators of countries
in the region and in developing countries in general. The
gross domestic product was 10.4 per cent between the
1974 and 1980. Before the imposition of sanctions, Iraq
enjoyed the highest per capita nutritional food basket in
the region. Ninety-seven per cent of our urban population
and 78 per cent of our rural population had gained full
access to medical care. The Iraqi Government made huge
investments in the fields of education and illiteracy

 

 

eradication, and it successfully applied the principle of
compulsory primary education.

Then comprehensive sanctions were imposed on Iraq
on 6 August 1990. By all standards, these are a form of
collective punishment imposed on the people of Iraq. These
sanctions moved Iraq from a state of relative prosperity into
full poverty, as described by Ambassador Amorim in his
aforementioned report. The matter is inextricably linked
with children, as they constitute the prime victims of these
sanctions. Infant mortality rates have risen to be among the
highest of the world. Serious malnutrition hits more than a
quarter of the children of Iraq. Today, only 41 per cent of
the Iraqi population has potable water. Eighty-three per cent
of the Iraqi schools require major repairs.

The UNICEF report published on 12 August 1999,
which contains the results of field surveys on child
mortality rates in Iraq conducted between February and
May 1999, reveals the disastrous effects of sanctions.

The field surveys covering 24,000 families have
demonstrated that the mortality rates of children below the
age of five have doubled from 56 per 1,000 live births from
1984 to 1989 to 131 per 1,000 live births from 1994 to
1999. Infant mortality rates have also risen from 47 to 108
deaths per 1,000 live births for the same periods. The
maternal mortality rate rose to 294 deaths per 100,000 live
births.

The UNICEF report states that the deaths of more than
half a million Iraqi children below the age of five for the
period 1991 to 1998 could have been avoided had it not
been for the imposition of comprehensive sanctions against
Iraq.

The above figures leave no doubt that a crime of
genocide is being perpetrated against Iraqi children through
the imposition of sanctions, which coincides with an
equally horrible crime: the use by the United States and the
United Kingdom of depleted uranium during their
aggression against Iraq in 1991. In the first year of their
use, these radioactive shells led to the deaths of 50,000
Iraqi children exposed to deadly doses of radiation
unleashed by the use of those weapons. The children of
Iraq continue to suffer from leukaemia and other kinds of
cancer. The newborn are maimed as a result of the use of
that weapon. This radioactive agent is 5.5 billion years
old - the age of the Earth.

In addition, the children of Iraq are suffering because
of the no-flight zones illegally imposed on Iraq since 1991.
The imposition of such zones and the more than 250,000
sorties flown by British and American planes over Iraqi
cities and villages strike terror into the hearts of Iraqi
children. They are sometimes targeted by the American
smart bombs. Is there any graver Violation of international
humanitarian law? How is it possible for the Security
Council to ignore the crimes being perpetrated by the
United States and Great Britain in the Council's name and
in excess of its mandate?

Coincidentally, the Security Council is considering
the question of child protection just a few days after the
issuance of the UNICEF report that highlights the role of
the Council. The Security Council and the United Nations
as a whole must resolve this grave situation and assume
responsibility in a sound manner in conformity with the
Charter.

The United States has greatly offended the United
Nations by using it as a tool for the genocide it is
perpetrating against Iraq and its children. Is there a
greater affront to the United Nations than that hurled by
James Rubin, Spokesman for the State Department, when
he declared at the Democratic Party convention held in
August 1996 that the United Nations could only do what
the United States let it do, or by James Baker, the former
Secretary of State, who said in a meeting held on 21 June
1995 that United States participation in the United
Nations was not driven by any starry-eyed commitments
to multilateralism, but rather by a sober recognition of the
usefulness of the United Nations as a vehicle for
American leadership.

Let us recall that the American Administration takes
pride in murdering the children of Iraq in the name of the
Security Council.

In a television interview aired on CBS in 1996, the
American Secretary of State was asked about reports that
half a million Iraqi children had died, more than the
number of people who died at Hiroshima. Was that too
high a price to pay? Mrs. Albright said that she thought
it was a very hard choice, but that it was worth it.

Those who believe that lifting sanctions is an
unrealistic objective have to face the unassailable fact that
the continuation of sanctions can only mean the
continuation of the crime of genocide and that any
cosmetic changes in the sanctions regime will not halt the
deterioration of the humanitarian situation in Iraq. There
is no practical, legal or ethical alternative to the lifting of
sanctions, none whatsoever.

 

