Mr. Chaudhry (Pakistan): Let me join others in
felicitating the Danish presidency on its excellent
handling of the Council's work during this month. We
also congratulate Ambassador Wang Guangya for the
successful Chinese presidency in April.

We welcome this important debate on post-
conflict peacebuilding and appreciate the personal
participation of Foreign Minister Mr. Moller. The
Presidency's discussion paper has been useful in
guiding the debate. We also appreciate the
contributions made by the Deputy Secretary-General,
Ms. Frechette, the President of the World Bank,
Mr. Wolfensohn, and other speakers.

The subject of peacebuilding has received
increasing attention since the High-level Panel's report
(A/59/565) last December. The Secretary-General later
offered his reflections in his report entitled "In larger
freedom" (A/59/2005) and in a subsequent non-paper.
The proposal for a Peacebuilding Commission is now
under active consideration in the General Assembly.
The proposal has particular relevance and appeal for
countries emerging from conflict, especially in Africa.

I would like to make a few points. First, the
increased focus on peacebuilding during the last couple
of years has its roots in the now well-recognized
interlinkage between peace and development. Indeed,
sustainable peace can be built only on a foundation of
sustainable development.

Secondly, peacebuilding is complex. It embraces
many facets, including the security, political,
economic, social and humanitarian facets. It often
involves assistance for institutional capacity-building,
economic recovery, good governance, reconciliation,
rule of law, human rights and the organization of
elections, among other things. It is clear that no single
United Nations organ has an exclusive mandate over
those issues. Successful peacebuilding strategies have
to be based on a comprehensive and integrated
approach, greater systemwide coherence, increased
inter-organ coordination and the engagement of all
relevant actors.

Thirdly, though peacebuilding is associated
mainly with post-conflict situations, in which one of
the main concerns is to help prevent a relapse into
conflict, it is equally important to prevent conflicts in
the first place. Apart from preventive diplomacy and
the pacific settlement of disputes, development should
be promoted as the best means to prevent conflict.
Assistance in economic, humanitarian or other fields
may be provided at the request of a country to avoid
slipping towards conflict.

Fourthly, at the policy level, a primary challenge is
to recognize and respect the respective competencies of
the General Assembly, the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council with regard to
peacebuilding. Besides, the integration of peacebuilding
activities in the field and at the country level logically
necessitates coordination between the relevant organs and
other actors at Headquarters. We believe that
complementarity in the work of the three principal organs
should be used to promote synergy in peacebuilding
efforts. Interaction between the Security Council and the
ad hoc advisory groups of the Economic and Social
Council on countries emerging from conflict is a good
basis upon which to build. Another challenge is to
preserve and promote national ownership of the
peacebuilding programmes and activities and to ensure
that the priorities of the country concerned have
precedence.

Fifthly, it is widely acknowledged that we need an
institutional mechanism dedicated to peacebuilding. It
may not be merely a gap-filling mechanism, but should
promote and coordinate a comprehensive approach. It
should be an intergovernmental body with the flexibility
to bring together all relevant actors in specific situations,
including United Nations agencies and the international
financial institutions, as appropriate.

Sixthly, experience from various specific situations,
Guinea-Bissau for example, shows that the major
challenge remains the provision of adequate, timely and
sustained assistance for peacebuilding activities. The
special circumstances of countries emerging from conflict
should be kept in mind while recommending policy
changes and negotiating aid packages. The international
financial institutions should show some operational
flexibility. Debt write-offs should be considered in the
first instance. While the recipient countries are expected
to meet some minimum requirements, there should be no
shifting of the goalposts by the donors. The proposal for a
standing fund for peacebuilding has merit.

All of us are trying to find answers to many of
those and other questions in the Secretary-General's
proposal for the establishment of a Peacebuilding
Commission. We hope that the various ideas advanced
today by Member States will feed into the rich array of
proposals already made on peacebuilding in general,
and the Peacebuilding Commission in particular.

I should like to recall that, in 2003, Pakistan first
proposed the idea of ad hoc composite committees,
comprised of members drawn from the three principal
organs of the United Nations, to effectively address
complex crises in all their phases, including post-
conflict peacebuilding. In May 2004, during Pakistan's
presidency of the Security Council, we circulated a
non-paper on ad hoc composite committees during a
public meeting on complex crises and the United
Nations response.

During the discussions in the General Assembly,
Pakistan has circulated its specific proposal on the
proposed Peacebuilding Commission. Pakistan has a
special interest and a sense of ownership in the
proposed Commission, which basically follows the
same concept of a composite approach we proposed
long ago. We are working with other Member States to
further crystallize the proposal and we are hopeful that
the General Assembly will be in a position to establish
the Commission at its forthcoming session.

