The President (interpretation from Spanish): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/ 1997/ 1000, which contains the
text of a letter dated 22 December 1997 from the
Permanent Representative of Egypt to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
transmitting the text of the Cairo Declaration on Somalia
signed by the Somali leaders on that date in concluding
their meetings in Cairo, Egypt.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the
situation in Somalia, including the recent
developments in the political, military and
humanitarian fields.

"The Security Council reaffirms its commitment
to a comprehensive and lasting settlement of the crisis
in Somalia, bearing in mind respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Somalia, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations. In
this context, it stresses that the responsibility for
achieving genuine national reconciliation and peace
rests with the Somali people themselves.

"The Security Council expresses its full support
for the efforts of regional and other interested States
as well as those of international and regional
organizations, particularly the Organization of African
Unity, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, the League of Arab States, the
European Union and the Organization of the Islamic
Conference to promote a direct political dialogue and
facilitate the emergence of a broad-based central
Government in Somalia.

"The Security Council welcomes the outcome
of meetings between the Somali leaders held in
Cairo concluded on 22 December 1997, in particular
their decision to adopt a federal system with regional
autonomy and their agreement to form a transitional
government of national unity and to hold an
inclusive conference of national reconciliation in
Baidoa through which a presidential council and a
Prime Minister will be elected. It also welcomes the
signing of the Cairo Declaration on Somalia
(S/ 1997/1000, annex) and other important
agreements attached thereto, particularly on the
creation of an elected Constituent Assembly, the
establishment of an independent judicial system and
the preparation of a transitional charter. The Security
Council calls upon all Somali leaders to contribute
positively to the current momentum for peace and
reconciliation created by the significant progress
achieved in Cairo, and by the other previous
initiatives of Sodere, Nairobi and Sanaa, through the
widest possible participation in the planned
conference and to cease immediately all acts of
violence and to observe the ceasefire.

"The Security Council urges all States to
contribute generously to the appeals of the United
Nations to ensure continued relief and rehabilitation
efforts in all regions of Somalia, including those
aimed at the strengthening of civil society. It also
stresses the urgent need to address the humanitarian
situation in those areas affected by the recent floods.

"The Security Council reiterates its call upon
all States to fulfil their obligations to implement the
embargo imposed by resolution 733 (1992) of 23
January 1992 on all deliveries of weapons and
military equipment to Somalia. In this context, it
calls upon all States to refrain from any actions
which might exacerbate the situation in Somalia.

"The Security Council expresses also its
support for the efforts exerted by the
Secretary-General aimed at exploring means for the
United Nations to assist in restoring peace and
stability in Somalia. In this regard, it notes with
appreciation the decision of the Secretary-General to
strengthen the United Nations Political Office for
Somalia (UNPOS) in Nairobi. In this regard, it
stresses the need for closer coordination of all
efforts for peace in Somalia.
 

"The Security Council expresses again its
appreciation to all United Nations agencies, other
organizations and individuals carrying out
humanitarian activities in all regions of Somalia. It
calls upon the Somali factions to ensure the safety and
freedom of movement of all humanitarian personnel
and to facilitate the delivery of humanitarian relief,
including through the immediate reopening of the
airport and seaport of Mogadishu.

"The Security Council encourages the
Secretary-General to continue his consultations with
the Somali parties, interested and regional States and
organizations concerned on means for the United
Nations to support peace and reconciliation efforts,
including through specific options contained in his
report of 17 February 1997 (S/1997/135). It
requests the Secretary-General to keep it regularly
informed and submit a report about these
consultations and developments in the situation in
due course.

"The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1997/57.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 12.25 pm.
