Mr. Al-Hajri (Oman) (spoke in Arabic): It is a
pleasure to address the Security Council on behalf of
the Arab Group and to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. Your diplomatic skills and
knowledge of international affairs are, we are sure, the
best guarantee for achieving success in the Council's
deliberations and the desired results.

The Security Council is meeting today to debate a
most important issue on its agenda, namely, the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question,
to which we have long awaited a solution from the
international community. We all know that Palestinian
lands are languishing under Israeli occupation, and
have been for a long time. The situation is deteriorating
on a daily basis owing to the arbitrary practices of the
occupying Power.

The Arab Group expresses its utmost concern with
respect to the continuing Israeli siege and its intensified
campaigns and inhumane, illegal and violent attacks
aimed changing the demographic composition of
Al-Quds Al-Sharif and other cities in Palestinian
territory by withholding identity cards, the forced
expulsion of inhabitants, the building of settlements
and the intensification of settlement activity, and
attacks against Muslim and Christian holy sites.

The Arab Group condemns the continuing
incursions by the Israeli occupation forces and settlers
into the mosque. Such provocative acts by the Israelis
and the gross violations of Muslim and Christian holy
sites make it the duty of the international community as
a whole to immediately intervene to put an end to such
crimes, because the desecration of holy sites is a threat
to the peace and stability of the region and the world.
We call on the international community, in particular
on the occasion of the International Year of Solidarity
with the Palestinian People, to join that people, who
are fighting to regain their inalienable rights. The
international community must bring pressure to bear
on Israel to free all Palestinian prisoners and detainees,
as well as those from the occupied Syrian Golan in
Israeli prisons.

The Security Council is called upon now more
than ever to fulfil its responsibilities to maintain
international peace and security, resolve the crisis in
the Middle East in accordance with the Charter and the
principles of international law. It should do so by taking
urgent measures, compelling Israel to immediately put
an end to such provocations of religious sensitivities
and by condemning State terrorism against civilians,
which is a threat to peace and security in the region.

The Arab Group realizes that the United Nations
has adopted many resolutions that have been ignored
by the occupying Power. The time has come for the
occupying Power to abide by Council resolutions and
to put an end to its illegitimate occupation. If Israel
persists, that would constitute a threat to the Council's
legitimacy and a sign of its inability to maintain
international peace and security.

The Arab Group stresses that the annexation by
Israeli occupation forces of Palestinian land and the
Syrian Golan is a grave threat to international peace
and security. It is a source of major outrage and anger
in the region. It cannot be condoned.

We cannot fail to welcome the agreement on
Palestinian reconciliation. It will unify the Palestinian
will to face the major challenges on the question of
Palestine. We call on all international parties, including
the Council, to provide all the necessary support for
Palestinian national reconciliation to succeed. Do not
place obstacles before it. We condemn the continuing
Israeli violations of Lebanese sovereignty by land, sea
and air and the electronic war being waged by Israel
against Lebanon through espionage activities along the
borders with occupied Palestine. Such data is being used
for piracy and spying on Lebanese telecommunication
networks. We call on the international community
to fulfil its duties in accordance with the Charter to
achieve international peace and security.

With respect to the Syrian crisis, the Arab Group
continues to stress the need to resolve the crisis by
peaceful means, through a process based on the Geneva
communique of 30 June 2012 (S/2012/523, annex) and
within the framework of the efforts being undertaken
by Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, Joint Special Representative
of the United Nations and the League of Arab States.
We call on the international community as represented
in the Security Council to continue to make efforts to
put an end to the suffering of the Syrian people. In his
latest report, the Joint Special Representative informs
us that the number of refugees outside Syrian borders
will reach 4 million by the end of this year if the crisis
were to continue. The number of victims in the next two
years may well reach 350,000. There is no alternative
to a peaceful political settlement of the crisis. The
Group appeals to the international community to make
more immediate efforts to stop the war machine in
Syria, protect civilians and facilitate the delivery of
emergency humanitarian assistance to those who need
it.

The aspirations of the Palestinian people have
always been addressed to this international body so that
they may be protected from the inhuman, illegal and
arbitrary practices of successive Israeli Governments.
Therefore, the Security Council, in the context of the
Year of International Solidarity with the Palestinian
People, must compel Israel to cease and desist in those
policies that destroy any peace process that would lead
to a just and lasting peace in the Middle East. We call
on it to accept the Arab Peace Initiative and begin true
negotiations in order to achieve peace based on the
Initiative and resolutions of the Security Council.

