Mr. Granovsky (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We believe that holding this solemn meeting
today in the Security Council under your leadership,
Mr. President, gives it even further significance. It is
highly symbolic that the meeting is taking place under
the presidency of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
one of the countries in the region, where a new State
has just been born.

The Russian Federation would like to join in
congratulating the East Timorese people, who have just
achieved the independence of their country through
peaceful and democratic means. In the case of East
Timor, our Organization has acquired a truly unique
experience, one which includes assisting to organize an
across-the-board survey of the people on the status of
the territory, a peacekeeping operation, assisting in the
preparations for independence, and subsequent
assistance in establishing this new State. This
experience will certainly go down in history as a clear
example of a successful United Nations action. We also
believe it necessary to pay tribute to the tremendous
work done by the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) under the
creative and skilful leadership of Sergio Vieira de
Mello.

During the Security Council meeting on 26 April
the Russian delegation had the opportunity to
congratulate the President-elect of East Timor, His
Excellency Kay Rala Xanana Gusmao, on his victory in
the elections and to voice the hope that the country's
leadership would demonstrate unity and continue on
the road to establishing harmonious relations with
neighbouring countries.

We understand that the institutions established in
East Timor are not yet on a firm foundation, and it is
very obvious - especially in this initial period, after
proclamation of East Timor's independence - that the
world community will need to provide support to this
newest State in the world. We believe that a central role
in international support for establishing East Timorese
statehood, and also for coordinating that international
support, must be played by the United Nations system.
We welcome adoption of the Security Council
resolution establishing the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor (UNMISET). We believe that
the goals assigned to the Mission respond to the critical
challenges at hand.

Among the key problems which UNMISET will
need to resolve are, of course, those of supporting both
the external and internal security of this new State.
Before the transition whereby full responsibility for
security devolves upon the East Timorese army and
police, it will be essential to create conditions that rule
out the possibility of any destabilization of the country
undermining the attainment of independence. We
believe that the passing of the baton in this area will be
carried out according to an agreed timetable and
without undue complications.

The second major challenge, we believe, is that of
working actively with the Government of East Timor to
develop an agenda for the country's long-term
development so as to inculcate in the Timorese,
especially the youth, a sense of confidence in the
future.

In conclusion, I would like to wish success to the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
East Timor, Mr. Kamalesh Sharma, whom we know to
be both an able and ideas-oriented diplomat and an
experienced and skilled organizer.

