Mr. Al-Qahtani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): First,
I wish to state how much my delegation appreciates the
efforts of the president of the Council for the month of
August. We wish to commend you Sir, for wisely
choosing to hold this thematic debate on the role of the
Security Council in conflict prevention and resolution,
in particular in Africa.

My delegation would have preferred the debate to
be more extensive and more focused on the role of the
Council in conflict prevention in general, because there
are a number of conflicts throughout the world where
the Council has virtually no presence and where it does
little to put an end to those conflicts, such as in the
Middle East. At the same time, we will have an
opportunity to debate that issue tomorrow morning.

Two years ago, meeting at the level of Heads of
State and Government, Council members adopted
resolution 1625 (2005) to promote the effectiveness of
the role of the Security Council in the prevention of
armed conflict, in particular in Africa. The resolution
contained important preventive measures that
addressed among other issues the handling of emerging
conflicts, as a preliminary to their resolution. We wish
to draw attention in particular to conflict prevention,
rather than confining ourselves to addressing existing
conflicts.

My delegation wishes to emphasize the
importance of analysing the experiences of past
conflicts in Africa. In fact, a number of reports
published by the Secretariat in past years warned that
there could be conflicts in some countries that could
risk spilling over from one country to another. The
question should be posed - what are the causes of the
proliferation of those conflicts? Were the warnings not
taken seriously; or was there a lack of resources that
prevented the Council from taking up the challenge?
Has the Council failed to address the root causes of

those armed conflicts such as illiteracy, economic
corruption, inadequacies in domestic policies, lack of
transparency and credibility, non-compliance by
Governments with the rule of law, violations of human
rights, the illegal trafficking of small arms and light
weapons, or the role of the illegal exploitation of
natural resources which has ignited conflicts as those
resources have been pillaged?

Cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union must be solidified in the area of the
maintenance of international peace and security in
order to overcome the obstacles and challenges
concerning armed conflict in Africa, in particular
following the adoption of the joint communique
between the African Union Peace and Security Council
and the Security Council in Addis Ababa during the
mission of the Security Council last June. Prior to that,
a communique was issued in November 2006, also in
Addis Ababa, which was a memorandum of
understanding between the two organizations on a
10-year partnership. In order for the memorandums and
communiques to have any effect, we hope that in
future, Council resolutions concerning cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union, as
well as other international and regional organizations,
would be issued under Chapter VIII of the United
Nations Charter so that words will be followed by
actions and there will be true partnerships between the
United Nations and other organizations, in particular
the African Union.

In addition, the United Nations must not hesitate
to bring to bear its resources and expertise for the
benefit of regional initiatives undertaken by the
African Union. Such extremely praiseworthy initiatives
include the African Union Mission in the Sudan
(AMIS) and the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) to maintain peace in Somalia. As the
Council is aware, political and financial reasons have
prevented AMISOM. from benefiting from necessary
support when the last resolution on Somalia was
adopted (S/RES/1772 (2007)).

The role of the Economic Community of West
African States, which has contributed to the
establishment of an effective collective security regime
at the subregional level as a member of the Standing
Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central
Africa, must also be strengthened. That Committee was
created in 1992 and since then has played a role in
preventive diplomacy and conflict prevention. In
addition to regional and subregional measures which
have been emphasized in today's presidential
statement, Qatar also wishes to call upon countries in
the Great Lakes region of Africa to implement the Pact
on Security, Stability and Development among those
countries, which was adopted during the summit
meeting of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region held in Nairobi in December 2006.

Those arrangements and mechanisms are part and
parcel of the international collective security system as
provided for in the United Nations Charter. It is thus
essential to genuinely recognize the importance of
those arrangements and of enhancing them as a part of
the mechanisms for maintaining international peace
and security that the United Nations must support
financially and logistically when necessary.

We can note as an example, and as we noticed
during the last Council mission to Africa in June, there
are important questions that are not given adequate
attention. They require that the Council adjust the
method of addressing them so that our working
methodology in preventing and resolving conflicts in
Africa is balanced and professional and so that our
focus is not just on resolving on certain topics that do
not serve the principles of maintaining international
peace and security and equality among States.

For example, the Council must address the
challenges of cross-border security between African
States and the deplorable humanitarian conditions,
violations of human rights and the ethnic conflicts in
some African countries, particularly in West Africa,
which the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court was repeatedly unable to visit in order to study
the humanitarian situation there.

If we wish to work seriously to prevent and
resolve conflicts in Africa, we must change our tactics
and methodology of work, particularly in the Security
Council, which must be able to deal with all issues of
Africa transparently, justly and fairly while respecting
fully States' sovereignty and territorial integrity.

Finally, protection of children and youth must
also be seen as an important aspect of any
comprehensive conflict prevention strategy. The
Council's action in this regard should not be restricted
to considering the conditions of children affected by
existing conflicts. Child protection programmes should
include measures to address the decline of levels of
primary education and high unemployment rates

among young people, which is considered the main
cause of many children engaging with the parties of
any conflict.

