Mr. Holliday (United States of America): I wish
to thank Benin for putting this important subject on the
agenda. The United States appreciates the thorough
work done in the report of the Secretary-General. We
recognize that this is a complicated issue, and we
commend the efforts under way to address these
difficult problems.

We welcome the increasing cooperation on cross-
border issues among the United Nations missions in the
region, particularly among the United Nations Mission
in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL), the United Nations
Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI) and the United
Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL), and the other
missions, as well as the enhanced level of coordination
in patrolling in the vulnerable border areas. That
approach makes sense and is the best possible and most
efficient use of material and resources.

Similarly, we welcome the emphasis on
developing cooperation between civil society groups
across borders, as well as United Nations coordination
with regional organizations such as the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the
Mano River Union. We encourage private sector
collaborations in order to continue to build peace and
stability in West Africa. Reactivation of the Mano
River Union may also provide opportunities to develop
practical ways to promote greater peace and stability in
the region.

Many good points have been made this morning,
so I will just touch on a few specific aspects of the
report.

As noted in our recent statement on children
affected by armed conflict, the United States
understands the tragic consequences suffered by
children affected by those conflicts and welcomes the
development of effective and harmonized disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration strategies in West
Africa, particularly where children are involved.
However, we note that funding for such programmes
remains a challenge. The United States, like many
other nations, is studying the recommendations of the
High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change
and believes that each recommendation, including
those regarding funding, needs to be weighed carefully
with the goal of achieving broad consensus on
measures that will produce increased efficiency while
addressing the central problem at hand.

We endorse the need for greater security sector
reform and underline the need for the creation of
democratic, professional security forces, drawn from
all groups in various societies. We also support the
Secretary-General's commitment to stop continuing
violations against children, including recruitment or
use of child soldiers in violation of applicable law,
unwarranted attacks on schools and hospitals and the
maiming and killing of children. That includes rape
and sexual violence and unwarranted denial of
humanitarian access to children.

As last week's Council meeting on small arms
and light weapons demonstrated, there is a need to
address the fact that destabilizing, illicit trafficking in
small arms and light weapons has proven a major
obstacle to peace, to economic development and to
efforts to rebuild war-torn societies. We commend the
work of ECOWAS in that field, and we support efforts
to strengthen the Moratorium on Importation,
Exportation and Manufacture of Small Arms and Light
Weapons in West Africa.

The United States also believes in accountability
and holding accountable those individuals who commit
crimes, and we note the report's mention of the
occurrence of trafficking in arms, natural resources and
human beings. We continue to have a different view,
perhaps, with regard to the most appropriate forums in
which to hear those particular cases.

Finally, I wish to say that we salute the efforts of
all the peacekeepers and United Nations personnel
involved in West Africa, and we also note the tragic
reports coming in today of the loss of life among
peacekeepers in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Our hearts go out to them.

Once again we thank you, Mr. President, for
bringing this subject to our attention.

