Mr. Nejad Hosseinian (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
would like to express our appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting of the Security
Council to consider the situation in Afghanistan, which is
alarming on both political and humanitarian grounds. We
have full confidence in your ability and diplomatic skills to
steer the work of the Council successfully so that it can
fulfil its obligation under the Charter in the face of this
threat to regional and international peace and security. I
also wish to thank Ambassador Sergey Lavrov for his
leadership of the Council in July.

The escalation of conflict and tension and the further
spread of lawlessness resulting from the recent military
offensive to the north of Afghanistan by the Taliban has
justifiably caused grave concern for most neighbours of
Afghanistan and for the rest of the international community.
This concern stems from the display of absolute disregard
by the Taliban for the wishes of the international
community, as manifested by the decisions of the Security
Council and the General Assembly, the efforts of the
Secretary-General and his Special Envoy for the rejection
of further bloodshed and the attempt to find a political
settlement in which the views of all Afghan people are
taken into account. The international concern also stems
from the recognition of the time-honoured fact that
Afghanistan, as a country with a multi-ethnic,
multicultural and fiercely independent population, cannot
be ruled by a single group, particularly when that group
is widely believed to have been organized, supported and
patronized by foreign powers.

The Afghan people have made it amply clear in their
history that they will not tolerate direct or indirect foreign
domination, no matter what the cost. This is where the
problem lies. Otherwise, it should make little difference
to Afghanistan's neighbours or to the rest of the world
which group rules the country as long as it respects the
basic principles of human rights and the rules of inter-
State relations.

It may be trite to say so, but trite or not, we
continue to believe that the problem in Afghanistan has
no military solution and that persisting to seek a military
victory will only perpetuate the internecine violence in
that war-tom country and will fail, and fail miserably, to
bring peace and normalcy to the deserving people of
Afghanistan. In our opinion as a neighbour, even if the
Taliban succeed in getting control of the entire land of
Afghanistan, they will not be able to rule over all the
Afghan people, who are of different ethnic backgrounds
and political and religious persuasions. Unfortunately,
therefore, the problems in Afghanistan will continue to
plague the Afghan people, the region and elsewhere.

Very little is known about the record, background
and operations of the Taliban in the recent political
history of Afghanistan before they suddenly surfaced as
a well-equipped and well-financed militia group in
Afghanistan. Their emergence and their mode of
operation have raised serious questions - for the Afghan
people and for the region - about their independence and
future agenda. The reports of foreign assistance to the
Taliban in the form not only of the supply of arms and
ammunition, but also of logistics, planning and foreign
military personnel in the last few years, and particularly
during the recent Taliban offensive, have strengthened the
general suspicions about them. They are ostensibly
students of religion who have now learned to fight, drive

 

tanks and fly jet fighters and helicopters. That is a
proposition that other people in Afghanistan and the region
find difficult to believe. The Taliban's history and
emergence are suspicious, but their practice since then is
disconcerting and outright threatening.

The daily reports of abuse and gross violations of
human rights, particularly against women and girls in the
name of Islam; the murders and constant harassment of
foreign relief workers and United Nations staff; the forced
displacement of the Afghan people on ethnic and religious
grounds, which has been referred to as Taliban-style ethnic
cleansing; the daily and indiscriminate bombardments of
civilians and defenceless people in Bamian and Hazarajat
where the Taliban have blocked the transit of urgent
foodstuffs and other humanitarian aid for months, leading
to massive starvation and death; the unbridled cultivation of
and traffic in drugs to meet the increasing demand for cash
to pay for Taliban offensive operations; and the harbouring
and instigation of terrorist elements and terrorist
organizations are routine and reflect the status of the
Taliban and the conditions under which the Afghan people
continue to resist. These issues are quite worrisome to the
international community, and they destabilize and threaten
the region.

The Islamic Republic of Iran respects the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Afghanistan, a country we would
like to see continue its proud heritage of political
independence and non-alignment. The fate of Afghanistan
will be determined by the Afghan people themselves. They
will have to make the political decision to opt for peace.
Peace cannot be imposed on Afghanistan from abroad or by
outside forces. In this connection, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, like most other neighbours of Afghanistan and the rest
of the international community, earnestly believes that as
long as a lasting peace has not been achieved in
Afghanistan - a peace which can be achieved only through
political negotiation under United Nations auspices and with
the help of the Organization of the Islamic Conference
(OIC), leading to the establishment of a Government that is
representative of all the Afghan people - the world as a
whole, and the neighbouring countries in particular, will
continue to suffer and be threatened as a result of a number
of continuing and heightened problems.

As a neighbour, Iran is seriously concerned about the
following threats: first, continued violence close to its
borders; secondly, the danger of violence and conflict
spilling over into its territory; thirdly, the danger of the
flow of more refugees as a result of the escalation of the
conflict and of displacement by the Taliban of groups of
the Afghan population on ethnic and religious grounds;
fourthly, the escalation of drug cultivation and trafficking
to and through the region to meet the increasing demand
for financing Taliban military offensives and rule by
force; and fifthly, the continued presence and activities of
terrorist elements and terrorist organizations in that
country.

In the light of these destabilizing dangers and in
order to send a strong message to the Taliban that their
pursuit of a military solution is not acceptable to the
international community, and that they will continue to be
viewed unfavourably as long as they disregard the wish
of the international community and the call by the United
Nations for a political settlement in which the interests of
all Afghan groups are taken into account, my Government
co-sponsored the draft resolution under consideration in
the Council.

My Government has a greater stake in this draft
resolution. The plight of the personnel of the
Consulate-General of the Islamic Republic of Iran in
Mazar-e-Sharif, of the correspondent of the Islamic
Republic News Agency and of many Iranian relief
workers continues. The capture of the Iranian
Consulate-General and the abduction of its personnel by
the Taliban have been condemned by many States as
gross violations of the basic principles and recognized
norms of international law.

I would like to refer to Security Council document
S/1998/776 of 19 August 1998, in which the
circumstances of the capture of the Consulate by the
Taliban offensive forces in Mazar-e-Sharif and the names
of the Iranian captives are set out. I wish to add that the
taped conversation between the head of our
Consulate-General in Mazar-e-Sharif and the Foreign
Ministry in Tehran when the Consulate was captured by
the Taliban forces at 14.30 hours on 8 August is
available. The sound of automatic-rifle fire can clearly be
heard in the background.

I wish to stress that the continued detention of the
Iranian nationals by the Taliban is unacceptable to the
Islamic Republic of Iran. We certainly hope that the
demand by the Security Council for their immediate
release and safe and dignified passage out of Afghanistan
is heeded by them. We call upon other Governments to
do more and to use whatever influence they may have
over the Taliban to persuade them to release the Iranian
captives without further delay. We are grateful to the
Secretary-General and his Special Envoy, Mr. Brahimi,

 

for their efforts to secure the release of the Iranian captives,
and we call upon them to redouble their efforts in this
humanitarian issue.

