The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Malaysia.

I wish to thank Assistant Secretary-General Hedi
Annabi for updating the Council on the situation in
East Timor.

Since many issues related to the transitional
process in East Timor and the United Nations mission
there have already been touched upon in past
discussions, as well as by earlier speakers, I shall
confine my intervention to only three aspects, namely,
the security situation, the question of an East Timorese
defence force and the refugee situation.

Of course, like others, we note that tomorrow is
the first anniversary of the United Nations-sponsored
consultation process in East Timor.

We continue to be deeply concerned about the
refugee situation, in respect of the security conditions
both in the camps hosting East Timorese refugees and
along the repatriation route between East Timor and
Indonesia. The United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) is struggling
to cope with militia incursions that have left local
people afraid and vulnerable. While UNTAET can
contain militia activity inside East Timor, it cannot be
expected to totally secure the border. Militias that have
infiltrated the border might well be biding their time
before hitting pre-designated targets.

We note that the fatal clashes of 10 August
between Nepalese United Nations soldiers and the
militia near the town of Suai followed a spate of militia
incursions along the West Timor border over the last
two months. The increasing number of incidents
between the militia and United Nations patrols is also
further delaying the return of East Timorese refugees
and fuelling fears that security in the border region will
continue to deteriorate. UNTAET will therefore have to
remain vigilant. We hope this problem will not
significantly affect East Timor's security. In that
regard, we trust that more strenuous efforts will be
made to rein in the militias and to expedite the return
of East Timorese from the refugee camps in West
Timor.

We note that in their first move out of forced
cantonment since United Nations deployment in East
Timor, the Armed Forces for the National Liberation of
East Timor (FALINTIL) will join UNTAET in security
operations along the border. FALINTIL's plan to join in
the territory's defence came as the United Nations
mission in East Timor signalled that FALINTIL would
be recognized as the core of the territory's new defence
force.

We recognize that while the forging of regional
relationships contributes to the security of East Timor,
it must also be prepared to defend itself. Top officials
from UNTAET have already met with East Timorese
army commanders to discuss proposals for a security
system for an independent East Timor. The options
would involve either the creation of a defence force
through conscription or the maintenance of a volunteer
reserve force of a varied number of troops. We
recognise the important contribution of King's College
of London through its independent study on this aspect
of East Timor's future needs.
In another sign of the emerging political face of
the new East Timor, Mr. Xanana Gusmao turned over
his post as Commander-in-Chief of FALINTIL to his
deputy at a ceremony marking the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the founding of the guerrilla army on 20
August. We welcome this move, which will further
strengthen the credentials of Mr. Gusmao as a leader
and a statesman in the post-independence period. We
believe this hand-over of military command to be a
symbolic but important act, as it affirms the democratic
principle of the separation of the military from politics
and paves the way for a democratic, independent East
Timor.

We cannot fail to draw attention to the fact that,
in contrast to the progress achieved in several areas,
the suffering of the thousands of refugees who remain
in camps has not been resolved satisfactorily. We
would like to express the concern of my delegation
about the seriousness of the current situation,
particularly in certain areas where the International
Organization for Migration and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) have had to suspend important activities
because of intimidation by militias of the workers of
those agencies. We condemn last week's attack by
suspected militias on three UNHCR workers at a
refugee camp in West Timor. We maintain that the key
to any solution of the East Timor refugee problem in
West Timor is the separation of former militias and
soldiers from genuine refugees, the maintenance of law
and order in the camps, and the clarification of the
status of East Timorese employed by the Indonesian
Government.

Malaysia remains firmly committed to peace and
stability in East Timor. The Foreign Minister of
Malaysia used the opportunity of his recent visit to
East Timor to emphasize Malaysia's continuing support
for East Timor's long-term reconstruction and
development. He took along with him a group of
important Malaysian entrepreneurs and also used the
visit to underline Malaysia's concerns about militia
activity in East Timor and in the border region and
about the need for an early resolution to the refugee
problem in West Timor.

Finally, Malaysia would like to pay tribute to
UNTAET, for their continued commitment and high
professionalism, and to the people of East Timor, who
have shown remarkable patience and fortitude in facing
their continuing hardships. Malaysia would also like to
express its profound condolences to New Zealand,
Bangladesh and Nepal for the loss of their soldiers in
the service of the United Nations in East Timor.

I new resume my functions as the President of the
Council.

