Mr. Kawamura (Japan): I would like to welcome
High Representative Federica Mogherini to the
Security Council and thank her for her insightful
briefing. Furthermore, we deeply appreciated her visit
to Hiroshima, Japan, in April 2016 and her call for
lasting peace throughout the world.

First, on behalf of the Government and the people
of Japan, I would like to recognize that the European
Union (EU) plays an indispensable and contemporary
role in enabling the Security Council to fulfil its
primary responsibility for the maintenance of peace
and security. The EU has consistently demonstrated
leadership and commitment in charting road maps for
the resolution of conflicts, post-conflict reconstruction
and humanitarian assistance around the world, while
also garnering vital international attention and support.

Japan and the EU are global strategic partners that
share the common values of democracy, freedom, human
rights and the rule of law. We have worked together
tirelessly for the peace and security of the international
community as a whole. As one example, the EU and the
United Nations recently hosted a conference in Brussels
to marshal international humanitarian support for Syria
and the region. Japan is pleased to have joined in those
efforts by announcing new humanitarian assistance of
approximately $260 million, which was decided after
the beginning of2017. The EU also plays a key role in the
Middle East peace process as a member of the Quartet,
including on the relaunch of negotiations to achieve
lasting peace. Japan is committed to facilitating direct
talks and implementing confidence-building measures.

Japan and the EU are also working closely
together in Africa, especially on measures to enhance
security and counter-terrorism. Joint projects are
under way in countries such as the Niger, Mali,
Mauritania, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Somalia to provide equipment, communications
technology, improved facilities and human resources
training. In the Niger, Japan recently announced
approximately $2 million in assistance to provide
wireless communication devices and vehicles to the
Government, while the EU is providing training for law
enforcement officers. Japan Maritime Defence Force
and EU Naval Force are also cooperating closely to
combat piracy off the coast of Somalia and the Gulf of
Aden, including through joint exercises.

Japan strongly supports the EU Global Strategy for
Foreign and Security Policy. The Strategy demonstrates
the EU's commitment to promoting a rules-based
international order, including on global maritime
security, centred on multilateralism and the United
Nations. The development of that Global Strategy comes
at an important time, given the ongoing challenges
faced by the continent, from refugee flows to terrorism.
Japan looks forward to enhancing its cooperation with
the EU throughout the world, including in the Asia
Pacific region. In particular, Japan strongly hopes that
the EU global strategy on building maritime capacities
and regional security architecture in South-East Asia
will be implemented.

I would like to conclude by reiterating that Japan
supports a strong, unified Europe. We hope that Europe
will overcome its various challenges and continue to
take robust and concrete steps towards integration and
international activism.

