Mr. Thomson (United Kingdom): A welcome to
you in the chair, Mr. President, and our thanks to the
French delegation for their services in the presidency
last month. We are also grateful to Under-Secretary-
General Guehenno for another good briefing.

Ambassador Ryan will shortly be making a
statement on behalf of the European Union, as the Irish
presidency and we fully subscribe to it. Many good
points have already been made this morning. I would
therefore like to address only a limited number of
points - three in fact: the outcome of the Berlin
conference, security and drugs.

Many others have expressed their gratitude to
your Government, Mr. President, for their organization
and leadership of the Berlin conference and I would
like to associate the United Kingdom with those
expressions. It was a conference that successfully
reaffirmed the international community's commitment
to Afghanistan at a moment when this was needed. We
welcome the announcement of elections in September
and the challenging targets set by the Berlin work plan
on disarmament, demobilization and reintegration.

The Conference also sent a needed message of
renewed commitment for reconstruction. The money
pledged over the next three years is substantial. The
money pledged for elections is important, but, as Mr.
Guehenno has reminded us, not yet sufficient.

For my Government's part, we have raised our
Tokyo pledge from £200 million to £500 million -
roughly $900 million - over five years. We have
contributed £105 million - roughly $19 million - to
UNAMA's preparations for elections. This represents a
substantial portion of the $68 million so far pledged.
We have also contributed some £70 million - roughly
$125 million - over three years towards counter-
narcotics and £52 million - roughly $95 million -
over three years towards security sector reform.
Clearly, what others can do in further contributions will
be welcome.

Money is not the whole story, however. The real
challenge now is implementation using that money.
Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration need to
happen before the election and to get going quickly. As
Mr. Guehenno has reminded us, security remains
critical for continued progress. The International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) and the provincial
reconstruction teams do need to be properly resourced
and we need to encourage partners to continue to look
at ways of contributing to the security effort, whether
through the provincial reconstruction teams or through
troop contributions to ISAF.

In addition to the provincial reconstruction team
that the United Kingdom leads in Mazar-e-Sharif, my
Government has offered to lead a second provincial
reconstruction team at Meymaneh and to establish the
forward support base for ISAF's expansion to the North
of the country.

Lastly, I wish to say a word on the picture on
drugs. Clearly, successfully tackling the drugs issue is
also going to be critical to Afghanistan's future. It is
going to take a long-term, sustainable approach and it
is going to require others to get more involved. The
United Kingdom, as lead nation, very much welcomes
the endorsement by the Berlin conference of the
Afghan-led national drug-control strategy and the
action plans stemming from the February international
counter-narcotics conference. Like all other speakers, I
think, we, of course, also welcome the signing by
Afghanistan and its neighbours of the Berlin
declaration on counter-narcotics. Afghans, with the
United Kingdom, the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime and other international assistance, are now
focusing on implementation of the strategy. Our top
priority is to urge donors to commit to specific activity
within the action plans.

Like others, we also support and welcome the
presidential statement to be delivered at the end of this
meeting.

