Mr. Akbaruddin (India): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing today's open debate on an
issue of increasing significance in an interconnected
world. We also appreciate the informative and
thoughtful briefings.

Increasingly, the ideas, industries, markets,
resources, services and products we share are
interconnected as never before, from the way we trade
to the way we invest, the way we travel to the way we
eat and, indeed, from the way we think to the way
we live. All of these, in one way or another, depend
on the growing proliferation of complex and sensitive
networks. These interconnections, underpinning the
provision of essential societal functions, have created a
new kind of vulnerability, giving terrorists the chance
to threaten targets that otherwise would perhaps have
been unassailable. Such threats serve the purpose of
creating disruption on a scale far beyond the immediate
area of an attack. They affect the population on a much
broader scale. They force the multiple stakeholders
providing basic services to be constantly on guard.
They therefore not only add to the stress on the
stakeholders and their societies, they also raise the cost
of the services provided.

Big urban centres such as Mumbai, New York
and London have become targets, since any impact on
cities that serve as financial hubs can affect a country's
economy in multiple ways. The investigations into the
heinous terrorist attacks in Mumbai in 2008 revealed
the impact that their perpetrators wanted to have on the
psyche and economy of the whole of India. The attacks,
whose targets included a hospital, a railway station and
hotels, were carefully planned and crafted from beyond
our borders in order to produce crippling effects not
just on daily life in a bustling metropolis but on an
entire country of a billion people.

The protection of critical infrastructure is
primarily a national responsibility. However, given
that many of our technologies and base templates for
systems around the world are similar, threats of attacks
on an international stock exchange, a major dam, a
nuclear power plant, of the possible sabotaging of oil
or gas pipelines or airport air-safety systems, or of the
potential blocking of an international canal or strait can
have much wider implications and complications that
extend far beyond national frontiers.

Many recent terrorist attacks have shown that
access to information and communications technologies
(ICT), and in some cases their manipulation, has
been an important enabler. The global nature of such
technologies raises the necessity for international
vision and coordination on aspects of policy, with the
aim of enhancing our capabilities. Despite years of
concern about the problem, States have adopted few
international instruments addressing issues resulting
from threats from cyberspace.

Current international law is not well positioned to
support responses to cyber attacks. Security Council
decisions that impose binding counter-terrorism
obligations do not mention them. With regard to new
treaty law, Member States have been negotiating a
proposed comprehensive convention on international
terrorism since the latter half of the 19905, the period
that corresponds to the rise of worries about terrorist
cyber attacks. The offence defined in the draft text may
be broad enough to be applicable to cyberattacks, and
yet the possibility of terrorist cyberattacks has not been
a catalyst for negotiations even after 20 years.

Today's debate is therefore an opportunity to
ask ourselves if we can work out our differences in
the face of concerns regarding ICT-related threats to
critical infrastructure, or ifit will require a cataclysmic
event to foster greater international collaboration
on protecting critical infrastructure from terrorist
cyberattacks. Since the threat is discernible and there
is understandable global angst about it, can we not
look at options for strengthening international law
against terrorist cyberattacks? Last month, there was a
crescendo of support in this Chamber for a preventive
approach. Are we therefore ready for a collaborative
preventive approach to addressing terrorist cyberattacks
against critical infrastructure? If we are not willing to
negotiate a treaty on such attacks, can we at least start
by clarifying the applicability of various anti-terrorism
treaties to them?

Collaboration is key to moving the perimeter that
we defend from our front doors to the edges of our
neighbourhoods. Protecting critical infrastructure from
terrorist cyberattacks requires a global neighbourhood
watch programme because, as the saying goes, there
is safety in numbers. Any effective collaboration,
however, also requires trust, and right now there is a
trust deficit. The lesson of the past is that international
law on terrorism has largely developed through States
reacting to terrorist violence. We hope that this will
not continue to be the case, and the Security Council's
adoption today of resolution 2341 (2017) is a first small
step in an area where much more needs to be done.

