Mr. Kubis: The report of the Secretary-General of

18 June (8/2014/420) provides a comprehensive account
of the events and trends of the recent quarter. It was
finalized prior to the second round ofpolling on 14 June.
I shall therefore provide an update on election-related
events since then, which have prevented me from being
pysically present in New York at the Security Council
today.

The Council is meeting amid challenges that
are testing Afghanistan's electoral, institutional
and legal frameworks, together with the maturity
of its political leaders. How the two presidential
candidates, Mr. Abdullah Abdullah and Mr. Ashraf
Ghani Ahmadzai, and the country's leadership manage
those events and the current impasse will be vital to
Afghanistan's unity and stability.

What keeps us hopeful in such challenging times
is the very strong and encouraging statements of the
Afghan people on the polling days of 5 April and
14 June. With pride and determination they turned out
in support of a democratic political transition and an
end to cycles of ruinous violence. The presidential and
provincial council elections of 2014 are Afghan-held,
Afghan-managed, Afghan-led and Afghan-secured.
The electoral institutions are still maturing but the
preparations for and conduct of the electoral cycle
have been recognized by domestic and international
observers as an improvement compared with the past.
That is certainly not to suggest that there were not
instances of fraud and irregularity.

At this time ofthe election impasse, the determination
and sacrifice of the candidates, campaign workers,
electoral personnel, security officials and voters must
be at the forefront of the minds of Afghanistan's
leaders. Millions of people came out to support each
of the two candidates. Their votes and those wishes
must be respected and protected. That the outcome of
such an extraordinary effort is currently at an impasse
makes it all the more disappointing and dangerous.
It is the responsibility of the Afghan independent
electoral management bodies and Afghan stakeholders,
including, first and foremost, the candidates, to ensure
the timely and orderly completion of the election
process from which a legitimate leader emerges.

Soon after the second round of polling, citing
institutional bias and substantial fraud, Mr. Abdullah
chose to disengage from the electoral process.
Accusations have centred around the high levels of
turnout in some areas of the country, which Mr. Ghani's
camp, in turn, put down to his team's mobilization
efforts. The recent resignation of the Independent
Election Commission's chief electoral officer was hoped
to provide an opportunity for the resumption of the
process and, in particular, lead to discussions between
the campaign teams and institutions on strengthening
technical checks and balances where voting patterns are
claimed to be unusual in increasing confidence in the
credibility ofthe electoral process and the acceptability
of its outcome.

The presidential candidates need to immediately
engage with one another and the mandated electoral
institutions in actively defining solutions to help the
process move forward with improved quality and
credibility. There is no political transition besides the
elections to decide the country's legitimate leadership,
accepted by the majority, and to protect its Constitution
and the gains since the fall of the Taliban. Under the
Council's mandate, the United Nations and I, myself,
as Special Representative can and do provide good
offices at the request of the Afghan authorities. We
have received such requests recently.

I remain very clear, however, about the parameters
of United Nations engagement. They are Afghan
elections. We can facilitate Afghan parties reaching
solutions. We can provide technical expertise to advise
on the possibilies and modalities of strengthened
checks and balances where there are questions about the
process. What we cannot do is to prepare solutions and
decide on behalf of the Afghans. That is the exclusive
responsibility of Afghans. The United Nations efforts
assist Afghan institutions and stakeholders. We cannot
substitute for them or replace them.

Given the rising tensions following the second
round, including increasing ethnic overtones, the utmost
maturity and statesmanship are required, in particular
by the two presidential candidates. Otherwise, the
risk is a confrontation of the two condidates and their
supporters, in which the losing side will reject the
results and contest their legitimacy. That could lead to a
protracted confrontation with the danger of a slide into
violence. Afghanistan can ill afford the unpredictable
impact on security, stability, the economy and the wider
region. The candidates urgently need to cooperate
with one another to prevent such scenarios, which,
unfortunately, cannot be excluded for now.

Insuchtimesoftension,missteps,miscommunication,
misunderstandings and the actions of a few radical
people can have broader consequences. I appeal
for calm among the supporters of both candidates
amid sharpening, hateful rhetoric of an increasingly
inflammatory tone that risks creating ethnic divisions.
Most disturbingly, this includes rhetoric invoking
memories of the fratricidal factional conflicts of the
19905. All necessary steps need to be taken by the
two leaders to avoid creating a slippery slope to civil
disorder and instability.

The country's political class, and notably the
two candidates Mr. Abdullah and Mr. Ghani, have a
paramount responsibility to manage this situation.
The wishes of the people for a timely conclusion of the
leadership transition, in accordance with the country's
laws, need to be respected. They must decisively and
actively engage in finding solutions to end the current
impasse and contribute to Afghanistan's forward
momentum at this critical time. As with elections
anywhere in the world, there can ultimately be only
one winner. The need now is for statesmanship, not
brinksmanship.

In challenging times, the predictability of
international support is all the more critical. The
upcoming sequence of high-level meetings is
specifically seen as an opportunity to highlight and
renew commitments with a new administration,
including regional cooperation at the Heart of Asia/
Istanbul Process Ministerial Conference hosted by
the People's Republic of China, ongoing international
security assistance at the NATO Summit in Wales,
and development priorities at the London Conference
on Afghanistan. This will all depend on Afghanistan's
political leaders and institutions breaking the electoral
impasse and the completion of political transition in an
orderly and timely manner.

Altogether, this reporting quarter has been both
promising and challenging for Afghanistan. On the
bright side is the people's participation and engagement
in the election process. That was, however, dominated
by economic downturn linked to a lack of confidence
due to the current uncertainties; the activities of
the insurgency and spoilers, including those linked
to international terrorism and narcotics networks;
the protracted electoral impasse; and deaths and
displacement due to natural hazards and conflict. Just
last week, an attempt was made on the life of the head of
the High Peace Council secretariat, Masoom Stanekzai,
an individual who has worked tirelessly for peace. Still
the people of Afghanistan look towards a better future,
and expect their leaders to work for it.

Finally, I would note that Afghanistan, together
with the whole Umma, is preparing to observe the holy
month of Ramadan. I sincerely hope that the occasion
of the holy month of Ramadan, observed in a spirit of
compassion, can in its own way through contemplation
and prayers, help pave the way for a peaceful and
prosperous future for a stable and united Afghanistan.
To my respected colleague Ambassador Tanin, members
of the Security Council and all peace-loving people,
I address the traditional congratulations, Ramadan
Mubarak.

