Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): We, too, welcome
Ambassador Dabbashi back to the Council.

South Africa reaffirms the African Union's efforts
to bring a peaceful end to the Libyan crisis. These
efforts have always been informed by and directed
towards promoting the genuine and legitimate
aspirations of the Libyan people. The African Union
remains committed to supporting efforts to bring a
peaceful end to the crisis in Libya. The Peace and
Security Council ad hoc committee, meeting in Pretoria
on 14 September, indicated its readiness to work with

the National Transitional Council and all other Libyan
stakeholders towards the goal of the early
establishment of an all-inclusive national unity
Government.

South Africa supports international post-conflict
reconstruction, reconciliation and rebuilding efforts to
assist the Libyan people in turning over a new leaf
after this conflict. Therefore this resolution 2009
(2011) is very important to my delegation, as it will
serve as a foundation for all United Nations support to
Libya's post-conflict reconstruction. Ownership of
these efforts by the Libyan people is critical.

We would like to address three issues that are
important to us in the context of the resolution.

First, the situation in Libya has improved, but
there is still a long way for the Libyans to go towards
achieving peace, security and stability. The immediate
challenge is for a peaceful end to the conflict. A
complete and verifiable ceasefire, including an end to
the NATO military campaign, is a prerequisite for
stability. This will enable the Libyan people to focus
their efforts on rebuilding and reconstructing their
country. South Africa is disappointed that the Council
was unable to include a clear call for the cessation of
hostilities.

Secondly, the Council has shown reluctance to
come out in strong and clear support of the 2.5 million
African migrants who comprise part of the Libyan
population. These migrants, it must be recalled,
contributed for decades to the economic development
of Libya. We repeat our call for an end to reprisals,
killings, arbitrary arrests and the detention of migrant
workers and black Libyans, and further call for those
involved in these activities to be held accountable for
their actions.

Thirdly, as we have noted that the situation in
Libya has shown improvement, we must now question
the need for the continued enforcement of the no-fly
zone to protect civilians. We cannot understand the
Council's support for this enforcement, as we are all
aware that the threats that warranted the no-fly zone no
longer exist. Therefore, we look forward to the lifting
of the no-fly zone as soon as possible.
