Mexico thanks the South African delegation for organizing this open debate and fully agrees with the fundamental role played by the Security Council in strengthening the rule of law, in particular through cooperation with the International Court of Justice. As noted in the declaration of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the rule of law at the national and international levels, adopted on 24 September 2012, we reiterate our call to the Council to "continue to ensure that sanctions are carefully targeted, in support of clear objectives and designed carefully so as to minimize possible adverse consequences, and that fair and clear procedures are maintained and further developed" (General Assembly resolution 67/1, para. 29). The work of the International Court of Justice is critical to the peaceful settlement of disputes and preventing the escalation of conflicts. Mexico advocates a preventive approach by the Security Council, for which cooperation with the Court may be key. In that regard, we highlight the following considerations. First, it remains a concern that, despite the Court being the principal judicial organ of the United Nations, less than half of the Organization's Member States have accepted the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court, including only one of the five permanent members of the Council. We take this opportunity to urgently call on those that have not yet done so to make a statement in that regard as a show of support between two principal organs. Secondly, we believe that the Security Council can take greater advantage of its ability to request advisory opinions from the Court in order to obtain an impartial, legal and technical view of certain situations, thereby helping to depoliticize certain items on its agenda and to seek negotiated and peaceful solutions to conflicts, in full compliance with international law. The Council should also fully support the Court's decisions, especially in cases involving threats or breaches of international peace and security. One example is the sub judice case concerning the Application of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (The Gambia v. Myanmar). The judgment that the Court will issue in due course may be fundamental to the treatment of that crisis, and the Security Council should be attentive to it and ensure that its eventual consideration is in harmony with the corresponding ruling. Thirdly, we stress the role of the Security Council in the execution of the Court's judgments under Article 94, paragraph 2, of the Charter of the United Nations. The success of the Court's preventive work is directly related to the enforcement of its judgments. Without it, the Court's preventive and adjudicative role will fail, putting international stability at risk. Unfortunately, my country has experienced at first hand the frustration that generates, even after having submitted several notes to the Security Council at the time concerning repeated non-compliance with a judgment. In that regard, we take this opportunity to endorse the content of General Assembly resolution 73/257, of 20 December 2018. In conclusion, Mexico reaffirms its support for the International Court of Justice and reiterates that strengthening and promoting the rule of law throughout the Organization is one of our country's priorities, and will also be promoted by the Council through Mexico's participation during the 2021-2022 biennium.
