Ms. Oduor: First, I would like to congratulate Spain
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of December, and also to commend
you, Mr. President, for the manner in which you have
conducted its affairs. I thank you as well for inviting
me to brief the Council on this very important subject
and for providing a detailed concept note (S/2016/1030, annex) to guide today's timely meeting.

Today's technological advances have made
the world a single, vast global village. Crime is no
longer a national phenomenon, but has taken on a
transnational dimension. The emergence and expansion
of transnational crime confronts all justice systems
with some new challenges. Criminal offenders,
including terrorists, are mobile and often seek to evade
detection, arrest and punishment by operating across
international borders. They avoid getting caught by
taking advantage of those borders and playing on the
frequent reluctance of law enforcement authorities to
engage in complicated and expensive transnational
investigations and prosecutions. The weak capacity of
any one country to address effectively some of those
new threats and challenges translates itself into an
overall weakness in the entire international regime of
criminal justice cooperation.

Article 3 of the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime gives a clear definition
of what constitutes a transnational organized crime.
Although the 19 universal conventions and protocols
relating to terrorism do not contain such a definition
regarding terrorism, nevertheless, they apply only to
transnational terrorism. Because of its transnational
nature, like all transnational organized crime terrorism
poses serious problems for national justice systems.
It is the national courts that try perpetrators since
there is no international court that is competent to try
terrorism cases.

I grant that it is difficult for criminaljustice officers
to investigate or institute criminal proceedings against
persons suspected of terrorism when such persons are
outside their territory or where key evidence, witnesses,
victims or the proceeds from the crime are located
outside the country's jurisdiction or where the legal and
judicial systems, with which they must cooperate are
different from those of their own country. Practitioners
of criminal justice cannot realistically work within the
confines of national borders. They have no choice but
to cooperate with their foreign counterparts in order to
bring the perpetrators of such offences to justice.

Terrorism and transnational organized crime
require a coordinated international response that calls
for more efficient and faster cooperation between
Member States. Current multilateral, bilateral and
national measures against transnational organized
crime, including terrorism are rapidly evolving to
keep pace with the new technologies. The evolution
over the past decade or so reflects the determination of
Member States to work more closely with each other to
face the growing threat of terrorism, organized crime
and corruption.

Allow me to apprise the Council of Kenya's efforts
to promote international judicial cooperation against
terrorism and what we believe should be the priorities
of the international community moving forward. The
terrorist threat in Kenya emanates mainly from the
Al-Shabaab terrorist group in Somalia, an affiliate of
the Al-Qaida terrorist network. The threat manifests
mainly through continued radicalization and violent
extremism within its borders that has resulted in an
inflow and outflow of foreign terrorist fighters and
terrorist attacks, including the 1998 United States
embassy bombing, the Paradise Hotel bombing of
2002, the Westgate Mall attack of 2013 and the Garissa
University attack of 2015, alongside scores of other
attacks over the years.

Kenya responded to the threat, among other
initiatives, by adapting various international statutes
into domestic laws, including the 2012 Prevention
of Terrorism Act. It also sought deeper counter-
terrorism cooperation with other partner States,
particularly on the investigation and prosecution of
terrorism cases. Kenyan law enforcement agencies
have worked with regional organizations including
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
East African Community, the African Union and the
broader international community, including the United
Nations, the United States and other bilateral partners,
to increase its counter-terrorism capacity and secure
land, sea, and air borders.
Since 2012, Kenya's primary contribution to
regional counter-terrorism efforts has been its
significant troop contribution to the African Union
Military Observer Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).
It has also hosted numerous trainings involving law
enforcement professionals from neighbouring countries
to build counter-terrorism capacities and to increase
regional cooperation.

Following the enactment of a new Constitution
in 2010, an independent office of Director of Public
Prosecution was created within which is a specialized
division on international cooperation. Its target is to
give effect to all requests within seven days. Similarly,
in 2014, security laws were amended to strengthen
the country's legislative framework against terrorism
that resulted in an enhanced legislative framework,
inter-agency coordination and cooperation against
terrorism particularly between the law enforcement and
justice sectors.

As a front-line State against international terrorism
over the years, Kenya has learnt several lessons regarding
the evolving threat. I will mention but a few. First,
although enforcement of the law is the responsibility
of the sovereign State, mainly to bring perpetrators
to justice, a coordinated international response and
close regional cooperation are vital. That is because
more rapid success in fighting terrorism is achieved
when Member States exhibit international cooperation,
good faith and honesty. AMISOM'S continued success
in Somalia against Al-Shabaab is clear testimony of
that as is the Lake Chad Basin Initiative against Boko
Haram in West Africa.

Secondly, terrorist groups move rapidly across
national lines and normally find sanctuaries in
countries with the weakest links. That is paradoxical
since no country can seal its own borders, or rely on
self-defence alone, and participate in today's economy
effectively. To resolve the paradox, regional and
international judicial cooperation against terrorism
using well defined standards are vital. International
conventions and initiatives such as the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and the Secretary
General's Plan of Action to prevent violent extremism
provide parameters to set such standards through which
Member States can adapt their national strategies based
on their own unique national circumstances.

Thirdly, terrorists and other criminals have shown
the ability to adapt to law enforcement efforts to
apprehend them. They have devised the means to travel
freely throughout the world, under false identities
using stolen and fraudulent travel documents, raise
finances through crimes such as drug trafficking,
human trafficking, ivory smuggling and corruption
as a key enabler. More than ever before, such trends
call for strong national coordination and sustained
international cooperation to manage and eradicate.

Fourthly, ordinary citizens in many societies like
Kenya's are demanding much better service from law
enforcement agencies through more prosecutions and
convictions. Raising the awareness of citizens and their
involvement in the prevention of terrorism and violent
extremist ideologies is crucial in winning the war
against terrorism while upholding human rights.

International judicial cooperation against terrorism
is hampered by many challenges, such as the diversity
of law enforcement structures, the absence of channels
for the exchange of information, divergent approaches
and priorities among nations, language, human rights
and privacy issues, issues regarding the criminal and
criminal procedure code to ensure that the appropriate
criminal acts are extraditable, ensuring that sensitive
information received via international cooperation
is kept confidential and the varied procedural
requirements of each jurisdiction.

In conclusion, to achieve greater international
judicial cooperation against terrorism, we need to
further encourage the convergence and compatibility of
national legislations, to introduce complex procedural
reforms, and generally to develop a much greater
investigation and prosecution capacity at the national
level and strengthen the capacity to cooperate at the
international level. We need to build capacity for
international cooperation of Member States within
their own criminal justice system. We need to come
up with more instruments that set standards for best
practices and cooperation. We need to institutionalize
and expand cooperation, the sharing of intelligence and
data, training and technology and organization that can
be shared without compromising national capabilities.
We need to encourage and deepen existing informal
cooperation and other arrangements among law
enforcement agencies worldwide, including through the
Interpol, financial intelligence units and other regional
networks, which is crucial to achieving and sustaining
formal cooperation.

Finally, it would be remiss of me if I did not
mention the important role played by the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime and the Counter-Terrorism
Department in enhancing capacity in Kenya and in the
region. Because of the them, we have been exposed and
are able to ensure much better cooperation than before.
Terrorism is a challenge that we all need to tackle in
solidarity. No country can do it alone.

