Mr. Kalomoh: I thank you, Mr. President, for
inviting the Secretariat to provide this briefing.

The past month has seen major political
developments in the Middle East: the establishment of
a new Palestinian Government following the elections
in January, the conduct of a general election in Israel,
and the beginnings of an important national dialogue in
Lebanon.

Two days ago, the Palestinian Legislative Council
(PLC) approved, by 71 votes to 36, the new Palestinian
Government, led by Mr. Ismail Haniyeh and
comprising Hamas members and independents. The
vote followed two months of discussions on the
possibility of forming a national unity Government,
which did not bear fruit. Palestinian Authority
President Mahmoud Abbas swore in the new
Government on 29 March on his return from the Arab
League summit in Khartoum, which reaffirmed the
commitment of the Arab States to the 2002 Arab Peace
Initiative. The summit also reaffirmed support for the
road map.

President Abbas had earlier written to Mr. Haniyeh
to express his concern at the draft Government
programme prepared by Hamas and to ask him to align
the programme with that of the Palestinian presidency.
The programme subsequently outlined by Prime
Minister Haniyeh in his speech before the PLC
expresses its respect for the constitutional relationship
with President Abbas and its honouring of the
relationship with the Palestine Liberation Organization
(PLO) on the basis of respect for their respective
constitutional mandates. It does not, however,
acknowledge the status of the PLO as the sole
representative of the Palestinian people or the basic
tenets of its 1988 declaration of independence, as
requested by Fatah and other parties in discussions on a
national unity Government.

The following priorities are identified in the
programme: all matters related to the occupation, the
provision of security, improvement of the economic
situation, internal reform and fighting corruption,
reinforcing the status of the Palestinian cause in the
Arab and Islamic worlds and developing international
relations to serve Palestinian interests.

It will be recalled that the Quartet and the
Security Council have called on the new Government
to commit to the principles of non-violence,
recognition of Israel's right to exist and acceptance of
previous agreements and obligations, including the
road map. This morning the Quartet principals issued a
statement, which included the following:

"The Quartet welcomed President Abbas's
call for the new Palestinian Government to commit
to a platform of peace and, having carefully
assessed the programme of the new Government
approved on 28 March, noted with grave concern
that the new Government has not committed to
the principles spelled out on 30 January 2006.

"The Quartet recalled its View that future
assistance to any new Government would be
reviewed by donors against that Government's
commitment to the principles outlined above. The
Quartet concurred that there inevitably will be an
effect on direct assistance to that Government and
its ministries.

"The Quartet encouraged continued
humanitarian assistance to meet the basic needs
of the Palestinian people. The Quartet noted in
that context the importance of improved
movement and access."

The Palestinian Authority continues to be unable
to meet its financial obligations. Although the
Authority's salary payments were made in February,
the Authority was unable to pay $15 million to $20
million in unemployment and other social benefits.
Depending on the honouring of pledges made at the
Arab League summit, a financing gap of approximately
$60 million exists for March salaries.

I now turn to Israeli political developments.
Israeli elections were held two days ago. According to
provisional results, the new Kadima party, led by
Acting Prime Minister Ehud Olmert, emerged with 28
seats in the Knesset, followed by Labour with 20 seats,
Shas with 13, Yisrael Beiteinu with 12 and Likud with
11. The remaining seats were shared by smaller parties.

Mr. Olmert stated during the campaign that only
parties committed to the so-called convergence plan
that he outlined would be invited to join a Kadima-led
coalition Government. This plan involves withdrawal
from parts of the West Bank, combined with the
annexing of major settlement blocs, with the stated
goal of setting Israel's permanent borders by 2010.
Officials have indicated that important details of the
convergence plan remain to be worked out and that
Israel would seek international support for it.

According to statements made during the
campaign, Israel would stand ready to proceed
unilaterally should it judge that negotiations with the
Palestinian side were not possible. President Abbas, for
his part, has rejected unilateral measures and has
indicated his desire to enter into negotiations with
Israel at the earliest opportunity. Acting Prime Minister
Olmert said on election night that

"if the Palestinians are wise enough to act, then in

the near future we will sit together at the

negotiating table to create a new reality. If they
do not, Israel will take its destiny in hand".

In that context, it remains to be seen whether Israel
will adhere to its stated policy holding that the entire
Palestinian Authority, including the presidency, has
become a terrorist entity. That policy has already led
Israel to freeze the transfer to the Palestinian Authority
of Palestinian customs and VAT revenues amounting to
approximately $50 million per month, notwithstanding
the provision of the Paris Protocol on the subject.

Allow me now to report on security
developments. Members of the Council have already been
briefed on the events in the Jericho prison on 14 March
and the reaction in Gaza and the West Bank, as well as
on the efforts of the Secretary-General, among others,
to ensure that the situation did not escalate and that
calm was restored. President Abbas has demanded the
immediate return of many of the prisoners. Israel, on
the other hand, has indicated that it intends to hold and
try them for their alleged crimes.

Israel was on high security alert during most of
the reporting period, and both Israelis and Palestinians
suffered from violence. An Israeli civilian was killed
and another injured in separate shooting incidents in
the northern West Bank on 1 March. A 15-year-old
Palestinian boy was killed in an operation in the Ein
Bitilma refugee camp on 3 March, where another
teenager was injured. On 6 March a targeted action by
Israel against two alleged Palestinian militants in Gaza
killed three Palestinian children, including two
brothers, and injured eight other passersby. Rockets
continued to be launched by Palestinians from Gaza
into Israel throughout the month, including, for the
first time, a Katyusha rocket on 28 March, and Israel
continued to fire artillery at rocket launching sites and
bombarded the access routes leading to them. On
March 25, a Palestinian teenager was killed in one such
bombardment. Israel reported that its security measures
prevented a number of terrorist attacks during the
month.

Let me now address the humanitarian situation in
Gaza. Citing security concerns, Israel has closed the
Karni crossing into Gaza for 46 days since the
beginning of the year. As a consequence, stocks of
basic food commodities, including wheat flour, have
been severely depleted. The crisis peaked between 17
and 21 March, when bakeries were forced to close and
food rationing was introduced. Since then, Karni has
reopened to allow over 1,300 truckloads of food to
enter Gaza, and stocks of basic commodities are
stabilizing.

The closure of Karni also seriously affected the
export of produce from Gaza, including from
greenhouse installations, previously operated by Israeli
settlers, that had been preserved with international
support. Some $5.2 million in potential exports were
destroyed after perishing before they could be
exported. On 26 March the export of goods was
permitted for the first time in two weeks. The
continuous operation of the Karni commercial
crossing, as envisaged in last November's Agreement
on Movement and Access, remains vital to Gaza's
economic viability and social welfare.

As in neighbouring areas of Israel, avian flu has
recently been confirmed in two locations in Gaza and
is suspected in two other locations in the Strip. An
estimated three million birds are affected. The United
Nations system is working closely with both parties to
contain this crisis. The Food and Agricultural
Organization is dealing with the Palestinian Minister
for Agriculture, and the World Health Organization is
encouraging and coordinating donor response and is
supporting the Palestinian Minister for Health in
addressing potential cases of human infection. The
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East and the World Bank are
examining options for distributing cash compensation
to farmers.

Avian flu is affecting the whole region, including
Israel. The Secretary-General welcomes the
cooperation among the region's Governments to
combat this serious problem and arrest the spread of
the disease. He thanks the Government of Israel for the
material and technical support it has provided to the
Palestinian Authority. Additional assistance from the
international community to the Palestinian Authority is
required.

Let me now turn to developments in Lebanon. In

Lebanon, political leaders have been engaged since
2 March in a national dialogue to address major issues
affecting their country, including the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1559 (2004). Discussions
so far have led to important consensus on certain
issues, including the international investigations into
the assassination of former Prime Minister Rafik Hariri
and 22 others, a court of an international nature to try
the assassins, and rebuilding Lebanese-Syrian relations
on the basis of non-interference and mutual respect
with a view to establishing full diplomatic relations.

Consensus has also emerged on how to address
the question of Palestinian weapons. In this regard,
Prime Minister Siniora was tasked with making direct
contact with President Assad to discuss the way
forward. The two leaders had an initial meeting on this
issue in Khartoum, on the margin of the Arab summit.

Participants in the dialogue also agreed to initiate
a process through which to identify the Shab'a Farms
as Lebanese. As the Council is aware, in 2000 the
Security Council confirmed the Secretary-General's
assessment that the Shab'a Farms lie in an area
occupied by Israel in the 1967 war and thus do not fall
within the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL) area of operation and the purview of
resolution 425 (1978), but rather of resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973). However, as is stated in the
Secretary-General's report of 22 May 2000 (S/2000/460),
the line of withdrawal identified by the United Nations is
to be "without prejudice to future border agreements
between the Member States concerned".

A national dialogue is now concentrating on the
issue of the presidency and on reaching a national
consensus on the weapons of Hizbollah. The situation
along the Blue Line has remained quiet, although there
has been continuing concern regarding the potential for
instability. The Israeli authorities reported concern
over a possible operation by HizbolIah against Israeli
targets. The Secretary-General has appealed to the
leaders of Israel, Lebanon and Syria to do their utmost
to maintain calm, the importance of which cannot be
overstated, particularly at this time.

Allow me to conclude with these brief observations.

First, while the programme of the new Palestinian
Government shows signs of evolution from Hamas'
deeply disturbing record and covenant, the Government
should, as President Abbas has urged, reassess its
positions on the Quartet's principles and President
Abbas' platform of peace, if the aspirations of the
Palestinian people for peace and statehood are to enjoy
the strong international support they deserve.

Secondly, as we await the formation of a new
Israeli Government, we must recall that if the prospect
of a viable Palestinian State in the framework of a two-
State solution is seen to dwindle because of unilateral
Israeli action, it will become even more difficult to
persuade Palestinians that there is anything to be
gained from moving toward a compromise. The interest
in negotiations recently expressed by both acting Prime
Minister Olmert and President Abbas should be
seriously explored.

Thirdly, despite the gulf between the parties, they
and the international community share a common
interest and duty to prevent a security or humanitarian
crisis in the occupied Palestinian territory. In this
context, and while mindful of Israeli security concerns,
we would observe that the extended closure of Gaza
has caused real hardships.
Finally, the beginning of the national dialogue in
Lebanon is an historic and positive development. All
the political leaders of the country have come together
without any external prodding for an open discussion
of issues of national concern. Notable progress has
been achieved. The process underscores the fact that
dialogue remains the most effective way to reach
consensus, and consensus is in turn the most effective
means of ensuring stability and national unity in
Lebanon. We encourage the Lebanese parties to
maintain their commitment to this dialogue as a means
through which Lebanon addresses both its national
priorities and international commitments. Let us hope
that their efforts will continue to bear fruit, thus
sending a message throughout the region that peaceful
dialogue is indeed the only way forward.

