Mr. Romero-Martinez (Honduras) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to join the other members in
congratulating you, Sir, representing the sister
Republic of Peru, for your wise stewardship as
President of the Security Council, and to acknowledge
the importance of bringing to the Council this topic -
children and armed conflict - in compliance with
mandates, but above all with the precepts established in
our Charter to preserve present and future generations
from the scourge of war.

We greatly appreciate the Secretary-General's
report (S/2006/826), as well as that of his Special
Representative, Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, who is

doing excellent work. We warmly congratulate her. We
would also like to express our thanks for the reports of
the Executive Director of UNICEF and the
representative of Save the Children, who eloquently
recounted a few situations and, generally speaking,
made important recommendations. My delegation
supports these recommendations, not only in their
design, but also fundamentally with respect to
developing relevant and effective programmatic action
that reinforces the rehabilitation and reintegration
efforts for children, ensuring long-term sustainability
and the success of such interventions.

We are pleased to note that the Council in the
past decade has placed priority on the defence and
promotion of the rights of the child, in particular those
affected by armed conflict.

The structure established by the Council in
resolution 1612 (2005) has made it possible to set up a
legal framework that marks a significant step forward
in finding a solution to such a complex problem and
complements existing international legal machinery. I
would like to point out a few of the most important
instruments: the 1989 Convention on the Rights of the
Child, the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in
armed conflict, the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and
their Additional Protocols, as well as the Statute of the
International Criminal Court, to mention a few.

We are pleased by the establishment in resolution
1612 (2005) of a monitoring and reporting mechanism
on the participation of children in armed conflict, as
well as by the encouragement to set up coordination
among the various specialized agencies of the United
Nations system, giving UNICEF an important role in
these activities.

In our opinion, this will strengthen and guarantee
an effective protection policy for those beings whose
smiles are being marked by the fatal tragedy of
violence. It will also revive hopes for a new, different
and just world and also for the development of our
youth. Perhaps we will manage to eliminate, once and
for all, a scourge that threatens all of us equally to
different degrees on some occasions or in different
circumstances, with children sometimes being the
weakest link in many of our marginalized areas.

Socio-economic realities expose them to an
environment of street violence whose reality is perhaps
harsher than what we see in a conventional armed
conflict. We do subscribe to the further expansion of
the range of information that we are trying to obtain in
order to analyse how we can contribute to resolving
this problem.

Honduras would like to see a world of peace,
security and the peaceful settlement of disputes in
applying international law. We hope to see smiles,
dreams, education and a better future for the children
of our world with the effective enforcement of the
fundamental rights of all humans, which we must
respect and promote in any part of the world. To
conclude, the smiles and the dreams of children cannot
be eliminated by the criminal use of guns.

