Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM).

At the outset, let me express the appreciation of
NAM. to you, Mr. President, and the Spanish presidency
ofthe Council for convening this debate on the Council's
working methods and for presenting the concept note
(S/2015/793, annex) on the issue. NAM. welcomes this
open debate, since it provides an opportunity for the
entire United Nations membership to express their
views on Security Council working methods and
encourages the broader membership to participate in
the debate.

For NAM, transparency, openness and consistency
are key elements that the Security Council should
observe in all its activities, approaches and procedures.
We regret that the Council has neglected those
important elements on numerous instances. Examples
of that failing can be seen in its reluctance to convene
open debates on some issues of high significance, its
holding of unscheduled open debates with selective
notifications, its practice of repeatedly restricting
participation in certain debates and of discriminating
between members and non-members of the Council,
particularly with regard to the sequence and time limits
of statements allowed during the open debates.

In View of the time limit and the fact that the NAM
position on the subject at hand is reflected in the May
2014 final document of the seventeenth Ministerial
Conference of the Non-Aligned Movement, I will
confine myself to the following nine specific measures
that NAM. calls for with a View to improving the working
methods of the Council and enhancing its efficiency in
fulfilling its primary responsibility.

First, the provisional rules of procedure of the
Security Council, which have remained provisional for
70 years, should be formalized in order to improve its
transparency and accountability.

Second, the number of public meetings should be
increased, in accordance with Articles 31 and 32 of
the Charter of the United Nations, and the meetings
should provide real opportunities to take into account
the Views and contributions of the wider membership
of the United Nations, particularly non-members of
the Council whose affairs are under discussion by the
Council.

Third, closed meetings and informal consultations
should be kept to a minimum and should be the exception
rather than the rule, as they were meant to be. Meetings
should be open, especially when they include briefings
by the Special Envoys or Representatives of the
Secretary-General and the United Nations Secretariat.

Fourth, the establishment of subsidiary organs by
the Council should be in accordance with the letter
and spirit of the Charter of the United Nations, and
those organs should function in a manner that provides
adequate and timely information on their activities to
the broad United Nations membership.

Fifth, the annual reports of the Security Council
to the General Assembly should be more explanatory,
comprehensive and analytical, assessing the work
of the Council, including such cases in which the
Council has failed to act, and should include the views
expressed by members during the consideration of the
agenda items. We also call on the Council to elaborate
on the circumstances under which it adopts the various
outcomes, whether resolutions, presidential statements,
press statements or other elements to the press.

Sixth, the Council should, pursuant to paragraph
1 of Article 15 and paragraph 3 of Article 24of the
Charter of the United Nations, submit special reports
for the consideration of the General Assembly.

Seventh, the Council should ensure that its monthly
assessments are comprehensive and analytical and
that they are issued in a timely fashion. The General
Assembly may consider proposing parameters for the
elaboration of such assessments.

Eighth, the Council should fully take into account
the recommendations of the General Assembly on
matters relating to international peace and security,
consistent with paragraph 2 of Article 1 of the Charter.

Ninth, the Council should cease its ongoing attempts
to shift issues on the agenda of the General Assembly
or the United Nations Economic and Social Council
over to the Security Council and the encroachment by
the latter on the functions and powers of the Assembly.

The Non-Aligned Movement rejects the use of
the Security Council as a tool to pursue national
political interests and agendas, since that practice
aggravates rather than alleviates situations and runs
counter to its mission as enshrined in the Charter. We
reiterate the necessity of non-selectivity, impartiality
and accountability in the work of the Council. The
decision by the Security Council to initiate formal or
informal discussions on the situation in any Member
State or on any issue that does not constitute a threat to
international peace and security is contrary to Article
24 of the Charter. In such cases, there is a need for
the Council to remain strictly within the powers and
functions accorded to it by Member States under the
Charter.

In recent years, the Security Council has been
too quick to threaten or authorize enforcement action
in some cases, while remaining silent and inactive in
others. Furthermore, the Council has increasingly
resorted to Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations as an umbrella for addressing issues that do not
necessarily pose an immediate threat to international
peace and security. A careful review of those trends
indicates that the Council could have opted for
alternative provisions to respond more appropriately
to particular cases. Instead of making excessive and
quick resort to Chapter VII, efforts should be made to
fully utilize the provisions of Chapters VI and VIII for
the pacific settlement of disputes. Chapter VII should
be invoked, as intended, as a measure of last resort.
Unfortunately, provisions of Articles 41 and 42 have in
some cases been resorted to with undue speed before
other options were fully exhausted.
Finally, as we approach the process to appoint a
new Secretary-General for the Organization, NAM
underlines its position as elaborated in the Algiers
ministerial declaration of May 2014, along with the
central role of the General Assembly in the process of
selecting and appointing the Secretary-General, and
expresses its support for efforts aimed at reinforcing
and strengthening the role of the Assembly in that
regard.

