I thank you, Sir, for convening today's timely and important debate, both in your capacity as President of the Council and Vice-Chair of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and other Procedural Questions. Malaysia would also like to commend Saint Vincent and the Grenadines for its leadership and commitment on this issue as Chair of the Informal Working Group. Malaysia also wishes to applaud the constant efforts of the Council in exploring practical working methods during these unprecedented circumstances. This clearly illustrates the importance of ensuring that the Security Council is as agile and effective as possible in discharging its mandates on behalf of the wider United Nations membership. The Council's performance, credibility and accountability are hugely defined by its working methods. In that regard, my delegation wishes to highlight the following points. First, on transparency and inclusiveness. Malaysia is pleased to see that progress has been made in enhancing the transparency and accountability of the work of the Council. We note that there are increasing numbers of open debates, with selected meetings covered by live webcast. The greater use of Arria Formula meetings of the Council for engagement with the wider United Nations membership is also commendable. In addition, we commend the conduct of informal briefings, as well as the introductory and wrap-up sessions by the President of the Security Council. We are also encouraged by the continuous monthly engagement between the President of the Security Council and the President of the General Assembly. The readout of this engagement, which is circulated by the President of the General Assembly, is valuable to all Member States. Malaysia hopes that similar engagement could be strengthened with the President of the Economic and Social Council, as peace and security issues are also linked to the subject of women, youth and development. Notwithstanding that, we also call on the Council to produce a summary of the closed consultations. We believe that it would be useful if some form of summary records on the important discussions could be established and shared with the broader membership. With regard to the annual report of the Security Council to the General Assembly, we note a trend in the delay of its submission in recent years. Malaysia also notes that, as of today, only seven Council members have circulated their monthly assessments for 2019. We would expect the Council to fulfil its commitment regarding the timely submission of reports, as stipulated in its presidential note S/2019/997 of December 2019. Secondly, with regard to effectiveness, the Council must fully utilize the "Any other business" item to ensure emerging threats and issues are addressed swiftly. It should also request more early warning and situational awareness briefings from the Secretariat. The Council should also continue to invite briefers who could deliver insights to add value to its deliberations. More importantly, the Council must do its best in closing the gap between early warning and early action. This relates to my final point, which is on the decision-making process. The Council must act promptly, decisively and in unison in maintaining international peace and security. Too often, due to the current veto system, the Council has failed in its mandate, owing to the narrow interests of some members. As a signatory of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency code of conduct, Malaysia calls for restraint in the use or the threat of the veto in situations involving mass atrocity crimes such as genocide, crimes against humanity or war crimes. We also support the French-Mexican initiative on framing the use of the veto in cases of mass atrocities. In today's context, Malaysia believes that it is also apposite to regulate the use of the veto in addressing non-traditional threats to international peace and security, such as on issues concerning global public-health emergencies. The seventy-fifth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations offers a golden opportunity for the Council to strengthen and reinvigorate its working methods so as to address the integrated nature of today's security threats. The Charter of the United Nations, indeed, affords the Council the flexibility to evolve and adapt as necessary. In this regard, Malaysia will continue to provide its full support towards the achievement of that goal.
