Ms. Stener (Norway): Norway wants to thank
the Lithuanian presidency for bringing this important
issue back to the Council. Let me also thank Deputy
Secretary-General Eliasson for his briefing, and
Mr. Deloire and Ms. Pearl for their testimonies this
morning.

Freedom of expression is one of the most
fundamental and important human rights. Regrettably,
it is also one of the most threatened human rights.
Safeguarding freedom of expression and freedom of the
press is at the heart of Norway's human rights policy.
Because of the increased pressure to these freedoms
worldwide, we are currently working on a strategy to
intensify our work in this field. A main priority for us
is the safety and protection ofjournalists, with a special
focus on women journalists and media workers. They
are particularly vulnerable to harassment and violence,
and it is important to address the gender dimension of
measures to ensure their safety.

Journalists go where most of us are unable or
unwilling to go. They place themselves in dangerous
situations in order to report independently, shed light
on atrocities and expose violations of human rights.
It is precisely because of this important eyewitness
role that journalists and media workers are targeted in
conflict situations. Although journalists operating in
areas of armed conflict are protected as civilians under
international humanitarian law, they are attacked for
what they have written, silenced for what they have
witnessed or kidnapped for the leverage and global
attention their capture may provide.

The vast majority of attacks against journalists,
however, occur outside situations of armed conflict. It
is therefore vital that we protect journalists both in and
outside of conflict. In the past 10 years, more than 700
journalists have been killed for simply doing their job.
Nine out of ten cases go unpunished. Impunity is the
greatest obstacle to ensuring the safety of journalists.
Every act of violence that goes uninvestigated and
unpunished is an open invitation for further violence.

Norway will continue to support the safety of
journalists online and offline and work against impunity
for perpetrators in accordance with the United Nations
Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the
Issue of Impunity. Through the Norwegian Union of
Journalists, the International Federation of Journalists
and International Media Support, Norway supports the
safety training of journalists and other media workers.
We must provide protection for journalists, and
we must fight impunity for crimes committed against
them. The international legal framework is in place,
but the gap between the commitments States have made
and the respect shown for human rights in practice
is far too big. What we need is political will and
implementation at the national level. States must ensure
the safety ofjournalists also in conflict situations. They
must investigate threats and attacks against journalists
effectively and impartially.

No journalist anywhere should have to risk his
or her life to report facts and news. We are therefore
pleased to have co-sponsored resolution 2222 (2015),
adopted this morning.

