There have been notable developments since the last open debate in July (S/2020/736), in particular the normalization of relations between Israel and the United Arab Emirates, Bahrain as well as the Sudan. The suspension of the application of sovereignty over the West Bank by Israel is also a positive gesture. Japan appreciates the mediation efforts of the United States and hopes these events will lead to an easing of tensions and to stability in the region. Despite such developments, however, the situation on the ground remains worrisome. The Government of Israel has recently approved plans for the construction of about 5,000 housing units in settlements in the West Bank. Japan deeply deplores the continued settlement activities of the Government of Israel, despite repeated calls from the international community, including Japan, to freeze such activities, which are in violation of international law. Such action runs counter to the efforts to provide momentum towards reducing tensions in the region, including through the agreements to normalize bilateral relations. The Middle East peace issue should be resolved only through negotiations among the parties concerned, and not through violence or unilateral actions. I wish to reaffirm Japan's commitment to supporting a two-State solution based on relevant Security Council resolutions and internationally agreed parameters. Japan will continue to work on building confidence among the parties with a view to the resumption of dialogue, the first step towards a two-State solution. Intra-Palestinian reconciliation is also imperative for realizing a two-State solution. Japan welcomes the announcement by President Abbas at the general debate last month (see A/75/PV.10) of his intention to hold elections, which should provide a unique opportunity for reconciliation and solidarity among the Palestinian people through the democratic process. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is causing a human-security crisis, threatening people's survival, livelihoods and dignity around the world, including in the Middle East. As always, the most vulnerable people are hit hardest. The increasing number of infections among Palestine refugees is particularly alarming, given their living conditions in overcrowded camps and the limited health services available. Japan commends the efforts of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) in this regard and expresses its utmost respect for the Agency's front-line workers operating under challenging circumstances. In addition to its contribution of about $1.5 million to UNRWA earlier this year in response to the COVID-19 flash appeal, Japan has recently decided to provide approximately $4.1 million of food assistance through UNRWA. This brings Japan's total contribution to UNRWA in 2020 to approximately $30 million. The pandemic calls for short-term humanitarian assistance, as well as medium- to long-term social and economic support. Japan will continue providing necessary assistance to Palestine refugees through UNRWA, with a view to protecting and empowering them and ensuring human security. In this respect, Japan expects UNRWA to continue its efforts to improve and strengthen its management, which is essential for delivering effectively to people in need. Lastly, we should not forget the importance of improving the overall quality of life in Palestine, even amid the COVID-19 pandemic. Japan has recently decided to provide approximately $34 million of assistance, which includes food assistance through the World Food Programme and aid for the construction of schools and improvement of refugee camps. Japan reiterates its continued commitment to the realization of a life of dignity and hope for the Palestinian people.
