Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): We commend the
Chinese presidency, as well as to the Permanent
Missions of Angola and Senegal, for initiating and
convening this open debate, which focuses on piracy
and armed robbery at sea in the Gulf of Guinea, within
the overall subject of the consolidation of peace in
West Africa. As a member-observer of the African
Union, Kazakhstan is deeply concerned that piracy in
the Gulf of Guinea affects not only a number of our
friendly countries in West Africa, but also the wider
international community. It is therefore becoming an
issue of global concern.

We strongly condemn piracy in the Gulf of Guinea,
which is often part of the heavily armed criminal
enterprises that employ violent methods. Those attacks
by pirates have reached a high record, with some 100
attempted hijackings annually, a close second behind
those in South-East Asia. It is alarming to note that
pirates in the region operate a well-funded criminal
industry, which includes established supply networks.
The piracy attacks mainly occur in territorial waters,
terminals and harbours, rather than on the high seas,
which has hindered intervention by international
naval forces. Furthermore, pirates have become more
aggressive and better armed, with brutal tactics that
defy the methods to capture them.

From the humanitarian point of view, we are
concerned that the pirates in the Gulf of Guinea are
especially noted for their violent modus operandi, which
involves kidnapping, torture, violence and the shooting
of crews, thereby constituting a conscious so-called
criminal business model. It is also disconcerting that
many events go unreported. From an economic point of
View, acts of piracy interfere with the legitimate trading
interests of the affected countries. To that end, trade in
the region's major ports has dropped dramatically. We
grieved that the cost of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea
has been estimated to be approximately $2 billion,
while poverty is a big challenge for the countries of
West Africa.

We commend the performance of the United
Nations, the African Union and other organizations
engaged in international efforts in the region to address
the scourge of piracy and armed robbery. To ensure
further progress, a more comprehensive regional
strategy elaborated by all stakeholders is needed.

Early in the seventieth session of the General
Assembly, Kazakhstan and the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) signed a cost-
sharing agreement for a new project called the
Africa-Kazakhstan Partnership for the Sustainable
Development Goals. The agreement focuses on
technical support to the Ministries for Foreign Affairs
and other relevant institutions in 45 African countries,
including West Africa. The project will promote the
sharing of institutional experiences and best practices as
Governments prepare to take forward the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1). The United Nations Development
Programme is working directly with ministries of
African countries to implement that project.

We believe that our overall objective should be to
build on the efforts of countries in the region to achieve
greater State-building, the rule of law, good governance,
inclusive political processes, security andjustice sector
reforms, the protection of civilians and the disarmament
and reintegration of combatants. All those measures, as
a complex whole, are vitally important to counter piracy
and armed robbery at sea in the Gulf of Guinea. To that
end, we have to think of greater military, diplomatic and
development partnerships that go beyond North-South
cooperation to South-South and triangular cooperation.
My delegation therefore supports the actions of the
United Nations, and especially those of the Council
through its various resolutions concerning the region of
West Africa as a whole and its countries individually.

We need to work together towards the West
African region's stability, progressive development and
achievement of human security for all. We therefore
stand for fully implementing resolution 1325 (2000)
and, most important, the 2030 Agenda, in the region.
That calls for broadening the concept of peace and
stability from State-centred security to people-oriented
security and from purely military to non-military
security, which includes the important priorities of
food and water and energy security, including nuclear
security, on our path to a non-permanent seat on the
Security Council.

President Nazarbayev of Kazakhstan, in his recent
new security paradigm document entitled, "Manifesto.
The World. The 21st Century", presented on 31 March
at the fourth Nuclear Security Summit in Washington,
DC, proposed the elaboration of a 2045 global
strategic initiative plan. Its main goal is to eliminate
the root causes of wars and conflicts by the United
Nations centennial in 2045. During his address to the
General Assembly last September (see A/70/PV.13), he
also called for transferring 1 per cent of the defence
budgets of Member States to the special Sustainable
Development Goals Fund.

Addressing the issues of piracy and armed robbery
at sea is possible by bringing together existing measures,
operating under the aegis of the United Nations. We
therefore call on all delegations to support these bold
and forward-looking approaches. Development and
peace go together, and therefore we must support the
countries of the West Africa region in implementing
the 2030 Agenda and the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change. Kazakhstan is therefore reaching out to
countries in Africa through technical assistance
with UNDP projects. We have to invest more in
sustainable development.

