Mr. Sow (Guinea) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the holding of this wrap-up
meeting devoted principally to the issue of
peacekeeping operations.

The Charter of this Organization entrusts the
Security Council with primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. In this
regard, the Council remains the principal organ
responsible for establishing the mandates of
peacekeeping operations. Accordingly, the Council is
required to draw lessons from past and current
operations and to make active efforts to strengthen the
United Nations capacity to maintain and promote
peace.

Since the launch of the first peacekeeping
operation in 1948 the international community has
acquired broad experience. The new nature of conflicts,
in particular intra-State conflicts, has lent peacekeeping
operations another dimension. Until the beginning
1990s, peacekeeping operations fundamentally relied
on the classical principle of interposition between rival
forces of two countries. The change has been reflected
in the diversification of the role of the protagonists and
of peacekeepers. It has also prompted the United
Nations to engage in in-depth reflection on
peacekeeping operations. The Brahimi report is an
eloquent illustration of this change and has the virtue
of shedding fresh light on the challenges that we face
and the steps that must be taken to tackle them.

Our consideration of this item is taking place in a
context marked by an increasing number of
peacekeeping activities, the success of which - as a
number of speakers have noted - relies on respect for
the basic principles, which are the consent of the
parties, impartiality and non-use of force except in
cases of legitimate self-defence. However, it should be
noted that the failure of certain peacekeeping
operations is due to many and very complex factors,
including the underestimation of what was at stake,
poor definition of certain mandates, inadequate
resources and, in particular, the absence of political
will among the parties in conflict.

To tackle this situation, my delegation would like
to note the importance of sending multidisciplinary
fact-finding missions to conflict zones. Such missions
could evaluate all the ramifications of the crisis so as to
make it possible to establish a suitable mandate. We
believe that better planning and a more precise concept
of operations and rules of engagement, as well as the
possibility of rapid deployment, will promote success
among these operations. This is why the United
Nations policy on a system of stand-by forces is worthy
of our full attention.

Coordination among the various departments of
the Secretariat, on the one hand, and, on the other,
between them and the other actors concerned, and the
availability of human, financial and logistical resources
fall within the same approach. From this standpoint we
encourage strengthened cooperation between the
Security Council, the Secretariat and troop-contributing
countries in the context of implementation of
resolution 1353 (2001). Moreover, particular attention
should be given to the question of training and
arrangements for regional cooperation.

On the question of Africa, a continent particularly
affected by armed conflicts, my delegation favours
bolstering regional and subregional capacities. My
delegation welcomes and encourages the strengthening
of cooperative relations between the United Nations,
particularly the Security Council, and the organs and
institutions active in the area of peace and security on
the African continent.

Developing activities to prevent war and build
peace in Africa requires financial, logistic and training
support, which the United Nations should provide to
the African Union and to its regional organizations,
especially the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), which is playing a leading role in
bringing peace and stability back to Liberia, Sierra
Leone and Cote d'Ivoire. Given the importance of
peacekeeping operations in the maintenance of
international peace and security, periodic evaluation of
such missions, in order to adapt and redefine them as
necessary, is essential.

In this context my delegations welcomes the
fruitful results of the fact-finding mission and
exchange of ideas yesterday by the five ECOWAS
Ministers for Foreign Affairs, together with the
ECOWAS Executive Secretary. We support the
recommendations made, individually and collectively,
by that mission with a view to adapting the
international community's peace efforts so as to meet
the concerns of the West African region. We are
grateful to all our friends, in particular all the members
of the Security Council, for their support for the
actions of that subregion.

I would be remiss if, in concluding my statement,
I failed to pay a tribute to United Nations and
associated personnel, as well as humanitarian
personnel, working in difficult circumstances at the
risk of their lives. We wish to take this opportunity to
reiterate our unreserved condemnation of the criminal
attacks on United Nations and humanitarian personnel.
Once again we address our condolences to the family
members of the victims of the attack on United Nations
headquarters in Baghdad. We welcome the Security
Council's recent adoption of resolution 1502 (2003)
and the declaration of 29 May as International Day of
Peacekeepers.

Lastly, allow me to convey to your delegation,
Mr. President, and to you personally my delegation's
gratitude for the quality of the work accomplished and
for your skill and diplomacy throughout this month.

