I thank President Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz for their briefings. We appreciate the ongoing efforts of Judge Agius at the helm of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals towards fulfilling the Security Council's vision of the Mechanism as a small, temporary and efficient institution, whose functions and size will diminish over time. Despite its residual character, the Mechanism continues to enshrine the formidable and vivid legacy of contemporary ad hoc tribunals as the catalysts for global and permanent accountability for atrocity crimes and the post-conflict rebuilding of domestic judiciaries. Tunisia commends the recent developments in the work of the Mechanism with the arrest of Rwandan fugitive Felicien Kabuga in France in mid-May and the confirmation of Augustin Bizimana's death. We salute the crucial contribution of the French authorities towards accomplishing the former. We also appreciate the unrelenting prosecutorial efforts of Mr. Brammertz and his Office that helped to shed light on the fate and whereabouts of those two suspects. As the Mechanism is predicated on State cooperation, it is essential that States continue to provide full and timely cooperation to the Mechanism so that the six remaining fugitives indicted by the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) are arrested and brought to trial. We stress that accountability that is proximate to the victims and affected communities must be at the core of any viable model of justice and central to meaningful reconciliation efforts. We urge the Mechanism to maintain consistent action in that direction so that international justice is also relevant domestically. Identifying a permanent solution for persons who have been acquitted or released by the ICTR and who currently reside in a safe house in Arusha has become a weighty matter. We encourage all efforts aimed at their voluntary and dignified return to Rwanda as part of reconciliation efforts in the country. It is often said that time heals all wounds. However, the current trends observed in the former Yugoslavia and among Rwanda's diaspora differ from that saying. The resurgence of genocide denials and the glorification of convicted war criminals are matters of serious concern. We firmly condemn such revisionist accounts, which seek to undermine truth, lasting peace and coexistence, as well as intercommunal reconciliation. Lest we forget that the Rwandan genocide took place because early warning signs were disregarded, the international community must continue to heed these pernicious ideologies and address them accordingly. Tunisia recognizes that the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has put a halt to judicial proceedings of the Mechanism and disrupted fixed timelines for their completion, along with foreseen implications for its budget next year. Against that backdrop, we urge the principals to further strive for efficiencies and minimize costs by achieving economies of scale, streamlining activities, identifying potential duplications and promoting synergies within, as well as between, the Mechanism's branches. We express our satisfaction at the overall gender balance maintained in the Mechanism, and we encourage further enhancement of its geographical diversity. We further stress the importance of providing the Council with clear and focused projections of completion timelines as the COVID-19 pandemic situation unfolds. Finally, Tunisia looks forward to the furthering of the Mechanism's operation so that it continues to carry out its important work in the expected efficient and effective manner.
