Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would
like to join others in thanking Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Sandra Honore for her
comprehensive briefing and in welcoming the presence
of His Excellency the Ambassador of the Republic
of Haiti.

In a few days, on 15 October, we will mark the
official closing of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and the opening of the
new United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH), pursuant to resolution 2350 (2017), of
13 April 2017.

Clearly this new chapter in the United Nations
presence in Haiti, which is about to begin, is a great
illustration of the significant progress achieved by the
Government and the people of Haiti with the support of
the international community and, above all, the United
Nations, which made possible the election of President
Jovenel Moise, the return to constitutional order, the
improved security situation and the resumption of a
normal political life, which we nevertheless hope will
further be improved through an enhanced political
dialogue, which is necessary for the strengthening of
democratic institutions.

It is important to note that since then, in order
to improve the living conditions of the Haitian
people - particularly those in rural areas - and also
to build the country's resilience to frequent natural
disasters and lay the groundwork for sustainable
development, the new authorities have been actively
implementing reforms in all areas, including
socioeconomic development, through the launch
of the flagship Caravan of Change programme,
which has intensified and expanded to several of the
country's regions.

We believe that upon review, MINUSTAH can
be proud of the work it has accomplished, despite the
difficulties posed by cases of sexual exploitation and
abuse and the outbreak of the cholera epidemic. The
Mission was deployed in 2004 in a politically very
unstable environment with widespread violence, yet
13 years later it has been able, alongside the Haitian
Government and people, to help lay the foundations
of lasting stability, better security and a future that
Haitians can glimpse with a sense of optimism.

My delegation would therefore like to once again
pay well-deserved tribute to Ms. Honore, Head of
MINUSTAH, as well as to all the Mission's personnel
and the troop- and police-contributing countries,
for helping the Haitian people. Nevertheless, we all
recognize that many challenges will still need to be
addressed in order to enable Haiti to consolidate the
progress made, which remains fragile. In that regard and
in terms of security, we are hopeful that MINUJUSTH
will help to put greater emphasis on building the
capacity of and training the Haitian National Police
so that it can improve its professionalization and
achieve the objectives set out in its 2017-2021 strategic
development plan, following the significant progress
already made.

Similarly, we are confident that with the support of
the new Mission, control and accountability mechanisms
will be strengthened, the process of legislative reform
will be completed, and the entities that promote and
support human rights will be strengthened so as to
allow them to conduct their work effectively. Given
its ambitious mission, MINUJUSTH deserves the full
support of the Security Council, hence the support and
confidence that my delegation wishes to express to the
women and men who will have the inspiring task of
fulfilling its mandate.

At the same time, my delegation calls on the
international community to remain mobilized to
confront the cholera epidemic that continues to plague
Haiti. That can be done by supporting the 10-year
Government plan to eliminate cholera in Haiti, as well
as through the new United Nations approach to cholera
in Haiti (resolution 71/161), which has just been adopted
by the General Assembly.

Senegal urges the States Members of the United
Nations to work collectively, in close collaboration with
the Haitian authorities and especially with the Victims,
to effectively implement that new approach. My
country welcomes the three-pronged strategy outlined
by Mrs. Josette Sheeran, the new Special Envoy for
Haiti, which aims to continue to contain the epidemic,
mobilize additional resources and, above all, learn from
this painful experience so as to improve United Nations
interventions around the world.

