Mr. Bailly (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation is pleased to take the floor during this open
debate on the item "Peace and security in Africa: drug
trafficking as a threat to international security", which
is a matter of great interest to us.

At the outset, Mr. President, I join other
delegations in conveying to you my warm
congratulations on this noble initiative, which has
given us an opportunity to pool our thoughts on one of
the ills that is undermining the harmonious
development of Africa. My appreciation also goes to
the United Nations, and in particular the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, for all the
assistance provided to my country and especially for
the unceasing and tireless efforts to the benefit of
developing countries as they combat the scourge of
drugs.

Trafficking in drugs, which now more than ever
is a part of globalization, is nothing new. We no longer
hesitate to talk about it as a transnational organized
crime with its own characteristics in terms of scope,
organization and financing. The growth of this scourge
has a dangerous effect on the equilibrium of our States,
and because of their transnational nature, these crimes
pose a serious threat to national, subregional and
international peace and security.

In the wake of decades of fratricidal wars whose
disastrous consequences continue to hamper its
development, the West African region has become a
major transit area for drug trafficking, in particular
cocaine being shipped from Latin America to Europe.
This is a major scourge with an impact on the
equilibrium of all our societies. Besides the rise in
crime that it causes, this trafficking harms our public
health systems and spreads HIV/AIDS.

Drug money corrupts our financial systems and
poses a threat to the survival of our States. It generates
a specific type of crime and creates networks of
criminals with their associated terrorism, gang wars
and payback - even armed movements. The fact is
that drug trafficking finances and is accompanied by
other crimes such as arms trafficking, terrorism and
money-laundering.
C6te d'Ivoire has not been idle in the fight
against drug abuse and drug trafficking. Since the 2002
Yamoussoukro Ministerial Conference on Drug Control
in Africa, we have put in place a comprehensive
national strategy encompassing prevention, education,
health care and treatment, assistance and reintegration,
along with a crackdown on trafficking, illicit
production and consumption. The strategy, which has
the support of the President and the Government of
cote d'Ivoire, includes a number of special measures,
such as coordination and supervision of the national
fight against drugs by an inter-ministerial anti-drug
committee, and mobilization and action by the police
directorate on drugs, targeting areas such as smoking
rooms and other places where traffickers congregate
and systematically destroying inventories and the
substances seized. We have ratified and are
implementing a number of relevant instruments,
including the 2000 United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocols. We
are working to harmonize our national legislation with
regional and international instruments, and we have put
in place national and subregional training programmes
organized by the Centre regional de formation a la lutte
contre la drogue de Grand Bassam in close cooperation
with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.

C6te d'Ivoire is mindful of the need for a
comprehensive regional and international approach to
put an end to this scourge, and our action in this sphere
must be taken within a regional and international
framework. Here, my country, which has already
undertaken bilateral agreements and partnerships with
friendly States on securing our borders and other
sensitive sites such as ports and airports, continues to
enhance its cooperation with INTERPOL. My country
is also working with its focal points to implement the
Regional Action Plan against illicit drug trafficking and
organized crime in West Africa, adopted by the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) at Praia, Cape Verde, in 2008.

In spite of these efforts, our States face many
challenges if they are to provide a comprehensive,
coordinated and effective national and international
response. Among other things, we need to strengthen
and harmonize the regional and international legal
framework, exchange information, provide education
and increase legal assistance in order to make
investigations and legal proceedings more effective
both in the ECOWAS area and throughout Africa.
Technical and financial assistance is a vital necessity
for capacity-building. We must also secure our land, air
and maritime borders, providing effective systems for
control and verification.

In his report on international cooperation against
the world drug problem (A/64/ 120), the Secretary-
General gives an overview of the world drug situation
and the status of international drug control activities.
Among other things, the alarming increase of cocaine
trafficking through West Africa and heroin trafficking
through East Africa is a matter of urgency. That is why
we must all strengthen international cooperation in
facing up to this global drug problem.

