Mr. Lambertini (Italy): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing today's briefing
and Assistant Secretary-General Keita for her
insightful remarks.

How to make peacekeeping more effective and
efficient is one of the major questions to be addressed.
It not only encompasses the issues of gaps in force
generation and capabilities, which were recently
addressed at the Peacekeeping Defence Ministerial
Conference in Vancouver, but is also part of the broader
reform of the United Nations system. This is because
peacekeeping is still a very important tool that the
United Nations can use to address the contemporary
challenges to international peace and security, as we
discussed yesterday in the open debate on complex
challenges in this area (see S/PV.8144).

Italy is doing its part as a provider of global
security. We are one of the most generous financial
contributors to the peacekeeping budget and we are
the largest contributor of Blue Helmets in the Group
of Western European and other States. Currently, we
have more than 1,000 units deployed in United Nations
peacekeeping missions in Lebanon, Cyprus and
Mali and in the military observer group in India and
Pakistan. Moreover, our defence and police forces are
also providing assistance and protection in other areas
of the globe - from Somalia to Afghanistan, from Iraq
to Libya and the Mediterranean, the Arab Gulf, the
Balkans, Eastern Europe and, as ofa few weeks ago, in
the Niger in the Sahel region.

As Assistant Secretary-General Keita said with
respect to the capability gaps, there is an urgent need
for air assets to improve the mobility of troops, for
medical assets to provide assistance and fast medical
evacuation, including to civilians, if needed, and for
units for explosive-ordinance disposal to remove mines
and improvised explosive devices. Italy has already
pledged to support enhancing these capabilities in the
next year, which we confirmed in Vancouver.

Technology is key in order to increase the safety
and security of peacekeepers. We think that the use of
drones in the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo has
effectively and efficiently improved the gathering of
information, which provided institutional awareness
that has been crucial for the protection of civilians and
the safety of Italian workers.

Training is also vital to improving capability and
ensuring that the mandate can be effectively delivered
on the ground. Since 2005, the Centre of Excellence for
Stability Police Units, located in Vicenza, managed by
our carabinieri together with the United States, offers
qualified training for United Nations peacekeeping
through a specific training module on the rule of
law, international humanitarian law, protection of
civilians, protection of cultural heritage, environmental
management and prevention of sexual and gender-
based violence in conflicts. It also focuses in particular
on training-of- trainers courses, especially for military
personnel from West Africa and the Sahel region.

These training programmes have developed
standard and common operational procedures to be
applied during robust police activities. We are convinced
that future police cooperation will be increasingly
based on specialized police units that are focused on
stabilization, rule of law, justice and the protection
of civilians, in line with the reform of the peace and
security architecture envisaged by the Secretary-
General, which emphasizes the need to focus more on
prevention, mediation and peacebuilding. That was also
the aim of the Security Council resolution 2382 (2017)
on policing and peacekeeping that was adopted during
our presidency last month.

Another major gap in peacekeeping operations is
the presence and role of women. The participation of
women at all levels is key to improving the effectiveness
and performance of missions. Their role is important
in all peace and security efforts. It is also crucial to
train peacekeepers to protect people, key values and
principles so as to ensure the credibility and reputation
of the United Nations. In this context, I would highlight
the fact that Italy has joined the Circle of Leadership on
the prevention of and response to sexual exploitation
and abuse in United Nations operations and has signed
the voluntary compact to eliminate this scourge. We
have also contributed to the Trust Fund in Support of
Victims of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse.

We should not forget logistics. The capacity for
operations to deliver and fulfil their mandates is
closely related to the swiftness of deployment and
the operational effectiveness of field missions. The
United Nations Global Service Centre's Logistics Base,
located in Brindisi since 1994, is a crucial hub for the
provision oflogistical support to peacekeeping missions
around the world. We should also pay attention to the
management of the environmental footprint of field
missions throughout their life cycles. A lighter footprint
would allow for cost efficiency and improved safety and
security for troops and for civilians of host countries
and eventually for the better delivery of mandates.

On this very last aspect, let me thank all our
colleagues for the issuance today of the press statement
we proposed on environmental management in relation
to peacekeeping operations. For the first time, a member
of the Security Council recognized the importance of
comprehensively addressing the relationship between
peacekeeping operations and the environments in
which they are deployed. This is a win-win goal that
has the potential to improve mandate delivery. Italy
will continue to support it in all the relevant bodies of
the United Nations.

Finally, I received a communication that we will
meet tomorrow at 1 pm. to approve a draft resolution,
so technically this is not our last meeting. But tomorrow
will be even closer to the holidays than today is so I
prefer to thank everybody now. It has been an honour and
a privilege to work with everyone, both professionally
and in a personal sense. Unlike Ambassador Rosselli
Frieri, I cannot give Council members an appointment
in 2034 so I will give members an appointment when
the reform of the Security Council has taken place.

