The Secretary-General: I join representatives
today with a heavy heart. The massive refugee
emergency that began one year ago in Rakhine state,
Myanmar, has become one of the world's worst
humanitarian and human rights crises. Last month, I
visited Cox's Bazar in Bangladesh and heard stories
of horrendous persecution and suffering. One father
broke down as he told me how his son was shot dead in
front of him, his mother was brutally murdered and his
house burned to the ground. He took refuge in a mosque
only to be discovered by soldiers, who abused him and
burned the Qur'an.

I know that members of the Council heard similar
harrowing accounts while on their own Visit to the
region. In their press statement of 9 May (SC/13331),
Council members highlighted the degree to which they
were "struck by the scale of the humanitarian crisis"
and that they remained "gravely concerned by the
current situation". They also reaffirmed the presidential
statement of 6 November 2017 (S/PRST/ZOl7/22), in
which the Security Council "strongly condemns the
widespread violence that has taken place in Rakhine
state", and expressed

"grave concern over reports of human rights
violations and abuses in Rakhine state, including by
the Myanmar security forces, in particular against
persons belonging to the Rohingya community".

One year ago, I immediately condemned the
attacks by extremists against the security forces, but
such attacks could never justify the disproportionate
use of force against civilian populations and the gross
human rights violations committed by the Myanmar
security forces and their allies. Last September, I sent
an official letter to the Council (S/2017/753) urging
concerted efforts to prevent further escalation of the
crisis in northern Rakhine state. Following my direct
engagement with the Myanmar authorities and several
initiatives on the ground conducted by the United
Nations system, I expressed my concerns regarding the
dramatic humanitarian and human rights situations. I
emphasized the threats to regional peace and security
posed by further degeneration.

As the Council knows, I have also been working
to advance a policy of engagement and unified action
to encourage positive actions by the Government,
help defuse tensions among communities and build
confidence and trust. In April I appointed Christine
Schraner Burgener as my Special Envoy on Myanmar.
She is undertaking a process of broad consultations,
including with the Government and military, civil
society and women's groups. I appreciate the Council's
strong support and welcome Myanmar's positive
cooperation with her so far. In June, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
the United Nations Development Programme and
the Myanmar authorities finalized the memorandum
of understanding that establishes a framework for
cooperation to create the conditions for the voluntary,
safe, dignified and sustainable repatriation of refugees
from Bangladesh. The memorandum of understanding
is also aimed at helping to create improved and resilient
livelihoods for all communities living in Rakhine state.

Of course, that all requires massive investment,
not only in reconstruction and development for all
communities in one of Myanmar's poorest regions, but
also in reconciliation and respect for human rights. I do
not yet see the commitment required for that investment
to take place. It is clear that conditions have not yet been
met for the safe, voluntary, dignified and sustainable
return of Rohingya refugees to their places of origin or
choice. I ask members ofthe Security Council tojoin me
in urging the Myanmar authorities to cooperate with the
United Nations and ensure immediate, unimpeded and
effective access for its agencies and partners. We must
also continue to press for the release ofjournalists who
have been arrested for reporting on this human tragedy.

Access is critical to meeting the enormous needs
and allaying the fears of refugees who would like to
return home. For the people who remain in Rakhine, it
would allow for consultations on quick-impact projects,
based on their assessed needs. Those Rohingya who
remain in Rakhine continue to face marginalization
and discrimination. Many have been cut off from
life-saving humanitarian assistance. Some 130,000
Rohingya remain confined in camps, with severe
restrictions on their freedom of movement. They
have extremely limited access to health, education
and other essential services and to ways of making a
living. There can be no excuse for delaying the quest
for dignified solutions that will allow people to return
to their areas of origin in safety and dignity, in line
with international standards and human rights. The
United Nations remains ready to help develop such
a plan. Voluntary relocation along with freedom of
movement, an end to segregation and discrimination,
inclusive development, the re-establishment of the rule
of law and public safety are essential. It is ultimately
the responsibility of Myanmar's leaders to demonstrate
greater resolve in upholding the principles of equality
and non-discrimination, while countering incitement to
racial hatred and violence.

Once again, I would like to applaud the tremendous
generosity of the Bangladeshi authorities and host
communities. But the response to the crisis must be a
global one. The international humanitarian appeal for
the Rohingya crisis remains significantly underfunded
at 33 per cent. Much more must be done to alleviate
the very real risks to life from current and impending
monsoons. I am grateful to the World Bank and its
President, Jim Yong Kim, for mobilizing almost half
a billion dollars in grant-based support for Rohingya
refugees and host communities. The grant-based
assistance approved by the Asian Development Bank
is also crucial to meeting medium-term needs and
providing assistance for life-saving priorities. Yet,
refugees need more access to education and livelihoods
to avoid further vulnerability to the risks of trafficking,
sexual exploitation and radicalization.

I cannot forget the stories I heard in Cox's Bazar.
One distraught woman gestured to a mother cradling
her young baby, who was conceived as a result of rape,
and told me,
"We need security in Myanmar and citizenship.
And we want justice for what our sisters, our
daughters and our mothers have suffered".

Accountabilityisessentialforgenuinereconciliation
among all ethnic groups and is a prerequisite for
regional security and stability. Regrettably, Myanmar
has refused to cooperate with United Nations human
rights entities and mechanisms, despite repeated calls
to do so, including from members of the Council. We
have called for different accountability options to be
considered. Most recently, very strong concerns have
been expressed by the United Nations Independent
Fact-Finding Mission on Myanmar, appointed by the
Human Rights Council. Its report, issued yesterday,
found patterns of "gross human rights violations and
abuses" (A/HRC/39/64, para. 100) committed by the
security forces, which it said "undoubtedly amount
to the gravest crimes under international law" (ibid., para. 100).

I believe the report's findings and recommendations
deserve serious consideration by all relevant United
Nations bodies. Effective international cooperation
will be critical to ensuring that accountability
mechanisms are credible, transparent, impartial,
independent and comply with Myanmar's obligations
under international law.

The Council has issued a strong presidential
statement. We also have clear recommendations from
the Kofi Annan-led Advisory Commission on Rakhine
State as a guiding framework, which takes into account
the needs of the victims and address root causes,
including discrimination, persecution and the lack of
legal status. I would like to take this opportunity to
again commend the statesmanship of the late former
Secretary-General in Myanmar and elsewhere. But
much remains to be done to provide the necessary
conditions for peace andjustice in Rakhine. As long as
a climate of fear and persecution prevails in Rakhine,
voluntary returns will not take place.

All communities in Rakhine state are poor and
need sustainable and inclusive development, which is
also essential for reconciliation and peace. I would add
that patterns of violations against ethnic and religious
minorities beyond Rakhine must also end if genuine
democracy is to take root.

A year has passed. The crisis cannot continue
indefinitely. The Council has shown unity in adopting
its presidential statement. That unity remains essential
if we are to answer clear appeals with action.
