Mr. Listre (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I wish
to thank you, Madam Minister, for presiding over our
deliberations, your delegation for its initiative to
convene this debate and the Secretary-General for the
information and comments he has shared with us on the
situation in Guinea-Bissau. I also wish to welcome the
Vice-Prime Minister of that country and the important
delegation that accompanies him this morning at this
Security Council meeting.

We believe that the political developments of this
past week in Guinea-Bissau make even more relevant
our debate on the transition processes towards peace-
building activities in those countries that, like Guinea-
Bissau, are emerging from conflict situations. This
shows the critical importance of transition periods and
the need to strengthen them with all the necessary
support of the Security Council and other United
Nations organs.

We also believe that lessons can be drawn from
the situation of Guinea-Bissau and applied to other
transition processes.

In our view, the situation in Guinea-Bissau cannot
be analysed in isolation; rather it should be considered
within a subregional context. It cannot be separated
from the political, military, economic and social
situations prevailing in other West African countries,
and particularly from the growing instability on the
common border between Sierra Leone, Guinea and
Liberia.

Guinea-Bissau entered a period of relative calm
following the presidential elections held at the
beginning of this year. However, the Security Council
must closely follow the transition process even if the
conflict appears to have ended. Factors of instability
endure, as the recent insubordination of General Mane
shows. In this case, as in others, post-conflict
democratic institutions are often weak and must be
supported by the international community concretely
and effectively.

A multidimensional conflict such as that in
Guinea-Bissau reinforces the need for a coordinated
and integrated approach involving the Security
Council, the Economic and Social Council, the relevant
specialized agencies, the Bretton Woods institutions
and the community of donor countries. In this context,
we believe that we should be considering ways of
making more operational and effective Article 65 of the
Charter on cooperation between the Security Council
and the Economic and Social Council.

This coordinated and holistic approach must be
adopted not just during the peace-building phase, but
earlier, as the conflict is developing. That is why we
believe that in the case of Guinea-Bissau, as with other
conflicts since the end of the cold war, it is not possible
to draw a clear-cut and definitive dividing line between
peacekeeping and peace-building activities. They can,
and often must, begin at the same time.

The humanitarian, institutional and economic
consequences of the conflict in Guinea-Bissau have
shown that bringing about lasting peace and
reconciliation requires far more than a ceasefire. The
conditions necessary for sustainable development
within democracy must be created.

The United Nations agencies, the Bretton Woods
institutions and the developed countries can, and must,
play a fundamental role in building peace in Guinea-
Bissau. Reducing or forgiving its external debt,
granting preferential credit, opening markets to its
products and increasing official development assistance
and private investment will help to create a climate of
stability and enable the people to enjoy the benefits of
peace.
At the same time, it is clear that the primary
responsibility for the resolution of the conflict rests
with the leadership of Guinea-Bissau. It must be
motivated by the political will to overcome the root
causes of the conflict, accept the conditions imposed
by the rule of law and embrace the goals of
reconstruction. The Security Council and the
international community must, of course, support this
process, but they cannot be a substitute for the political
will of the parties to make peace and to live in peace.

I would not want to conclude without expressing
Argentina's appreciation for the tireless work carried
out by the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Peace-
building Support Office in Guinea-Bissau, Mr. Samuel
Nana-Sinkam. We should also like to express our
appreciation to the Economic Community of West
African States and the Community of Portuguese-
speaking Countries for their constant support for the
people of Guinea-Bissau as they move towards peace,
progress and national reconciliation.

