Mr. Kulyk (Ukraine): I wish to take this
opportunity to express our appreciation to the
delegation of Chile and to you, personally, Sir, for
holding this open debate on the issue of small arms. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
substantive and timely report on this matter
(S/2003/1217).

The illicit trafficking and accumulation of small
arms remain among the greatest impediments to
sustainable development, conflict prevention and
resolution and post-conflict peace-building. It
continues to pose a serious threat to human security
and human rights.
Ukraine has steadily expressed its concern about
the serious humanitarian consequences of this
phenomenon, which claims hundreds of thousands of
innocent lives all over the world, thus highlighting the
global dimension of the problem. We are deeply
convinced that, without concerted efforts by the
international community to prevent uncontrolled
proliferation of these weapons, it is impossible to
maintain peace and regional and global security.

The Programme of Action on Small Arms,
adopted by the 2001 United Nations Conference on the
Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All
Its Aspects, is a significant step towards the goal of
controlling this scourge but only the first step. We hope
that through the follow-up process successfully started
last year, it will be possible to make the
implementation of the Programme of Action more
efficient and to find ways to strengthen and further
develop the measures contained therein.

In our view, it is essential to provide for regional
coordination between national control systems and
mechanisms for the prevention of small arms and light
weapons trade operations. Ukraine reiterates that the
responsibility for establishing controls over the
trafficking in small arms and light weapons rests with
the States acquiring those weapons. At the same time,
those States should be encouraged to improve their
abilities to curb the illicit trafficking in small arms.
This might require substantial financial assistance from
the international community.

Ukraine welcomes the report of the United
Nations Group of Governmental Experts on Tracing
Small Arms and Light Weapons, presented last year in
the First Committee. We fully support its
recommendation concerning the development of an
international instrument, open to all, which will
increase the national capacity of States to identify and
trace, in a timely and reliable manner, small arms and
light weapons, as well as to seize those of illicit nature.

Preventing, combating and eliminating the
uncontrolled spread of small arms and light weapons is
one of the important issues for the Security Council to
look into. It is evident that promoting the conditions
for long-term development and security is impossible
without resolving ongoing conflicts and taking
adequate measures aimed at ensuring stability in post-
conflict situations.

The Council has made considerable progress in
this work, but I think it is fair to say we still have a
long way to go in detailed monitoring and in working
with business, financial institutions and other actors -
internationally, regionally and at the local level - on
the implementation of arms embargoes.

Excessive accumulation of and illicit trafficking
in small arms and light weapons continues to fuel and
intensify conflicts as well as delay their resolution. The
series of innovative measures taken by the Security
Council to enhance compliance with arms embargoes,
including through establishing independent panels of
experts and monitoring mechanisms, have resulted in
positive outcomes, especially in Angola and Sierra
Leone. At the same time, the problem of illicit
trafficking persists in other areas, such as Somalia and
Afghanistan.

In this connection, in our view, the last report of
the Secretary-General on small arms presents a mixed
picture on the imposition of arms embargoes. The
restriction on the supply of ammunition to areas of
instability requires more attention by the Security
Council, as does the issue of identifying links between
small arms and light weapons and the illicit
exploitation of natural and other resources. We support
the Council's consideration of actions against States
that deliberately violate arms embargoes.

We believe that, at this stage, it is important to
review the lessons learned, in order to ensure the
efficiency of further measures that could be taken by
the Security Council. In this connection, it will be
useful to continue to focus on the financial sources
used for the purchase of illegal weapons and to define
the role that the relevant international organizations,
business and financial institutions and other actors can
play in implementing arms embargoes.

Ukraine firmly adheres to the practical efforts
undertaken to ensure effective implementation of the
United Nations Programme of Action and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) Document on Small Arms and Light Weapons,
particularly with regard to the destruction of surplus
stocks of small arms and ammunition. In this context,
we look forward to a successful future implementation
of the NATO Partnership for Peace Trust Fund project
to destroy 1.5 million small arms and light weapons
and 133 thousand tonnes of ammunition in Ukraine.
These efforts are also aimed at assisting Ukraine in
coping with its significant ammunition stockpiles.
Particular importance in this regard is also attached to
the assistance mechanism provided in the OSCE
Document on Stockpiles of Conventional Ammunition.

I would like to stress that Ukraine maintains a
responsible policy in the field of arms control.
Ukrainian legislation envisages strict measures to
prevent illegal manufacturing, possession and
trafficking of all types of armaments, including small
arms and light weapons. The national export control
system provides for effective procedures of export-
import licensing. As of today, efforts are being made to
improve national legislation in this field. One of the
latest steps was the adoption by the Government of
Ukraine of its action plan to implement the United
Nations 2001 Programme of Action as well as to
implement the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Document on Small
Arms and Light Weapons of 2000.

In conclusion, let me assure you, Sir, that Ukraine
will continue to take an active part in the international
efforts towards combating illicit trafficking in small
arms and light weapons and in restraining their
uncontrolled proliferation. The members of the
Security Council can count fully on our support
concerning that issue.

