I would like to thank Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and Ambassador Abdou Abarry, Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004), concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo, for their insightful briefings. My delegation is pleased to note that, during the reporting period, there were continuous efforts to ensure an overall environment conducive to the advancement of the political process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, despite ongoing tensions. We also welcome regional diplomatic efforts with neighbouring countries and reaffirm the key role of subregional organizations and the importance of cooperating with them. However, we are deeply troubled by the continued deterioration of the security situation in some parts of eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, especially in North Kivu, South Kivu and Ituri. Confrontations between armed groups, intercommunal conflicts, attacks against civilians by the Allied Democratic Forces and various other armed groups, as well as the Forces armees de la Republique democratique du Congo, and the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) are of particular concern. Numerous recent attacks claimed tens of civilian lives and affected United Nations personnel on the ground. We strongly condemn those attacks and urge all parties to heed the ceasefire appeal of the Secretary-General. We would also like to reiterate the vital importance of ensuring the safety and security of United Nations personnel. In addition, Viet Nam is concerned over the humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where over 25.6 million people are currently in need of assistance. Various health challenges, including the coronavirus disease pandemic, the re-emergence of Ebola in the west and measles and other dangerous diseases, are putting increasing amounts of pressure on the already dire socioeconomic and humanitarian situation in many regions of the country. We therefore call for greater support from the international community to the Democratic Republic of the Congo at this critical moment. Against the current backdrop, my delegation would like to stress the following points. First, the protracted conflicts in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo serve to emphasize the need to work towards a sustainable solution. It is important to find a comprehensive approach to address the root causes of conflict. Greater focus should be placed on enhancing dialogue between communities and addressing socioeconomic issues and the illegal exploitation of, and trade in, natural resources. We also support efforts relating to the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process, as well as security sector reform programmes. Secondly, we would like to reiterate the importance of deepening regional cooperation, which will also contribute to peace and security. As we have all witnessed, stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in the region has benefited from meaningful cooperation among countries. We would like to welcome the commitments made by President Tshilombo Tshisekedi and his counterparts in promoting cooperation and reconciliation in the region. In this regard, we salute the contributions made by the Southern African Development Community, the Economic Community of Central African States, the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region and the African Union. Last but not least, Viet Nam has full confidence in the role played by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and MONUSCO in favour of peace and stability in the country. The close partnership between the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and MONUSCO represents the vital need for our support for the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We welcome MONUSCO's close contact and cooperation with the President and various local authorities to help address the root causes of conflict and develop targeted provincial strategies for the protection of civilians. We look forward to further discussions on the joint strategy for the transition of MONUSCO and would like to stress the importance of preserving what we have done our utmost to achieve in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
