Mr. Lucas (Angola): We thank Under-Secretary-
General Stephen O'Brien for his briefing on the
disturbing humanitarian situation in Syria.

Most regrettably, the conflict in Syria continues
while the parties completely disregard their obligations
under international humanitarian law and the
relevant Security Council resolutions. This is an
irrational war that is disproportionately affecting the
civilian population.

After a short respite, with the partial cessation of
hostilities and improvements in humanitarian access,
we are now witnessing the escalation of violence
in and around the city of Aleppo, with hundreds of
thousands trapped by the fighting and unable to access
basic assistance. As the Security Council tries to exert
pressure for the cessation of hostilities and a return
to negotiations, the parties on the ground continue
to strive for military gains. The closure of the last
remaining access route in and out of eastern Aleppo,
cutting off all civilians from humanitarian assistance,
is just the latest demonstration of the total disregard
there is for the Council's resolutions and international
humanitarian law.

Although we fully support humanitarian agencies
in their efforts to address critical life-saving assistance,
such as food, medical supplies and fuel, and its supply
to all besieged and hard-to-reach areas, the recent
escalation in fighting between Government forces
and non-State armed groups should lead us to focus
on where these non-State armed groups are acquiring
weapons and resources. One issue that is barely
mentioned in our discussions is the fact that regional
and international stakeholders are not being held
responsible for providing the means that allow this
bloody war to continue. Paradoxically, humanitarian
assistance is blocked or is made hard to reach for those
in need, while the means to make war continue reaching
the parties to the conflict.

In conclusion, we urge the parties to return to
negotiations so that a political solution to this bloody
war may be found and so that humanitarian agencies
may have unconditional, safe and unhindered access
to all those in need. We condemn the air strikes and
bombings in eastern and western Aleppo in the recent
weeks that have resulted in numerous deaths and
injuries, among which there were many children, as well
as the destruction of hospitals and other vital civilian
infrastructure. While we support the establishment of
a humanitarian truce, as requested by the Secretary-
General, to allow humanitarian agencies access to
those in desperate need of food and water, among other
basic necessities, we emphasize that the proliferation of
terrorist groups and other non-State armed groups poses
a dangerous threat, not only for Syria but for the entire
region. The Security Council and the International
Syria Support Group must step up concerted efforts to
cut off the flow of arms into Syria and jointly combat
the growing threat of radicalism and terrorists.

