Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. De
Mistura, for his insightful update and commend him
for his exceptional commitment and determination to
pursue peace in Syria. My delegation would like to
share the following observations and recommendations.

On the purely political track, Kazakhstan remains
committed to the sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic, and
to ensuring the continuity of State institutions. My
country is pleased to note the gradual progress in the
political settlement of the Syrian conflict during the
Geneva and Astana meetings.

We draw attention to the reduced military activity
and improvement of the humanitarian situation in the
four de-escalation zones. Astana reaffirms its readiness
to further promote the political process to achieve peace
and stability in Syria.

Like others, we call on members of the Security
Council to use their influence in order to consolidate the
national ceasefire regime and contribute to the success
of agreements reached in Astana. We call on Council
members to unanimously support the Geneva and
Astana platforms, as well as the additional mechanisms
developed within them, such as the memorandum on
de-escalation zones. Such a joint approach would
help to produce a ceasefire and to oblige the Syrian
Government and rebel forces to end their battles.

Kazakhstan considers it both useful and relevant
to agree on an additional format for United Nations
interaction with the parties to the conflict through
informal technical meetings of experts, at which issues
related to the Syrian constitution are discussed. We
support Special Envoy De Mistura's view that these
technical meetings can become an opportunity to unite
the opposing platforms. Let us endeavour to bring
about a new peaceful life in Syria. We welcome and
support the multifaceted diplomacy he is conducting
to resolve the Syrian crisis. We believe that the more
countries are positively involved in the solution of the
Syrian question, the sooner we will see the light at the
end of the tunnel.

Kazakhstan believes that in searching for an exit
strategy, a regional approach should be considered as
a very effective method to mitigate the situation and
prevent further deterioration. We therefore call on all
Middle Eastern/Gulf region States to join the guarantor
countries and do everything possible to ensure that
the ceasefire regime is respected and observed by all
parties.
It is clear that to see further progress, there is a
strong need to continue supporting the objectives
and gains made thus far in the Astana and Geneva
negotiations and through the other three guarantors in
order to see further positive outcomes.

On the counter-terrorism track, in our opinion
the inconsistency of the struggle against terrorist
organizations in Syria slows down the political
settlement significantly. Actions based on the "we will
manage ourselves" principle are counterproductive,
and their consequences are predictable and hazardous.
We call on the international coalition forces operating
in the provinces of Raqqa and Deir ez-Zor to exercise
caution in conducting military operations with a view to
averting accidental civilian deaths, including of women
and children. We recognize the need for further joint
international efforts to counter the constant terrorist
and extremist threats, which must be coordinated
between the various sides through a unified strategy.

On the humanitarian track, we emphasize the
importance of expanding humanitarian assistance
to Syria, including an increase in medical assistance
to civilians in areas where the ceasefire is respected.
Rapid, safe and unhindered humanitarian access should
be provided and conditions created to deliver medical
aid to the local population to meet their basic needs.
Aviation targets identified by any party should exclude
such infrastructure facilities as bridges, oil and gas
wells, dams and power plants - in other words, all
critical infrastructure. We have a moral duty not to
drive the future generation of Syrians into burdensome
bondage, requiring them to rebuild every structure that
has been destroyed.

Finally, the focus of the Syrian political track
must now be on establishing sound governance, the
formulation and consolidation ofa new constitution, as
well as new, United Nations-supervised elections. It is
therefore important to preserve unity among the Council
members, as demonstrated in the adoption of resolution
2336 (2016). Only then can there be determined action
to speedily alleviate the burden of long-protracted war
on the Syrian people.

