Mr. Jandrokovie (Croatia): At the outset, I wish
to express Croatia's deepest condolences to China and
Myanmar on their tragic losses.

My country has aligned itself with the statement
to be delivered by the representative of the Republic of
Slovenia on behalf of the European Union.
Nevertheless, I would like to make several remarks on
today's important topic.

First of all, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for choosing the topic of post-conflict
peacebuilding for the thematic debate under the United
Kingdom presidency of the Security Council. That
topic is timely and, above all, exceedingly relevant in
today's world - a world in which we are witnesses to
situations where far too many conflicts that end
through negotiated settlements restart within five
years. Moreover, we are witnesses to many conflict
areas in which the situation does not permit national
Governments to assume their responsibility to ensure
the security and well-being of their people, and
therefore unnecessarily prolongs a sometimes
seemingly endless international military or other
presence.

Why is that so? The answer, when found, will
almost inevitably be very complex, if not at times
almost elusive - not unlike the actual situations in
post-conflict areas themselves. Some of the possible
reasons for this can be found in the concept paper for
today's deliberations (S/2008/291, annex), which, in
our View, provides a good starting point for our
discussion. To be sure, the rapid implementation of a
peace agreement is very important, but we have to
ensure that this does not occur in a vacuum. The whole
of a society that emerges from conflict has to feel the
peace dividends of emergence from a conflict, which
take the form of stability, security and improvements in
daily life. We agree completely with those assessments.

Additionally, we believe that it is important to
involve domestic resources, wherever possible and
without exacerbating existing political tensions. An
operation of post-conflict stabilization can most
certainly benefit from this kind of engagement. The
utilization of domestic resources certainly enhances the
effectiveness of an operation and makes use of the
available experience and skills of the people in the
country emerging from conflict, who more often than
not can provide a unique perspective not otherwise
available to outsiders.

Another added value of this approach is being
able to develop autonomous capacity that is necessary
for the consolidation of those national structures that
will eventually need to take over responsibility for
governing the country. Also worth mentioning is the
positive effect that the international community
working together with national structures can have on
the overall better acceptance of a peacebuilding
mission by the local population.

Our own experience during the war imposed on
Croatia in the 19905, when United Nations
peacekeepers, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the World Health
Organization, as well as many other agencies and
humanitarian assistance organizations, were present in
the area, leads us to conclude that all these agencies
may have come with the best of intentions, but that in
many cases they were not able to understand the real
needs of the population or to cooperate effectively with
each other or with the people involved. The ultimate
result of this was that much of the overall spending of
the United Nations and other agencies in Croatia
during that time went into maintaining themselves and
their own programmes and goals, and did not end up
with the people or institutions that required their
assistance.

It is, of course, not my intention to disparage the
presence of United Nations and other humanitarian
organizations in Croatia during those difficult times.
We are most certainly very grateful for the help and
assistance we received, and indeed some significant
results were produced, including one of the most
successful United Nations missions overall - the
United Nations Transitional Administration in Eastern
SIavonia. My comments are aimed solely at providing
examples of how we can always learn from and
improve our activities.

The establishment of the Peacebuilding
Commission is one of the most important results of
United Nations reform thus far. Croatia was very active
in its founding, and was also elected as a member in its
inaugural year of existence, including as a member of
the country-specific meeting on Burundi. We value and
support the work of the Commission, especially
through its integrated peacebuilding strategies. What
we need to do now is ensure that those strategies are
implemented on the ground in the most efficient
manner.

Croatia is of the opinion that the peacebuilding
concept enacted through the Peacebuilding
Commission offers the best way in which we can
effectively achieve as well as consolidate the three
main pillars of the United Nations: security,
development and the protection of human rights.
Achieving and consolidating security creates the
conditions necessary for development and therefore
also strengthens the tools required for protecting and
enhancing human rights. Implementing the three main
pillars together leads to creating sustainable peace and
long-lasting stability and prosperity.

We are aware that the chances for substantive
peace are enhanced with the speedy and coordinated
engagement of the United Nations system following
the establishment of a ceasefire on the ground or the
signing of a peace agreement. As there are many
United Nations agencies that can be involved in post-
conflict situations, it is imperative that their efforts be
coordinated and integrated so that the capabilities of all
these United Nations and other agencies can be utilized
to capacity while simultaneously reducing overlap. In
doing so, costs can most certainly be reduced and more
resources can be allocated to address the core needs of
the country involved.

A good example of utilizing a coordinated and
integrated approach is the report of the High-level
Panel on United Nations System-wide Coherence,
entitled "Delivering as one" (see A/61/583), which we
fully support. That report envisages the role of an
empowered Resident Coordinator as the leader of
integrated United Nations efforts in the areas of
development, humanitarian assistance and the
environment. Post-conflict peacebuilding efforts and
leadership on the ground should follow a similar
pattern.

We also believe that the plans and organization of
the core structure of integrated post-conflict
stabilization efforts should be permanently placed on
standby so that preparations for a specific operation
will take the minimum amount of time and will include
only country-specific details. Several questions in this
regard have been posed in the concept paper for
today's discussion (S/2008/291, annex). When looking
at the different types of civilian experts that are
required for a post-conflict peacebuilding mission,
especially in the areas of justice, corrections, security
sector reform, governance and economic recovery, we
believe that the formation of rosters, as was suggested
in the Brahimi report on peacekeeping (S/2000/809), is
a good way forward. The existence of permanent
rosters of civilian experts that are ready to be deployed
on short notice would significantly shorten preparation
periods and enable the civilian effort in post-conflict
stabilization to be deployed immediately after a
ceasefire or peace agreement has been reached. In that
respect, my Government is ready to make its
contribution in the form of civilian experts who
themselves have gained experience and expertise
during the post-conflict stabilization and reconstruction
period in Croatia.

All the activities that we are talking about today
are obviously not possible without sufficient funding.
Therefore, we must do our utmost to ensure sustainable
and transparent financing. For its part, Croatia is one of
the founders of the Peacebuilding Fund, whose work it
supports and contributes to.

My delegation hopes that today's discussion will
result in the establishment of concrete steps towards
strengthening both United Nations and international
capabilities in the field of post-conflict peacebuilding.
We are looking forward to the Secretary-General's
advice on this matter, and are of the opinion that the
Council should revisit this issue in a timely manner.

