Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
We are meeting in this Chamber once again to lament
and reject the recent escalation of violence in the
Middle East. Following a few weeks of relative calm,
the enemies of peace have once again achieved their
aim. There has been new bloodshed and renewed
terrorist acts, leading to scenes of horror. The Israel
Defence Forces are again laying siege to the
headquarters of President Arafat and imperilling not
only his life, but the very possibility of reform in the
various components of the Palestinian Authority.

Let there be no doubt that Colombia rejects
terrorist attacks in Israeli territory and the recent attack
against a school in Palestine. Israel's excessive use of
force and the siege of Arafat's headquarters do not
contribute to establishing the political climate
necessary to overcome the stalemate in a process that
began two years ago.

The members of the Security Council have
supported the diplomatic activities of the Quartet, of
which the United Nations is a participating member.
The Quartet's plan, put forward about a week ago, is
comprehensive and includes various aspects that will
have to be developed in parallel with one another. As
we have said previously in this Chamber, the political,
security, economic and humanitarian aspects must be
addressed simultaneously. While the first phase of the
Quartet's plan touches on all these aspects, we must
ensure that one will not prevail as a precondition for
the others.

The Quartet, with the participation of other
States, has also established some working groups to
assist the Palestinian Authority in making reforms in
various areas. There can be no doubt that acts of
violence and terror impede this process, as do actions
taken to undermine the Palestinian Authority, which fly
in the face of the forces for change supported by the
international community.

The elections in Palestine scheduled for early
next year will be a decisive moment. The leadership
chosen in those elections should enjoy the international
community's support, as it will be responsible for
implementing the next phase of the plan - the
establishment of the Palestinian State.

The establishment of the Palestinian State is not
just an option, it is a necessity. It means recognizing
the right of the Palestinian people to self-
determination, as acknowledged in many United
Nations resolutions.

The last phase of the Quartet's plan provides for
direct negotiations between the parties with a View to
reaching a definitive solution. Both the reforms and the
political process must be accompanied by measures
implemented by Israel to improve the living standards
of the Palestinian people, thereby making it possible
for economic activities to resume, facilitating the
movement of goods and peoples and lifting blockades
and curfews. Both parties must make a great effort to
avoid being overwhelmed by the violence, or, rather,
not to give way to the extremists who see violence as
the only course of action.

A few days ago we received a report from Mrs.
Catherine Bertini, the Personal Envoy of the Secretary-
General, assessing the humanitarian situation in the
territories. That report is worrying and confirms what
we all feared. The lack of mobility is having an impact
on the people, as they are unable to get to work. Their
health has deteriorated, in addition to the fact that in
some emergency situations ambulances have been
denied access. Education has also been affected, as
neither teachers nor children can get to the schools.
The lack of income is causing a food crisis, and
approximately 300 localities have no regular water
supply. In the words of the report, there is a serious and
growing humanitarian crisis in the West Bank and
Gaza.

The report contains a series of recommendations
that must be taken into account by both the Palestinian
Authority and Israel, including the obligation to respect
international humanitarian law and the applicability to
the occupied territories of the provisions of the Fourth
Geneva Convention.
