Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I too thank
Prosecutor Bensouda for her report. It is a report with
a particularly serious tone that warrants not only the
Security Council but also the Secretariat to question
the impact of the activities we have undertaken for the
benefit of the civilian population in Darfur.

The immense region of Darfur has been the site
of atrocities since 2002. At the very start, the Council
created the International Commission of Inquiry for
Darfur and, on that basis, referred the situation in
Darfur to the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) in 2005. The first arrest warrants of the
ICC were delivered in 2007. Furthermore, the Council
has not remained inactive on the political front as it
has actively participated in the mediation efforts with
the African Union. It also deployed to Darfur one of
its largest peacekeeping operations, the African Union/
United Nations Hybrid operation in Darfur (UNAMID).

But let us be clear enough to acknowledge that,
failing the genuine implementation of resolution 1593
(2005), the situation has only gotten worse. We have
not succeeded in meeting our responsibility to protect
the civilian population in Darfur. Almost 400,000 new
internally displaced persons (IDPs) since February
2014, aerial bombings of villages, sexual violence on
a massive scale committed against women, militias
practicing scorched-earth policies attacking the IDP
camp at Khor Abeche - the destruction of an entire
people is the goal. The only development is that they
changed the name of the Janjaweed militias. They now
go by the name Rapid Support Forces, but the crimes are
the same. Their modus operandi remains the same as
that they followed in the darkest periods of the conflict.

The tragedy has taken on a national dimension. The
action of the Rapid Support Forces and the violation
of fundamental rights involve the entire territory.
Although the Sudanese Government says that it is ready
to launch a comprehensive process of national dialogue
and constitutional review, its calls to action are void of
any meaning as it increases the negative signals it is
putting out - arresting opponents, bombing of civilian
targets and sentencing Mariam Yahya Ibrahim to death
for abandoning Islam.

UNAMID's effectiveness at protecting civilians
is now open to question. The Security Council has
therefore decided to undertake a strategic review of
the force in order to improve its responsiveness and to
allow it to refocus on its principal task - the protection
of civilians. The Mission has been reproached for self-
censoring, for minimizing the responsibility of the
Sudanese authorities in the attacks, and for failing to
take into full account the crimes that it had witnessed.
Those are serious allegations. The Secretariat should
seek to remedy the situation. Many ofus also regret that
the policy of avoiding essential contacts with persons
subject to International Criminal Court arrest warrants,
defined by the Secretary-General, has been sullied in

the context of Darfur.

But we cannot put the blame for failure on the
Mission alone. UNAMID is not a mission for imposing
peace. We ask it to protect civilians who are directly
affected, but at the same time to work in harmony
with security forces that are guilty of crimes. If the
Council is genuinely serious about implementing the
peace agreement and protecting civilians, we must
go beyond a strategic review of UNAMID. The fight
against impunity must be reinvigorated. We cannot
continue discussing the role of the Council in the fight
against sexual violence and confine ourselves, as we
are doing now, to asking UNAMID and the agencies to
undertake training activities on how victims should fill
out a complaint form. That is not serious.

Not a single head of militia is worried.
President Thabo Mbeki himself said so before the
Council. We must in fact pursue and arrest responsible
parties if we want to finally bring an end to the violence
in Darfur.

We are divided on the opportunity to arrest
President Al-Bashir, which is unfortunate. It is also
unfortunate that certain States parties to the Rome
Statute continue to meet with him. France believes
that such visits show disrespect for resolution 1593
(2005) and States' obligations under the Rome Statute.
Beyond a particular interpretation of the law, one must
also think of the impact of such visits, which can only
encourage the Sudanese security forces and the militias
to continue their practices.

Let us look towards the future. With respect to
the Secretariat and the agencies, that means that the
principal actors must have better communication
with the Court; that aplies in particular to the African
Union/United Nations Joint Special Representative,
the Darfur Peace Agreement, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence, the
High Commissioner for Human Rights and the United
Nations Development Programme. Let us be more
consistent in the information that is disseminated and
in the activities we deploy on the ground. We need a
results-based approach, not an approach based on the
number of seminars we hold.

As for the Council, we must measure the negative
impact of our inability to implement resolution 1593
(2005). We see it in Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile
states, where the Sudanese Government is repeating
the same old practices against the population, including
aerial bombings that target hospitals and schools. We
see it throughout the region, in South Sudan and in
the Central African Republic, where perpetrators of
massive abuses believe - wrongly - that they enjoy
total impunity. It is not a question of whether or not
we support the ICC, but a matter of the maintenance of
peace and security throughout the region.

In conclusion, I reiterate our full confidence in the
Prosecutor. It would undoubtedly be useful, as proof of
that support, if the Secretariat reassured her that it will
mobilize all its components in support of international
criminal justice. It would also be useful if future
Council resolutions on Darfur reflected its concerns
over the aerial bombings, the disarmament of militias,
sexual violence and the necessity for the Sudan to
cooperate with the International Criminal Court.

