Mr. Mawe (Ireland): Ireland commends you on
your initiative in scheduling this debate, Mr. President,
and we welcome the adoption today of presidential
statement S/PRST/2015/3. We thank the Secretary-
General, Ambassador Patriota of Brazil and Nobel
laureate Ms. Leymah Gbowee for their insightful
briefings on the topic this morning. Ireland associates
itself with the statements made on behalf of the
European Union and by the representative of Austria
on behalf the Human Security Network.

In its Preamble, the Charter of the United Nations
defines the purpose of our Organization as saving
succeeding generations from the scourge of war. With
the United Nations and its humanitarian partners
responding to four severe, large-scale humanitarian
crises in Iraq, South Sudan, the Central African
Republic and Syria - all of them the result of conflict,
and with the highest number of refugees, asylum-
seekers and internally displaced persons on the planet
since the end of the Second World War - the most
charitable verdict is that our collective record in this
respect has been mixed. While each of the conflicts has
unique features, reflecting the diversity and complexity
of each country, there is one common feature. Each
has tensions at its core that are the result of sectarian,
ethnic, socioeconomic or ideological differences. Time
and again we see how conflict erupts where people
are excluded, marginalized and denied meaningful
participation in the political, economic and social life
oftheir countries. We need a better approach to counter
this.

With the adoption in August of resolution
2171 (2014), the Security Council recognized the
interconnectedness of the three pillars of the United
Nations system and the need to comprehensively
address the underlying causes of conflict. Peace and
security, development and human rights cannot be
siloed in the United Nations system when we know
how interdependent they are in reality. In taking this
forward, there are of course limitations on the level of
engagement that is possible for the Security Council
and the degree ofwelcome there would be on the part of
Member States. However, the Council does have a clear
responsibility to prevent situations from developing
into full-blown crises and must do more to enhance its
preventive capacities.

Let the touch on three key aspects that are
central to the theme of today's debate. The first is
institution-building. When it comes to ensuring lasting
peace, the links between political settlements and the
possession of strong and trusted State institutions are
well understood. We know that 90 per cent of all civil
wars in the past 15 years have occurred in countries
that had also experienced a civil war in the previous
30 years. The crises in the Central African Republic
and South Sudan are painful reminders of the fragility
of peace and the need to promote effective transitions
from conflict and fragility to peaceful and resilient
States and societies.

Ensuring strong institutions requires national
ownership, leadership and political will. On the island
of Ireland, we have experienced this at first hand. In
1998, a comprehensive political framework for the
settlement of the Northern Ireland situation, the so-
called Good Friday Agreement, was agreed on in a
negotiation process that involved not just the Irish and
British Governments but the political representatives
of all of Northern Ireland's communities. It was a
watershed moment, in that it set out a road map for
new political institutions and structures based on an
approach of inclusion and trust. The example of South
Africa, where the political opening in 1994 created a
environment conducive to enabling a new national
identity to take shape, is also noteworthy.

The establishment of a new and comprehensive
post-2015 development framework is also of vital
importance. Including goals and targets on peace in the
framework presents an opportunity to enable peaceful
and inclusive societies to be built and to address the
dynamics of conflict, violence, exclusion and instability.

The second aspect I would like to mention is
inclusivity, and the critical role that women play in those
efforts is another crucial aspect to sustaining peace. As
Ireland's former President Mary Robinson put it,

"Women's participation in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts is critical to
building sustainable peace because no society
can develop - economically, politically or
socially - when half of its population is
marginalized."

Women are often powerful and capable actors in
their communities, and the knowledge, information
and insight provided by women's groups can be
valuable in detecting and understanding tensions.
We welcome the increasing attention to supporting
women's participation and leadership in peace-related,
political, development and economic decision-making
at the international level, but we must do more to
create opportunities, particularly for women and other
marginalized groups, at regional, national and local
levels. In order to set out a transformative agenda on
women, peace and security for the years ahead, we must
fully grasp the opportunities that the high-level review
and global study of resolution 1325 (2000) present. On
Wednesday, Ireland launched its second national action
plan on the resolution, aimed at strengthening women's
leadership and participation in decision-making in
conflict and post-conflict situations and ensuring that
a gender perspective is incorporated into all aspects
of Ireland's foreign-policy engagement, through a
whole-of-Government approach.

The third aspect I want to highlight today is the
correlation between severe human-rights violations
and threats to international peace and security. The
Secretary-General's Rights Up Front action plan
portrays with great clarity what is at stake in situations
of massive violations of human rights. With its key
mechanisms of the regional quarterly review and a
Senior Action Group now established, we encourage
the United Nations system to build on those efforts to
ensure swift and timely responses to early-warning
signs of conflict.

As has already been said many times today, 2015 is
a crucial year for the United Nations system. In shaping
a more effective and impactful United Nations, we
must seize the opportunities presented by the post-2015
development framework, the reviews of United Nations
peace operations and peacebuilding architecture, and
the high-level review of resolution 1325 (2000).

Ireland joins many others here today in calling
for positive synergies with these initiatives and looks
forward to actively contributing to them.

