Mr. Jandrokovic' (Croatia): At the outset, allow
me to thank you, Mr. President, and the Austrian
presidency, for taking the initiative to re-engage this
body on the vitally important issue of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, which, in our View, often
strikes at the core of the Council's primary mandate
regarding threats to international peace and stability.

I would also like to commend the Austrian
presidency on his hard work in preparing the draft
resolution on this issue, which we have just adopted.
My thanks also go to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
for his frank and poignant remarks. His presence here
today shows the clear commitment of the United
Nation to placing this issue at the highest possible
level.

It is evident that the nature of contemporary
conflict has changed in the modern era. Nowadays, in
the conduct of armed conflict, civilians more often than
not become the targets of armed attacks and atrocities,
including murder, deportation and ethnic cleansing, as
well as rape and sexual violence. This is not only as a
consequence of war but as a method and means of
conducting war. Such atrocities were once considered
as exceptions in the conduct of armed conflict, while
today they have frequently become the rule.

The defining moment that forced the international
community to conclude that a more decisive and
comprehensive approach and action were required
came in the mid-1990s with the genocides committed
in Rwanda and Bosnia and Herzegovina. Our own
experience of the early 1990s showed us that there still
existed an immense gap between the theoretical
implementation of international humanitarian law and
practice on the ground.

It is especially important to note that the majority
of atrocities committed during the war in Croatia were

perpetrated before the arrival of international
peacekeeping forces. For that reason, we hope that the
resolution just adopted will strengthen the resolve of
the international community to react quickly and
decisively in order to minimize actual threats to
civilians.

As a response to the atrocities committed during
the 19905, The Security Council took an important
decision in 1999 to add to the mandate of the
peacekeeping operation in Sierra Leone a direct
reference to the protection of civilians - including
through the use of force - as a mandated task of that
peacekeeping operation. The introduction of the
protection of civilian provisions became increasingly
important in later peacekeeping mandates, where the
concept became the central part of the mandate of the
peacekeeping operation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, and has since been introduced into a
plethora of other United Nations-mandated
peacekeeping missions.

I would like to add that while a peacekeeping
mission may be able to help stop violations of
international humanitarian law on the ground, for any
long term and sustainable improvement of a conflict
situation there needs to be solid cooperation between
peacekeeping and other international personnel and the
authorities and populace of the host country. Such
personnel work closely with civilians on the ground,
and a deterioration of relations between them may have
an indeterminate yet detrimental effect on overall
political efforts to establish and sustain peace and
prosperity.

This has led the United Nations to develop a
more integrated or multidimensional approach to
peacekeeping, which is well reflected in the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations' New Horizon
non-paper on the protection of civilians. Here the
emphasis is placed not only on issues of immediate
security or military concern but also on long-term
issues, such as the protection of civilians, the
strengthening of civil society and security sector
reform, as well as on economic revitalization and
development.
Development is especially important in this
context since, without assisting a host country's return
to self-sustainability, recourse to violence can and quite
often does occur, as has been demonstrated by
returning peacekeeping operations to countries in West
Africa, Timor Leste and Haiti.

The war of independence in Croatia during the
early 1990s produced untold consequences on a great
many civilians in my country. Apart from the resulting
death and destruction, I would like to stress that
Croatia, a nation of 4.5 million people, was nearly
overwhelmed with over 850,000 displaced persons and
refugees, more than half of whom came from
neighbouring Bosnia and Herzegovina. Although this
was an immense challenge, we managed to ensure the
provision of all necessary facilities for this population,
as well as the maintenance of the normal functioning of
all institutions.

The terrible losses suffered in Croatia as a
consequence of the conflict spurred our leaders to
explore new avenues for seeking internationally-agreed
and legally binding redress for the crimes committed,
without prejudice, through the establishment of an ad
hoc tribunal. This resulted in the establishment of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia. In advocating for a tribunal, Croatia did
not lose sight of the fact that the duty to protect
civilians by implementing international humanitarian
law lies primarily with the parties to the conflict and,
as such, it emphasized the vital principle that judicial
processes individualize criminal responsibility.

For its part, by establishing the ad hoc Criminal
Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia and Rwanda, the
Security Council opened a new chapter in international
law, leading to the establishment of the International
Criminal Court and a number of other hybrid tribunals.
All these have proved to be valuable tools in
combating impunity as a corrosive force that can
undermine chances for reconciliation and the building
of lasting peace.

Over the years, the Security Council has acted in
numerous other ways to enhance the protection of
civilians agenda. The Council has promoted the use of
mediation in order to help prevent the outbreak of
armed conflict in crisis situations. It has used its
influence on parties to armed conflict to observe
standards of protection, including by imposing targeted
measures against recalcitrant parties in cases of
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law. And it has now even referred specific
situations to the International Criminal Court.
The sixtieth anniversary of the core treaties of
international humanitarian law - the Geneva

Conventions of 1949 and their subsequent protocols -
likewise provide us with an opportunity to look back
and examine our own roles in implementing the central
tenets of these treaties. They also allow us to analyse
the degree and level of success to which the various
international actors have managed these inherent
responsibilities.

In spite of numerous positive developments in the
Council, Croatia remains extremely concerned about
the severity and prevalence of constraints on
humanitarian access in the field, as well as the
frequency and gravity of attacks on humanitarian
personnel, bearing in mind the impact they also has on
civilians, especially women and children. The Council
has a responsibility to respond to situations of armed
conflict where humanitarian assistance is being
deliberately obstructed, not merely by calling on the
parties involved to allow unimpeded passage to relief,
but also by imposing targeted measures in grave
instances of the wilful impediment of such supplies.
Moreover, the concept of the responsibility to protect,
as reflected in the 2005 World Summit Outcome
Document (General Assembly resolution 60/1),
represents an integral part of the protection of civilians
agenda.

As world leaders have acknowledged, individual
States are responsible for protecting their populations
from the aforementioned atrocities. At the same time,
the international community also has a responsibility to
help protect populations and to take collective action
through the Security Council if and when national
authorities manifestly fail to protect their people from
such atrocities.

We would also like to stress the need for greater
emphasis on the issue of mines and explosive remnants
of war. Croatia has much experience in the technical
side of mine clearance, as well as in the rehabilitation
of mine victims. We need to remember that these silent
killers kill and maim long after the end of a conflict,
and at that point the victims tend to be civilians rather
than military personnel.
The new resolution 1894 (2009) joins a number
of resolutions that the Council has adopted in the past
two years on civilian-related issues, for which I would
like once again to thank my friend and colleague
Michael Spindelegger and the Austrian delegation.
While we agree that the Council's involvement in the
protection of civilians as a thematic issue has helped
create a much-needed normative framework for the
issue, this progress has not been as evident in
improvements of the actual situation on the ground for
civilians in armed conflict.

Croatia firmly believes that the Council's new
resolution offers a valuable opportunity for that
improvement to take place, to the benefit of all
civilians caught in armed conflict.

