Mr. Matjila (South Africa): I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this important and timely meeting on the situation in Somalia. I have the distinct honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the Niger, Tunisia and South Africa, as well as Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (A3+1). At the outset, the A3+1 would like to thank the Secretary-General for his report on the situation in Somalia (S/2020/798). We would also like to thank Mr. James Swan, Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM), and Mr. Francisco Madeira, Special Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission for Somalia and Head of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), for their briefings. We commend them for their efforts in Somalia. We would also like to welcome our colleague, Ambassador Osman of Somalia, to our meeting today. We pay tribute to all Somalis who have perished since our previous meeting on the situation in Somalia (see S/2020/573). The A3+1 statement will focus on four important issues and developments in Somalia, namely, first, political developments; secondly, election preparations; thirdly, security; and, fourthly, the humanitarian situation. First, on political developments, the A3+1 welcomes and commends the Federal Government of Somalia and federal member states for their recent meetings and consultations, which constitute an important first step towards building the political consensus necessary for the transition in Somalia. We agree with the Secretary-General's observation that the long-awaited resumption of dialogue between the leaders of the Federal Government and the federal member states and the steps taken towards normalizing the Federal Government's relations with Jubaland are critical to the restoration of collaboration between the Federal and state levels of Government. In that regard, the A3+1 further welcomes the meeting between President Farmajo and Somaliland President Muse Bihi Abdi in Djibouti, following their initial meeting in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. We appreciate the continued regional and subregional efforts, as well as those of the international community, in bringing political stability to Somalia and the Horn of Africa. That is a positive development towards consolidating peace, security and development in the region. The Niger, Tunisia, Saint Vincent and _ the Grenadines and South Africa urge all major stakeholders in Somalia to maintain that spirit of inclusive consultations and cooperation in all follow-up meetings in order to reach a broad-based agreement on critical matters. We regard that and other developments in the relations between the Federal Government and the federal member states as a critical step towards building the essential political consensus on various important issues, including agreement on the electoral modalities, security arrangements, constitutional review and power-sharing. As the Security Council and the international community, we should all support the recent discussions held by the Federal and state leaders in Dhuusamarreeb. The international community and partners of Somali leaders and stakeholders should also allow them to lead and determine their future, without interference or imposition. Furthermore, we appeal to the Somali stakeholders to undertake urgent and concerted efforts to reach a broad-based, inclusive political agreement, including on the way forward on elections and the finalization of the revised Constitution, among other key priorities. Secondly, on the preparations for the elections, the Niger, Tunisia and South Africa, as well as Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, recall their previous statement to the Council, in which they noted that the preparations and holding of one-person-one-vote elections in Somalia was a critical priority (see S/2020/436, annex XII). We further underlined the importance of dialogue, inclusive political participation and the resolution of political differences between the Federal Government of Somalia and the federal member states, which are critical to the success of the elections and national cohesion. We reiterate that those observations remain valid today. Therefore, the A3+l commends the recent developments related to the preparations for the elections in Somalia, in particular the adoption by the House of the People of the amendments to the political parties law and four resolutions that address the representation in Parliament of all federal member states, including the allocation of seats to constituencies for both Houses and a minimum of 24 per cent representation of women in Parliament, We are also pleased that the National Independent Electoral Commission continues its preparations for the national elections. That is evidenced by the two possible options for conducting the elections either in March or in August 2021, depending on whether the elections are held through paper-based voter registration and polling or standard biometric voter registration. The A3+1 urges all the stakeholders in Somalia to engage constructively in an inclusive dialogue to reach a political consensus on the modalities and timing of the elections. We further appeal to the international partners to coordinate their support to ensure inclusive, credible and secure elections in Somalia. Thirdly, on the security situation, the A3+1 remains concerned about the volatile security situation in Somalia. We strongly condemn the attacks by Al-Shabaab on Somali civilians, the security forces, AMISOM, the United Nations and the international community. We pay tribute to the ultimate sacrifices of AMISOM and the Somali National Army in their quest to bring about peace, stability and development in Somalia. We reiterate our previous calls urging the Federal Government of Somalia, with the support of the United Nations, AMISOM and international partners, to continue the generation, training and resourcing of capable and effective Somali national forces, which will ultimately take over the security responsibilities in line with the revised Somali transitional plan and the national security architecture. To that end, we again appeal for the international community and partners to mobilize the necessary resources, including the replenishment of the United Nations trust fund in support of AMISOM and the trust fund to support the Somali security forces, as they continue to make commendable progress towards restoring State authority, peacebuilding and State-building. We commend in particular the efforts of the Somali National Army in securing all recovered areas thus far. However, we recognize the challenges created by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, as well as the rains, from April to June, that have impacted the expansion of some security activities, including the liberation of more zones. We are heartened by the number of reconciliation efforts made by the State Administration and communities aimed at ending the cycle of violence among clans. We support the peaceful resolution of tensions among the communities and peaceful coexistence between the clans. We strongly condemn the reported incidents of civilian casualties and conflict-related sexual violence, particularly those affecting women and girls. We also strongly condemn the grave violations against children in armed conflict, including the use, abduction, recruitment, killing and maiming of children, that have been registered during the period under review. We support the calls urging that all perpetrators of such crimes be identified and held accountable. Furthermore, we have taken note of the developments in Parliament relating to the draft sexual-offences bill and the introduction of an alternative bill. Although we recognize the prerogative of the Somali Parliament to draft legislation, we call on the authorities to ensure that any new piece of legislation remains consistent with Somalia's international law obligations. Fourthly, concerning the humanitarian situation, Somalia has been impacted by the triple threat and shock of the COVID-19 pandemic, an infestation by desert locusts and floods. Those challenges have deepened Somalia's humanitarian crisis. COVID-19 in particular has exacerbated pre-existing vulnerabilities, disrupted socioeconomic gains and affected the livelihoods of ordinary Somalis. We commend the actions taken by the humanitarian partners for the expansion of their support to Somali authorities to address the impact of COVID-19. The A3+1 notes that the adverse impact of flooding due to climate change remained widespread in Somalia during the period under review. We are concerned that that situation will continue to exacerbate the displacement of people, food insecurity and the outbreak of water-borne diseases, as well as to adversely affect the livelihoods of those made most vulnerable across the country.In that respect, Somalia requires continued support by the international community and humanitarian partners to mitigate the impact of that triple threat. We support the call by the Secretary-General for the additional funding that is urgently needed to continue to deliver humanitarian assistance. We deplore the fact that the security situation remains a major constraint to humanitarian operations. We are concerned at and condemn the recorded incidents against humanitarian operations and providers, including recorded incidents that led to the killing, abduction and, in some instances, detaining of humanitarian workers. Finally, the Niger, Tunisia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and South Africa commend the efforts and commitment of the United Nations through UNSOM and the United Nations Support Office in Somalia, AMISOM, the United Nations Mine Action Service, the Federal Government and the federal member states of Somalia and the international partners for their continual efforts and progress in bringing about stabilization and deepening federalism and State-building in Somalia. We urge a continued and strengthened working relationship between AMISOM and UNSOM in order to assist Somalia to take ownership of addressing its own security challenges, as envisaged by the transition plan. We reiterate that the withdrawal of AMISOM from Somalia should be condition-based, as the security situation remains volatile and is characterized by frequent terrorist attacks. To conclude, the Niger, Tunisia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and South Africa support the continued presence of AMISOM and UNSOM in Somalia. In that regard, we support the renewal of the mandate of UNSOM for another 12 months when it ends on 31 August 2020.
