Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank you, Madam President, for your very
generous words addressed to me. I would like to
express the warmest and most confident wishes for the
complete success of our work under your elegant and
able guidance.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. The Central and Eastern European
countries associated with the European Union-
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Hungary, Latvia,
Lithuania, Poland, Romania and Slovakia - as well as
Cyprus, Malta and Turkey, which are also associated
countries, align themselves with this statement.

I would like to express the European Union's
support for the resolution on the situation in Sierra
Leone that was skilfully and determinedly prepared by
the United Kingdom, and for the strengthening of
existing sanctions and the establishment of an embargo
on rough diamonds illicitly exported from Sierra
Leone. The adoption of this resolution is a first step,
and shows that the international community intends to
react in the firmest possible way to the events that have
taken place in Sierra Leone since the beginning of
May.

The European Union also hopes that the Security
Council will, on the one hand, be able to decide swiftly
and positively on increasing the staff of the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) as
proposed in the Secretary-General's last report and, on
the other hand, examine the assistance that might be
given to the Government of Sierra Leone to bring to
trial Mr. Foday Sankoh and other persons responsible
for Violations of the Lorne Peace Agreement.

The European Union vigorously condemns the
actions of the Revolutionary United Front (RUF), in
particular the attacks and hostile actions committed
against UNAMSIL. It calls upon the RUF immediately
and unconditionally to respect the commitments it has
made and to begin the process of demobilization and
disarmament provided for under the Lome Agreement.
The European Union underscores the personal
responsibility of Mr. Foday Sankoh in the course of
recent events, by virtue of which he can no longer be
considered one of the partners in the peace process
under any circumstances.

The European Union considers the measures
proposed in the resolution as being particularly timely
for various reasons.

First, the measures aim to put an end to the illicit
exploitation of diamonds in Sierra Leone by the
Revolutionary United Front, an exploitation that is
substantially contributing to financing that movement's
war effort and impoverishing the people of Sierra
Leone as a whole. The European Union is convinced
that the establishment of a lasting peace in Sierra
Leone requires drying up the RUF's financial
resources.

Secondly, these measures have been the subject
of close consultation with the Government of Sierra
Leone. They show a concern for cooperation with those
economically involved in the diamond trade. The
setting up of an effective system of certificates of
origin for diamonds produced in Sierra Leone may
ultimately complete the efforts already undertaken by
the Security Council in other African countries, in
particular in Angola. This will give complete legality
to the diamond trade and should contribute to peace
and development in Africa and other regions of the
world.

Thirdly and lastly, these measures will strengthen
the existing embargo on arms. On several occasions,
the European Union has had opportunity to express its
concern over violations of Security Council resolution
1171 (1998). The Secretary-General's proposal to set
up a group of experts responsible for collecting
information on violations of that embargo and
examining the links between the diamond trade and the
arms trade meets with the particular support of the
European Union. The European Union calls on all
countries concerned, and primarily on the countries
neighbouring Sierra Leone, to show exemplary
cooperation with that group of experts.

The European Union is pleased to welcome all
measures taken to strengthen the role of the sanctions
Committee set up under resolution 1132 (1998). The
holding of a preliminary hearing by the sanctions
Committee between now and the end of the month to
assess the role of diamonds in the conflict in Sierra
Leone, and the links between the trade in Sierra Leone
diamonds and the arms trade, represents an important
decision. We hope that the holding of such a hearing
involving both governmental and non-governmental
experts may serve as a precedent for the work of other
committees.

The European Union also notes that the resolution
establishes an embargo regime on diamonds for an
initial period of 18 months and provides for bi-annual
reviews of the implementation of the embargo. The
European Union takes note of the commitment made by
the Security Council to carry out an in-depth review of
the situation at the end of the 18-month period so as to
take a fresh decision, if necessary, to either extend the
measures taken and adjust them if need be, or to adopt
new measures in the light of the Government's
authority over diamond-producing areas. The European
Union believes that all these measures are aimed at
supporting the efforts of the authorities in Sierra Leone
in order to enable them to take back the control over
resources that have slipped through their fingers. They
also reflect the concern of the Security Council to
ensure that the measures it adopts are effectively
followed up with actions.

Finally, the European Union is satisfied with the
close coordination between the Security Council and
the member States of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) with regard to the
situation in Sierra Leone. As Ambassador Moctar
Ouane emphasized, the meeting held last month
between the Security Council and the ministerial
delegation of the ECOWAS Mediation and Security
Council Committee of Six on Sierra Leone is evidence
of this indispensable closeness.

The European Union would like to recall that the
restoration of peace in Sierra Leone will be possible
only with the active support of the countries of the
region. Conversely, the persistence of chronic
insecurity in Sierra Leone would be a handicap to
subregional development and would fuel the
destabilization of neighbouring countries.

