Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom fully subscribes to the balanced
statement made earlier by Greece on behalf of the
European Union and its affiliated European States.

My delegation has listened carefully to the points
made by Member States of the United Nations in this
debate. It is not surprising that, on a subject of this
importance and intensity, there is such a wide diversity
of views. Many speakers have referred to the 12-year
period within which the peaceful disarmament of Iraq
was attempted again and again by the Security Council.
No one worked harder than the British Government to
try to bring about that objective. No one has worked
harder in recent weeks than the British Government to
try to unite the Security Council around a position that
would have maintained the vigorous line adopted
unanimously in resolution 1441 (2002).

I am fully aware that Member States, perhaps
without exception, find the current situation deeply
disappointing and distasteful. But they cannot set aside
the clear, prolonged and universally available evidence
that Iraq was repeatedly defying the United Nations in
refusing complete disarmament of its weapons of mass
destruction under the terms of successive resolutions.
The express and explicit demands of the Security
Council were never carried out by Iraq, and the United
Nations has not succeeded in drawing the right
conclusions about the consequences of that.

Resolution 1441 (2002) was adopted unanimously
but not implemented with any rigour by a united
Council. International peace and security cannot be
maintained with responsibility by avoiding hard
decisions. Iraq was clearly determined - even in the
face of the threat of military action - to hang on to its
prohibited weapons programmes and to develop others,
with all the risks that that posed to peace and security
in the region and more widely, including to the national
security of the United Kingdom. Iraq has, furthermore,
valued its defiance over the well-being of its own
people, who have as a consequence endured a decade
of sanctions.

Coalition action is therefore now under way to
enforce Security Council decisions on complete Iraqi
disarmament. This action is being undertaken in a
manner that is directed only at the regime that is
responsible for this failure to respect the United
Nations. We are doing everything possible to minimize
the effect on civilians, to leave infrastructure intact and
to ensure that the necessary humanitarian assistance
reaches the Iraqi people as quickly as possible.

We accept in full our obligations under
international humanitarian law. The United Kingdom
has already committed $80 million to support
humanitarian agencies, including the excellent efforts
of the Red Cross and the Red Crescent. A further $300
million has been set aside for the United Kingdom's
humanitarian response. In addition to that, the United
Kingdom is contributing one fifth of the growing
European Union contribution. Coalition engineers are
already at work building a water pipeline from Kuwait
to distribute supplies in southern Iraq, while a Royal
Fleet auxiliary ship will shortly be arriving at Umm
Qasr, carrying the first coalition consignment by sea of
humanitarian supplies. And I should like to underline
that these significant efforts in Iraq will not detract
from the funding and the very high priority that we are
giving to all other development activity, particularly in
Africa.

The action that the United Kingdom is now taking
with its coalition partners to uphold United Nations
resolutions is both legitimate and multilateral. The use
of force is authorized in the current circumstances
under Security Council resolutions 678 (1990), 687
(1991) and 1441 (2002). A broad coalition of well over
40 States is supporting this action materially or
politically.

We deeply regret the differences within the
Security Council that have marked the past few months
of discussion on this subject. Now is the time to put
those behind us and to unite to ensure that the United
Nations and the international community can act
quickly to meet the needs of the Iraqi people during
and after military action.

Our first priority must be to ensure that the
changing realities on the ground in Iraq are reflected in
the operation of the oil for food programme, on which
60 per cent of Iraqis remain dependent. Many in this
debate have spoken in support of the Secretary-
General's proposals on amending the programme. We
have made progress within the Council on a draft
resolution. We hope that the outstanding issues can be
resolved rapidly so that the Secretary-General, as he
has requested, has the necessary authority and
flexibility to maximize the role of the United Nations
in delivering humanitarian relief.

An equal priority, including in the short term - a
priority recognized and acted upon by the British Prime
Minister as a central plank of British foreign policy -
is to restore the Middle East peace process to health.
That means both publication and implementation of the
road map and progress on security as well as on all
other issues. The peace process must not be sidelined
because of Iraq, nor must it be promoted only because
of Iraq. Justice for the Palestinians, security for Israelis
and Palestinians alike, and a comprehensive regional
settlement must all be urgent priorities in their own
right.

Looking further ahead, we will need to consider
carefully the role that the United Nations can play in
building a stable and prosperous Iraq. The expertise of
the United Nations and that of the international
community will be needed to achieve that result. The
United Kingdom is convinced that the United Nations
must take a central role in the future of Iraq. The Prime
Minister will meet the Secretary-General at United
Nations Headquarters later today to discuss precisely
that. I sincerely hope that the Council will play its part
with responsibility in ensuring a well-functioning Iraq
that no longer presents a threat to international peace
and security, where people can enjoy their fundamental
rights without fear of oppression, and where a
representative Government provides effectively for its
people and manages natural resources for the exclusive
benefit of all the people of Iraq.
