Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I also
thank Ambassador Osorio for his briefing today. Over
the past three months, we have had new reminders
that Iran's illicit nuclear programme remains one of
the gravest threats to international peace and security
before the Council.

Since we last met (see S/PV.6737), the Director
General of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) has reported, yet again, that Iran has continued
to expand and accelerate its prohibited uranium
enrichment activities and heavy water-related work,
in contravention of the Council's multiple resolutions.
Iran continues to install centrifuges at Natanz and the
Fordow fuel enrichment plant, near Qom, two previously
clandestine facilities. Iran continues to accumulate a
stockpile of low-enriched uranium, enough for several
nuclear weapons if further enriched to higher levels.
Iran continues to enrich uranium to nearly 20 per cent,
a level that is close to weapons grade, in quantities that
exceed its declared needs.

Those technical developments alone are alarming.
But international concern is compounded by Iran's
repeated denial of IAEA requests for access to the
locations, documents and personnel required to resolve
outstanding issues related to the possible military
dimensions of Iran's nuclear programme.

We welcome ongoing discussions between Iran and
the IAEA. But those discussions must produce results,
unlike similar discussions in the past. We regret that,
to date, Iran has not followed through on its reported
agreement to comply with the IAEA's structured
approach for resolving the Agency's concerns about
the possible military dimensions to Iran's nuclear
programme. Success will only be measured and defined
by Iran's actual actions. It is not enough to merely sign a
document. Iran must take the steps necessary to resolve
the longstanding issues with its nuclear programme,
without further delay.

Those developments remind us of the continuing
importance of the work of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006). We fully support the Committee's decision last
month to impose targeted sanctions on two Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps individuals and one entity
involved in arms smuggling. That action also sends the
clear message that there are consequences for those who
assist in the evasion of sanctions. We urge the Committee
to make more such designations in the near future.

We also commend the Panel of Experts on the
sanctions imposed on Iran for its excellent work and
we welcome the Council's renewal last month of the
Panel's annual mandate. The Panel recently produced
a well-researched final report (S/2012/395). It has
continued to adhere to high methodological standards
and has carried out its mandate in a professional manner.

We note with great concern the Panel's recent
characterization of Syria as a central party to illicit
Iranian arms transfers. That finding is all the more
troubling in the light of the recent violence perpetrated
against the Syrian people. Over the past two years, the
Panel has assembled substantial evidence proving Syria's
role as a repeat violator of United Nations sanctions on
Iran. Syria's refusal to implement its United Nations
obligations should be a matter of central concern to the
Council.

We also note the troubling information regarding
Iran's continued launches using ballistic missile
technology, in violation of paragraph 9 of resolution
1929 (2010). Iran's continued missile activity, as
well as its links to North Korea's prohibited ballistic
missile-related activities, merits further scrutiny.

The United States remains determined to prevent
Iran from acquiring a nuclear weapon, and we remain
committed to doing so through a comprehensive
dual-track approach that includes both pressure and
diplomatic engagement.

Since the Council's last meeting, the permanent five
plus one group (P5+1) and Iran have held two rounds of
talks, first on 14 April in Istanbul and then in Baghdad
on 23 and 24 May. Preparations are now under way for
a third round of talks, in Moscow, next week.

In Baghdad, as part of our agreement in Istanbul,
the P5+1 laid out clear proposals to begin to address the
Iranian nuclear issue through initial confidence-building.
That included proposals dealing with the previously
undeclared enrichment facility at Fordow and all aspects
of Iran's nearly 20 per cent enrichment.

We also put ideas on the table regarding reciprocal
steps we would be prepared to take. We have said
repeatedly that the window for diplomacy is not
open-ended. We have sought to impress upon Iran the
urgency of the situation and have made clear that we
will not engage in an endless process oftalks that do not
produce concrete results.

We remain firm, clear and united in seeking a swift
diplomatic resolution of the concerns about Iran's
nuclear programme. The P5+1 are ready for serious
negotiations. We hope that Iran will decide to take
concrete steps to address the international community's
concerns.

