Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his briefing
on the situation in the Middle East. I also thank the
Permanent Representative of Israel and the Permanent
Observer of Palestine for their statements.

The events that have taken place in recent weeks
confirm once again that the international community,
and the Security Council in particular, must continue to
monitor the situation in the Middle East and encourage
intensified negotiations between Israel and the
Palestinian Authority, based on previous agreements and
obligations and ongoing diplomatic efforts. That has
been particularly evident following the attack on the
freedom flotilla that took place in international waters
on 31 May, with tragic and disturbing consequences, not
only because of the clearly reprehensible facts, but also
because it has yet again highlighted the fragility of the
humanitarian situation in Gaza.

The presidential statement adopted by the
Security Council on 1 June (S/PRST/2010/9), which
called for a prompt, impartial, credible and transparent
investigation of those events in accordance with
international standards, remains valid. Mexico believes
that the parties involved have not only the right to
establish their own commissions of inquiry, but also
the obligation to do so in matters that concern them.

In that regard, we note the results of the internal
inquiry commission established by Israel, which were
made known on 12 July. We continue to await the
results of the independent public committee for more
in-depth conclusions.

That not withstanding, such internal commissions
cannot replace the establishment of an international
commission as outlined in the Council's presidential
statement; rather, they must complement it. Only thus
can we create the cooperation and trust that are needed
to ensure that a credible outcome of the investigations
that is acceptable to the parties concerned. Hence, we
encourage the Secretary-General to continue his efforts
to establish a body that would meet those criteria.

At the same time, it is essential also to prevent all
acts of provocation that could give rise to another
incident like the one that occurred on 31 May. In that
regard, any delivery of humanitarian assistance must
be arranged through established channels.

We believe that the Gaza blockade is
unsustainable and counterproductive, and that it has
severe humanitarian consequences for the civilian
population of the Strip; at the same time, we welcome
Egypt's decision to partially lift the blockade and
Israel's decision to permit access to Gaza for more
goods, limiting only material that could affect its
security. We recognize the important work in that
regard of the Quartet and its Representative and that of
representatives of the United Nations system.
While this progress is positive, the lifting of the
blockade must be complete. As we have been saying
since January 2009, and taking account of Israel's
legitimate security concerns, we believe that this
security can be achieved only if it is accompanied by
the establishment of an international monitoring
mechanism to guarantee a lasting ceasefire, the
complete opening of border crossings and control of
illicit trafficking in arms to Gaza, in accordance with
Security Council resolution 1860 (2009).

We also underscore the importance of carrying
out the intra-Palestinian reconciliation process, which
is taking place with the support of Egypt. This is
essential for the building of a future Palestinian State.

Frank and direct dialogue is the only way to
achieve a comprehensive, lasting resolution of the
Middle East conflict that recognizes Israel's right to
exist and makes possible the establishment of a
politically and economically viable Palestinian State,
living in peace with Israel within secure and
internationally recognized borders, in accordance with
Security Council resolutions, the Road Map, the
Madrid principles and the Arab Peace Initiative.

We therefore support the holding of so-called
proximity talks, so long as they lead to the resumption
of direct negotiations within a reasonable time. We
must understand that the window of opportunity that
opened when the proximity talks began could close if
significant progress is not made. We therefore
encourage both parties to make every possible effort
aimed at an agreed resumption of direct negotiations.
Thus, it is essential for both Israel and the Palestinian
Authority to comply with the principles set out in the
Road Map, which are the basis for resolving all
pending issues in this conflict.

Similarly, both parties must avoid actions that run
counter to international law and international
humanitarian law, as well as any provocative statement
or act of violence that could exacerbate tension. In that
regard, the demolitions in East Jerusalem and the
building of new settlements are to be condemned. Such
practices in an occupied territory run counter to
international law and violate the provisions of the
Fourth Geneva Convention. We reaffirm that all such
practices, including the expansion of settlements in the
West Bank and in East Jerusalem by so-called natural
growth, are a further serious obstacle to the peace
process. We urge Israel to cease such practices.

We commend the Palestinian Authority's efforts to
meet its commitments with respect to security and
economic development in the West Bank. We have
taken note of the positive economic and human impact
of Israel's initiative to partially lift restrictions imposed
on the movement of people and goods in the West
Bank. We hope that these steps will be permanent and
will lead to the complete and irreversible dismantling
of all checkpoints, which is indispensable for the
establishment of a viable and independent Palestinian
State.

We are convinced that improvement in the living
conditions of the Palestinian people and effective
security controls in the West Bank are essential for the
achievement of lasting peace in the Middle East. We
therefore support Prime Minister Fayyad's plan to lay
the economic and institutional foundations of a future
Palestinian State; we call upon the Quartet and the
international community to continue their active
support for those efforts.

Peace in the Middle East requires progress on the
various tracks of the conflict in the region. Thus, we
are concerned at continued violations of the provisions
of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006), in
particular daily raids by the Israel Defense Forces in
Lebanon's territorial space and the discovery of
weapons and explosives in the area of operation of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL).
We are concerned also by recent acts of violence -
presumably organized - against UNIFIL personnel.
We must guarantee their safety and freedom of
movement in their area of operation and must ensure
coordination at the highest level between the Lebanese
Armed Forces and Government and UNIFIL in order to
avoid incidents like those that took place on 3 July. We
appeal to both Israel and Lebanon, and to all other
actors involved, to comply with the provisions of the
relevant Security Council resolutions and to avoid all
hostile rhetoric that could lead to an escalation of
violence. It is essential to strengthen Lebanon's
sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence.

Finally, we consider that Israel and Syria must
resume a process of rapprochement as soon as possible,
through modalities acceptable to both parties, in order
to find a solution on the occupied Golan that will
preserve the sovereignty and protect the interests of
both States.
