Mr. Heusgen (Germany): First of all, I would like
to welcome and thank Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq, for her
briefing. I would also like to thank her for her work and
that of her team. From her statement today, it was clear
to everyone that she is dedicated to the subject. We wish
her good luck. We are very happy that the extension of
the mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI) was unanimous. It shows that the
Security Council is united in its support for the Special
Representative and her work.

Germany continues to be a partner of Iraq on its very
difficult path forward. I would also like to underline the
progress that has been achieved. Germany has been a
partner from the very beginning. Since 2014, we have
spent approximately €l.7 billion on Iraq's stabilization
and reconstruction. We will continue to be a partner
in future.

With regard to the work of the Government, which
is difficult enough, I would like to underline that, first
and foremost, it is important that all of the remaining
posts be filled. With respect to the priorities, I would
like to echo the sentiments made by our American
and French colleagues concerning the fight against
corruption. That is key to ensuring that authorities
gain the trust and confidence of the people. In the same
vein, that also holds true for accountability for those
who have committed crimes against humanity and
other crimes, as that is very important for post-conflict
reconciliation. Germany fully supports the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed bey Da'esh/ISIL and its Special
Adviser, Karim Khan. In the various court cases and
proceedings, it is important that international law be
respected and standards met, as that is crucial in the
fight against impunity. It is also important that no new
crimes be committed in the fight against impunity.

Let me turn now to the positive developments.
After the tension we all witnessed between Baghdad
and Erbil, it is very good that the situation is now on
the right track. Some issues were resolved. The internal
customs checkpoints have been removed. The salary
issue has been resolved. We therefore hope that relations
between Baghdad and Erbil are being normalized and
that sustainable solutions can be found for outstanding
issues. I would also like to praise UNAMI's contribution
to Iraqi efforts to mitigate tensions in Kirkuk.

Iraq-Kuwait relations were also mentioned. There
again, it is very good that the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General follows and supports the
efforts undertaken between the Kuwaiti and Iraqi
Governments to pursue the process of reconciliation.
The tripartite mechanism's activities are very welcome.
The return of all Kuwaiti and third-country nationals,
human remains and Kuwaiti property remain important
so that reconciliation can be completed.

With regard to the issue of women and peace
and security, we very much welcome the Special
Representative's efforts to promote inclusiveness and the
participation of women at all levels of decision-making.
Her cooperation with the Women's Advisory Group on
Reconciliation and Politics in Iraq is very important
in developing priorities for their work. We constantly
reiterate the importance of women being involved in
decision-making. I would like to commend Iraq on its
national action plan on women and peace and security.
It is the first country in the region to adopt such a plan.
I recall the Arria Formula meeting we held here four
months ago, together with Peru and the United Kingdom.
One can see that Iraq is a well-recognized example in
the region and beyond. The country is now working on
its second national action plan, and we welcome that.
We hope that the second national action plan will enjoy
the support of the new Government and that the means
to ensure that the objectives set out in the plan can be
achieved on the ground will be supplied. That requires
an adequate budget. Germany again stands ready to
support Iraq in the implementation of the plan.

We also encourage Iraq to continue its work on
accountability regarding sexual violence in conflict
and to adopt a survivor-centred approach in that regard.
In resolution 2467 (2019), the Security Council spelled
out in detail possible measures concerning how to
strengthen legislation, enhance investigations and
prosecute sexual violence in conflict. We encourage
Iraqi efforts to reform the justice sector, using the
examples provided in resolution 2467 (2019). We
would also like to support the remarks made by the
representative of the United States with regard to
children born of sexual violence, and the importance of
the work that has to be done in that regard.

My last point concerns climate insecurity. Iraq is
one of the countries in the Middle East that is most
severely affected by severe climate change-related
security risks, such as prolonged heatwaves, increased
rainfall variability and prolonged periods of drought.
On 11 July 2018, Mr. Hassan Janabi, Minister for
Water Resources of the Republic of Iraq, discussed in
the Security Council (see S/PV.8307) the significant
negative impact of climate change in terms of
compounding the country's security challenges. He
highlighted in particular the climate-intensified risks
associated with the absence ofregional and international
frameworks for water sharing, which makes Iraq's
security challenges even worse. Therefore, we would
welcome UNAMI's support for a regional dialogue
and approach - not only on energy, the environment,
water and refugees but also on the adverse effects of
climate change and ecological changes on the stability
of the region. We emphasize the need for adequate
risk-assessment and risk-management strategies by the
Governments of the region and by the United Nations in
relation to such adverse effects.

