Uruguay thanks Germany and the Dominican Republic for convening this timely open debate and aligns itself with the statement submitted by Canada on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security (see annex 20). Sexual violence in conflict is one of the most serious and degrading violations of human dignity. That form of violence inflicts unspeakable suffering on the victims and causes long-lasting trauma that ruthlessly destroys the social fabric of entire communities, threatening their recovery and development prospects. The Secretary-General's report (S/2020/487) shows that sexual violence in conflict unfortunately continues to be used as a tactic of war and terrorism. Meanwhile, the global crisis of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), which is devastating the planet, is further exacerbating sexual and gender-based violence. It is therefore essential to move from commitment to compliance and to find solutions to end that grave scourge. First, Uruguay believes that the most effective tool to achieve that objective is prevention. There is no doubt that peace continues to be the best way to combat sexual violence in conflict. According to the Secretary-General's report, the ultimate goal of the agenda against that kind of violence is not a war without violations but a world without wars. The Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire to combat the COVID-19 pandemic, which was supported a few days ago by resolution 2532 (2020), is a step in that direction. Another key factor in prevention is establishing an environment that respects women's rights, allowing them to participate on an equal footing in political, economic and social life and to fully contribute to the growth of their societies. The common denominator of sexual violence is that it finds fertile ground where there are well-established patterns of structural gender discrimination. States therefore need to address those underlying causes, which perpetuate violence, and promote the full realization of human rights. Uruguay believes that this task requires a sustained effort, both in conflict situations and in times of peace. In that regard, the Uruguayan Government has continued to strengthen its legal system and has adopted new laws, including on combating human trafficking and eradicating violence against women and other human rights violations, as well as on the care and reparation of victims. For Uruguay, education, apart being a right in itself, plays a fundamental role in promoting other women's rights. Education provides women and girls with opportunities for their economic, political and social empowerment, and equips them with better tools for overcoming discrimination and violence. The increasing number of attacks on schools and universities in different conflict situations is regrettable. States that have not done so are therefore encouraged to endorse the Safe Schools Declaration. Secondly, Governments must adopt effective mechanisms to address the recovery and reintegration of victims through services and programmes that are not only limited to health care, but also provide psychosocial care to survivors so that they can overcome trauma and stigmatization, and empower them to successfully reintegrate into society. As recognized in resolution 2467 (2019), the focus should be on the victims. They are not a homogeneous group. It is therefore necessary to address the specific needs of different groups, such as women and girls, men and boys who have been victims of sexual violence, people with disabilities, refugees and internally displaced persons, ethnic minorities and stigmatized and marginalized communities, as well as children born of war. Continuing such services must remain a priority during the current global health crisis, in which the risks of sexual and gender-based violence are increasing. Thirdly, accountability is essential to combating impunity for perpetrators of sexual violence in conflict, deterring and preventing such crimes and providing redress to victims. COVID-19 has had a negative impact on accountability, limiting the ability of States to receive complaints and conduct investigations and trials. Delivering justice is one of the most important duties of States. Efforts must be made to ensure that perpetrators are brought to justice in these exceptional times. That can be achieved through the innovative solutions that some States have already begun to implement, such as the use of tele-hearings with due guarantees of legality and transparency, the application of remote justice through electronic files, digital signatures of judges and parties and the use of in-person justice, respecting distances. In order to deliver justice, Uruguay has reopened its court offices with in-person hearings. Measures were introduced to mitigate health risks and ensure social distancing in court buildings, such as more spaced out scheduling, virtual procedures to reduce the flow of people in offices and summoning witnesses to trials for shorter periods and sequentially. When the national legal system fails, international law should apply. The Rome Statute includes sexual violence in the category of crimes against humanity and war crimes and recognizes the possibility that it may amount to the crime of genocide. Crimes of that magnitude should not go unpunished. Uruguay therefore encourages the Security Council to refer such cases to the International Criminal Court. Fourthly, the Security Council has the primary responsibility for preventing and combating sexual violence in conflict. Consequently, it must ensure that the issue is duly considered in the sanctions committees, which should systematically include the names of perpetrators in their listings. The prevention of sexual violence should also be included in country-specific resolutions and in the mandates of peace operations, and gender advisers should be deployed on the ground. Uruguay is committed to cooperating as far as possible with the Security Council to ensure the proper functioning of peacekeeping operations. It therefore provides predeployment training to its troops on protection issues and on the detection of early warning indicators of conflict-related sexual violence. It has also increased women's participation in its contingents, which have excelled in preventing and responding to sexual violence and human rights violations. Finally, Uruguay would like to highlight the important role of an actor that has been closely linked to the origin and development of the women and peace and security agenda and without which implementation will not be possible - civil society. At a time when COVID-19 is affecting the already restricted space for action by women human rights defenders and peacebuilders, they often continue to be victims of crimes against them. A gender component is clearly identified in a significant number of attacks against them, resulting in threats and attacks, including rape and sexual violence. The authorities have an obligation to prevent such attacks, effectively investigate complaints, punish the perpetrators and refrain from imposing excessive restrictions that hinder the work of women human rights defenders and peacebuilders. Creating an adequate environment for their work, implementing special mechanisms and protocols for protection and the prevention of crimes against them, and establishing specialized offices and personnel to investigate and process complaints are measures that States can adopt to legitimize the work they do. At a time when human rights are being constrained, the work of those activists is more necessary than ever in order to implement public health measures. Uruguay would therefore like to conclude by acknowledging the selfless work that they do with courage and dedication in the most difficult and risky environments, devoting their lives to building a more equitable foundation for the future and defending victims of sexual violence and the rights of the most oppressed and vulnerable in the world.
