Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to you, Mr. President, for
having organized this meeting, and we wish to express
our gratitude to the Chairmen of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities (the 1267 Committee), and the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) (the 1540 Committee), for the
reports on the work of the committees they head in the
field of terrorism. On the whole, the committees
continue to assist the Security Council in implementing
its active approach to issues of fighting international
terrorism, including by providing a significant
contribution to the Security Council in implementing
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.

In our view, the preparation and submission to the
Council of the global survey of the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001) (see S/2008/379) was an
important milestone in the CTC's counter-terrorist
activity. For the first time since the resolution's
adoption in 2001, a comprehensive assessment of its
implementation, the presentation of trends and the
formulation of recommendations regarding further
work was carried out. We welcome the intention of the
CTC to conduct periodic reviews in the future.

The survey was compiled based on preliminary
assessments of the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001). At the same time, it provides guidance for
further improvement of these assessments. We
welcome the Committee's progress in the preparation
of preliminary implementation assessments (PIAs).
PIAs are now prepared for almost every State and
conveyed to capitals. The processing of the first
responses has started. In this respect, we expect
stepped-up dialogue with Governments on the basis of
their PIAs. As the Committee begins the process of
updating its initial analyses, it should base itself on
relevant information from Governments and on their
specific comments on the CTC's assessments. We
expect that work on the basis of the PIAs will be
orderly and without any delays.

In that context, we back the efforts of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) aimed at assisting Member States in preparing
their responses to the preliminary assessments. We
welcome the regular meetings between the Chairman
of the CTC and the Executive Director of CTED with
representatives of States for additional clarification of
formats and PIA procedures.

A most important area of the CTC's work is in-
depth dialogue with Governments within the
framework of country visits. We back the Committee's
flexible approach to CTED's visiting missions and the
effective use of the various formats.

We note the recent CTED visit to Madagascar
conducted jointly with the Secretariat's Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force. That was the
first such visit devoted to issues of implementing
resolution 1373 (2001) and the Global Strategy. The
visit served as confirmation of the complementarity of
the Security Council's and the General Assembly's
counter-terrorism efforts and demonstrated new
potential for optimizing contacts with States, including
with the objective of identifying technical assistance
needs.

We welcome the involvement of CTED in the
Task Force's work on implementation of the Global
Strategy, including the contribution of the Executive
Directorate in preparing materials for the first review
of the implementation of the Global Strategy, held on
4 and 5 September.

We continue to view the 1267 Committee and its
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team to

be among the effective and operational mechanisms of
the Security Council in the field of counter-terrorism.
Unfortunately, we are obliged to note the continuing
spread of extremist ideas and the influence of the
Taliban, both in Afghanistan and beyond its borders,
which is demonstrated by the large-scale terrorist acts
in Kabul and other regions of the country and by
increasing attacks on humanitarian personnel and
United Nations staff members. That shows the desire of
radical forces to take power and to control the country
at the cost of the lives of the peaceful population. In
these conditions, we consider it inappropriate and
dangerous to move away from a policy of isolating
extremist leaders and to establish political contacts
with leading members of the Taliban, especially in
violation of existing sanctions regimes. We call upon
all States to unswervingly implement restrictive
measures against individuals on the sanctions list
pursuant to the relevant Security Council resolutions.

We welcome the efforts of the 1267 Committee
and its Monitoring Team to keep the sanctions list
updated, reflecting the reality of today's terrorist
threat. We note the significant progress achieved in this
field through the adoption of resolution 1822 (2008).
We urge States to designate for listing individuals and
organizations related to the Taliban and Al-Qaida and
to actively provide additional information regarding
such individuals already on the list. The full
implementation in good faith by all States of their
commitments in this field will determine the success of
our common efforts aimed at countering the real threat
to international peace and security from the Taliban
and Al-Qaida. We advocate closer coordination in this
area, first and foremost with the CTC and its Executive
Directorate.

As a sponsor of resolution 1540 (2004) and the
subsequent resolutions 1673 (2006) and 1810 (2008),
the Russian Federation is interested in the
comprehensive development of international
cooperation to fully implement the provisions of those
important resolutions aimed at preventing weapons of
mass destruction, related materials and delivery
systems from falling into the hands of non-State actors,
above all terrorists. We are satisfied by the fact that,
during the six months since the previous 1540
Committee briefing, the Committee continued to step
up efforts in assisting States to implement the
provisions of resolution 1540 (2004) and in the
coordination of broad international cooperation. We are
ready to continue to back such efforts, including within
the framework of our ongoing cooperation on issues
related to the 1540 Committee's mandate with other
States members of the Commonwealth of Independent
States.

We should like to recall the importance of 1540
Committee report (see S/2008/493) presented to the
Security Council in July on the outcome of its work for
the years 2006 through 2008. In it, due attention is
devoted to issues of continuing work with countries
that are lagging in providing information on the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) as well as to
new tasks spelled out by the Security Council in
resolutions 1673 (2006) and 1810 (2008). There is now
a need to focus on making these tasks concrete and on
their implementation, including via expedited
agreement on a new programme of work for the 1540
Committee.

It is extremely important to fully bring to bear
existing expertise to prevent the weakening of the
Committee as a result of the impact on the
Committee's resources of the tangible increase in
workload following the adoption of resolution 1810
(2008). In this respect, we urge members of the
Committee to act as expeditiously as possible to
conclude the protracted process of agreeing on the new
composition of the group of experts assisting it in its
work. We should like to assure the Council yet again of
our unswerving readiness to offer comprehensive
cooperation and active participation in the Committee's
activities aimed at realizing the objectives of
resolutions 1540 (2004), 1673 (2006) and 1810 (2008).

The Russian Federation backs the joint statement
made on behalf of the three Security Council
Committees dealing with issues of counter-terrorism.
We consider fully warranted the policy aimed at
increasing cooperation among the committees and their
expert bodies: CTED, the Monitoring Team and the
1540 Committee group of experts. We believe that
there is scope to further expand and increase such
cooperation. We are ready to engage in in-depth
consideration of these issues within the Security
Council.

