Mr. Lucas (Angola): We thank Jordan for convening
this meeting. We are grateful to Ms. Valerie Amos,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator; Mr. Antonio Guterres,
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees;
Ms. Ertharin Cousin, Executive Director of the World
Food Programme; and Ms. Angelina Jolie Pitt, Special
Envoy of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, and thank them for their briefings. We were
deeply touched by their remarks regarding the tragic
plight of the Syrian people.

The Government of Angola remains deeply
concerned by the lack of progress in reaching a
settlement to the conflict in Syria. We are especially
worried about the widespread conflict and the high
level of violence throughout the Syrian Arab Republic.
In fact, the latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2015/264) portrays a situation of tragedy that raises
serious doubts whether Syria will be able in future to
stand again as the relevant Arab and Middle Eastern
country we once knew.
As reported this morning by the briefers, the dire
situation in Syria is heartbreaking. Millions require
humanitarian assistance. There are internally displaced
persons in Syria and refugees in neighbouring countries
and all over the world. Many countries continue to
contribute generously to the humanitarian effort in
Syria. The fact is that the Syrian crisis is the largest
humanitarian emergency in the world. Providing
emergency humanitarian assistance to 12 million
people is an unsustainable effort. We commend the
efforts and solidarity of Lebanon, Jordan, Turkey, Iraq
and Egypt for receiving so many Syrian refugees and
for their support to those communities. However, the
spillover affect of the Syrian conflict is a critical issue
that must be urgently addressed, as it has the potential
to destabilize those countries and the entire region. The
presidential statement (S/PRST/2015/ 10) adopted today
is clear on that critical issue and on the need to support
those countries' efforts in favour of the Syrian refugees.

As mentioned yesterday during the very important
and timely debate on new and violent extremism
(see S/PV.7432), armed conflicts and poverty have
devastating effects on the psychological well-being
of young people and are breeding grounds for violent
extremist groups to spread their ideas of hatred and
intolerance. Those terrorist organizations are well
funded and have very sophisticated networks for
recruiting vulnerable men and women. Unfortunately,
Syria has become a primary battleground for terrorists
of many kinds, whose barbaric and criminal methods of
war and terror add a terrible dimension to the conflict
and have the potential to impede any political and just
settlement.

At the present stage of the Syrian conflict, among
the 7.6 million people who have been forced to flee
their homes, including the 3.9 million who have fled to
neighbouring countries in North Africa, are extremely
vulnerable individuals. Eventually, many of them may
be susceptible to recruitment by the terrorist networks.
Thousands of these refugees are attempting to reach
Europe, where they seek asylum to start a new life,
an endeavour not always easy to accomplish. Many
Syrians were involved in Sunday's tragedy off the
coast of Libya, adding an even more tragic dimension
to the plight of Syrians who were forced to undertake
an adventure by travelling thousands of kilometres in
search of peace and freedom from war and want, only
to meet death in equally horrific circumstances.

The violence in Syria is growing worse; 440,000
people remain in besieged areas. We witnessed the
tragedy of the Palestinian refugees in Yarmouk,
where water is being denied to the inhabitants, as are
electricity and other basic necessities and services.
The warring parties have a complete disregard for the
lives of men, women and children and the basic tenets
of international humanitarian law. The plight of the
Syrian people is tragic indeed, and the international
community could and should do much more by
intensifying its efforts to attain real unity of purpose
in brokering a political situation to the Syrian conflict.
The international community has an inalienable
responsibility to prevent the conflict from dragging
on indefinitely, find specific ways to bring an end to
the violence and human rights abuses, and to launch
a Syrian-led political process leading to a transition
that meets the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian
people and enables them to determine their own future
independently and democratically.

It is regrettable that the efforts of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, to negotiate a cessation of hostilities in
Aleppo have so far been unsuccessful. The opposition
representatives rejected the plan unless it was linked
to a comprehensive solution based on the June 2012
Geneva communique (S/2012/523, annex). We firmly
believe that the political track must involve both the
Government and the opposition, keeping in mind
that ending the suffering of the Syrian population is
paramount.

At these meetings, we must do more than repeat
ourselves about the necessity of finding a political
solution to this conflict. It is time to act decisively
and coherently to show the Syrian people that the
international community, and the Security Council
in particular, have their best interests at heart. As
Ms. Amos remarked, it is absolutely necessary for the
Council to take bold measures to advance the cause
of peace in Syria. In that regard, we hope that Cairo
and Moscow initiatives to mediate talks between the
opposing parties will continue, and that we, along
with Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura, will carry on
applying the necessary pressure on all parties involved
to lay down their arms and conduct meaningful
discussions about the future of Syria.

