Ms. Kang: On behalf of Under-Secretary-General
and Emergency Relief Coordinator Valerie Amos, I
would like to deliver the following statement.

As Syria enters its fifth year of conflict, violence
and brutality continue unabated and with total
impunity. The indiscriminate use of explosive weapons
in populated areas by all parties claimed more lives this
month and displaced thousands. Government aerial
bombardments, including the use of barrel bombs, and
attacks by armed opposition groups have intensified
in many areas, including Aleppo, Dar'a and rural
Damascus. The parties to the conflict continue to kill
civilians and target civilians and civilian infrastructure,
including vital public services such as water and
electricity, in blatant disregard of resolution 2139
(2014) and international humanitarian law, condemning
people to further unnecessary suffering. Over 2 million
people in Aleppo and Dar'a governorates have been
affected by the wilful denial of water and electricity
by parties to the conflict this month. Of the 212,000
people who are besieged in conditions that deteriorate
every day, only 304 were reached with food in January.
Those 304 were in Yarmouk, where 18,000 people are
in desperate need.

In the other besieged locations, the parties
continued to restrict access severely. The requests to
deliver assistance to people in east Ghouta, which were
mentioned in our previous statement to the Council
(see S/PV.7369), were denied by the Government - nor
could we deliver to the towns of Nubul or Zahraa,
which have been besieged by opposition forces since
May 2014.

In Raqqa and Deir ez-Zor, the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant has closed down the offices of several
organizations, including the Syrian Arab Red Crescent,
a key implementing partner. Some 600,000 people
have not received food assistance in those governorates
since December 2014. The sick or wounded often have
nowhere safe to get treatment. According to Physicians
for Human Rights, there were four attacks on medical
facilities in January, and five medical staff were killed.
On 23 February, a car bomb reportedly killed at least
four civilians in the parking area of a hospital in
Qardaha, Latakia governorate.

There are continued challenges to the provision of
medical supplies, in particular surgical items. However,
in one development, the World Health Organization
(WHO) succeeded in sending life-saving medicine and
medical supplies this week from Damascus to hospitals
and public health centres in the eastern part of Aleppo
city and rural Aleppo, for approximately 60,500
medical treatments.

At the same time, WHO surgical items, UNICEF
midwifery and diarrhoea kits, and United Nations
Population Fund reproductive health kits were
removed by Government security personnel from an
inter-agency convoy travelling to Al-Wa'er, in Horns
governorate. This follows a previous refusal to allow
medical supplies into Al-Wa'er in November.

Every month we report on the same violations; the
numbers change but the pattern remains the same. The
parties to the conflict continue to act with impunity,
killing and abducting civilians, denying access and
removing vital supplies from convoys. This pattern
must be broken. Specifically, the siege that currently
affects 212,000 people must be lifted. We must ensure
that everyone in all parts of Syria has access to medical
supplies, including surgical supplies. The use of
blockades of humanitarian aid and of basic services,
including water and electricity, must stop, as must the
indiscriminate attacks on civilians, including through
barrel bombs, which have come to characterize this
conflict.

The Council must do everything in its power to hold
the parties accountable and achieve the aforementioned
changes. Resolution 2139 (2014) is extensive in its scope,
and the Council's concerns and recommendations, as
set out in the resolution, must be respected.

Humanitarian organizations operating from within
Syria and from neighbouring countries continue to
reach millions of people in need month after month.
Last month, some 3.4 million people were reached with
food assistance while hundreds of thousands were also
reached with medicines, household items and other
supplies. Cross-border shipments by the United Nations
and partners have increased since the adoption of
resolution 2165 (2014). Some 950,000 people have been
reached with food, 880,000 with critical household
items, 340,000 with water and sanitation, and nearly
470,000 with medical supplies. This complements
and is in addition to the existing non-governmental
organization programmes that again reached over a
million people last month. But it is not enough. More
effort must be made to de-escalate the violence, protect
people and enable humanitarian organizations to give
greater support.

We are encouraged by the efforts made by the
Secretary-General's Special Envoy, Staffan de Mistura,
to secure a freeze in fighting in some parts of Aleppo.
In hopes that the freeze will materialize, humanitarian
agencies have developed plans to scale up aid deliveries
throughout the eastern part of Aleppo City. Our plans
include the provision of emergency food and other
supplies and the rehabilitation of basic services,
including electricity and waste management, removal of
debris, getting children back into school, and repairing
and renovating damaged homes. Humanitarian agencies
are already delivering assistance in Aleppo but much
more needs to be done. The United Nations will make
use of any additional opportunities, including through
the freeze, to expand humanitarian access.

However, we are extremely concerned that two
staff members of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, doing essential work with
opposition parties on the ground to secure access for
the delivery of urgently needed humanitarian supplies,
have been asked to leave the country without any reason
given. This will hinder our work tremendously. We call
upon the Government of Syria to reverse its decision so
that we are able to continue our life-saving work for all
Syrians in need.

In addition to the many operational constraints
we face, including insecurity and interference by the
parties to the conflict, our response cannot keep up
with the needs of Syria's people because we do not
have enough funding. By the end of last year, the Syria
Humanitarian Assistance Response Plan for 2014 was
just 48 per cent funded. We cannot afford the dire
consequences of failing to meet those needs. We can
do more, if we have more money to do so. Lack of
funding has already forced the World Food Programme
to reduce food rations by 30 per cent. In the longer
term, if we do not receive what we need, we will only
be able to provide food to the extremely vulnerable. For
every $1 million the WHO cannot raise in Syria, some
227,000 people lose vital health services, and unless
urgent funding is received before May 2015, a million
children who are out of school will not be able to have
access to alternative education options. Malnutrition
programmes for up to a million children will have to be
halted or reduced.

The humanitarian community has come together to
bring all operations in Syria - cross-line and cross-
border - under one single response plan for 2015. This
will enable better identification of needs to allow for
a more effective response. But in order for it to work,
we need the resources. Kuwait has generously agreed
to host a third pledging conference for Syrians in need
on 31 March. We need high-level representation at that
conference and meaningful pledges that will make a
difference on the ground. We look to the members of the
Security Council to show leadership to end the barbaric
and brutal warfare in Syria. We are running out of
words to describe the terrible human and humanitarian
consequences.

