Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I wish to thank the Deputy
Secretary-General, Mr. Jan Eliasson, and the Assistant
Secretary-General for Human Rights, Mr. Andrew
Gilmour, for their briefings today.

At the outset, I wish to reiterate my delegation's
principled position that issues of concern should be
addressed through constructive engagement, dialogue
and consultations. We believe that as a responsible
member of the international community, and
particularly as a member of the Security Council, we
have an obligation not to shy away from discussions on
issues that may be considered delicate or complex. It
is with that consideration that we have supported the
proposal for the Council to have a discussion on the
matter before us.

We note the constructive engagement undertaken
by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea with
the various human rights mechanisms. That has
been evidenced by its continued participation in the
universal periodic review and acceptance of a number
of recommendations made therein. We believe that
full implementation of the accepted recommendations
would contribute positively to the enjoyment of human
rights and socioeconomic development of the people
of the Democratic People's Republic, as highlighted
by Assistant Secretary-General Gilmour. We are also
encouraged by its submission of its combined second,
third and fourth reports to the Committee on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women and its combined fifth and sixth reports, earlier
this year, to the Committee on the Rights of the Child.

The United Nations country team has also worked
with the Government of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea to complete a strategic framework
for the 2017-2021 period. We understand that the
five programming principles - a human rights-
based approach, gender equality, environmental
sustainability, results-based management and capacity
development - have been integrated into the framework
and tailored to the country context. We nevertheless
encourage the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea to consider accommodating the requests of the
commission of inquiry and the Special Rapporteur
to visit the country. These visits, we believe, would
allow them to have a proper assessment of the human
rights situation in the country. The visits would also
further ensure the credibility of the outcome reports
and allay fears of politicization and dispel allegations
of partiality. We further believe that such engagement
would provide an avenue for the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea to convey its view and position on
the human rights situation in the country, including on
the issue of obstruction. Malaysia further encourages
the Government of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea to also engage in technical cooperation activities
in the field of human rights with the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights and his Office
with a view to improving the human rights situation in
the country.

The year 2016 has seen the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea take the dangerous and provocative
steps ofundertaking nuclear tests and an unprecedented
number of ballistic missile launches. Those are not
steps that contribute to confidence-building in the
region, nor are they constructive towards engagement
and dialogue. Malaysia voted in favour of resolution
2321 (2016), which the Council recently adopted.
Malaysia's vote was an unequivocal reaffirmation of its
belief that the illicit development and procurement of
weapons of mass destruction and related technologies
and capabilities by any State is unacceptable and
cannot be tolerated by the international community.
In that regard, Malaysia encourages the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea to step up cooperation
and engagement with the Council, other partners and
stakeholders, including the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006), with a view to
addressing non-proliferation concerns.

Malaysia remains convinced that the interests ofthe
international community vis-a-vis international peace
and security would be best served by the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea's immediate return to the
negotiating table. Malaysia calls on the Democratic
People's Republic to recommit itself to peaceful
dialogue and negotiations under the framework of the
Six-Party Talks. Malaysia believes that all efforts should
aim at reaffirming the commitment to maintaining
regional peace and security and establishing a peaceful
environment in the Korean peninsula. We also continue
to emphasize the importance for both the Republic of
Korea and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
to honour the terms of the 25 August 2015 agreement
in order to continue making progress in inter-Korean
relations, as well as to maintain peace and security in
the Korean peninsula.

Malaysia is further of the view that the ASEAN
Regional Forum, premised on confidence-building
measures, preventive diplomacy and peaceful resolution
of conflict, remains available as a possible mechanism
for concerned and interested parties to constructively
engage with the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
at the intergovernmental level on the situation in the
Korean peninsula.
My delegation wishes to conclude by reiterating
Malaysia's readiness to engage constructively with all
Council members, the United Nations, other partners
and stakeholders, as well as with the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, on this issue.

