Mr. Locsin (Philippines): Money is the lifeblood
of terrorism. The financing of terrorism in the
Philippines is a complex web of illicit flows, money-
laundering, transnational organized crime, especially
the drug trade, and even the occasional remittance sent
by Filipinos overseas. Porous physical, financial and
cyberborders enable it.

Since the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001), the
Philippines has complied with the call to counter the
financing of terrorism by all means sufficient for its
containment and extinction. We have defined terrorist
financing as a separate crime and are amending our
human security act to address the exploitation of
cyberspace for terrorism. Without an international
regulatory framework for cyberspace, its increasing
use of encrypted platforms for transnational terrorist
financing will continue to create security challenges.

We adopted the 2018-2022 national anti-money-
laundering and countering the financing of terrorism
strategy in response to the 40 recommendations of
the Financial Action Task Force and our own national
risk-assessment exercise. At its core is the lesson that
financial intelligence units, law enforcement agencies,
the prosecution service and local Government units
must work together, share information with one another
and raise awareness - not only between the private
and public sectors, but first and foremost among
themselves. Intelligence gathering has been ineffective
because agencies were only looking at terrorist acts,
not the means that enable them. Our strategy tells us
to further tighten our legal and regulatory framework.
In that regard, I want to focus on a crucial driver of
the Philippine economy - remittances. Stand-alone
money-service businesses, particularly remittance
agencies, have been used as a channel for terrorist
financing. Money transfers through informal channels
helped terrorist groups launch the Marawi attack
in 2017.

Remittances account for 9.8 per cent of our gross
domestic product. Restricting their flow has touched
off a cultural nerve of resistance. The challenge is to
balance the requirements of counter-terrorism and the
imperative of convenience for those who have struggled
in Babylonian captivity to make ends meet in Biblical
lands for their families at home. The dilemma has
tempted foreign banks to demand that they be used
exclusively for remittances at piratical rates. Bankers
will be bankers. There is also a concern with non-profit
organizations. Contributions that they receive for
laudable purposes are knowingly diverted to, or
set up precisely as conduits for, terrorist financing.
Such non-governmental organizations operate in the
southern Philippines. The geographical distribution of
threat incidents indicates that some regions are more at
risk than others, hence the need to reinforce counter-
terrorism mechanisms at the local Government level.

Marawi illustrates the symbiotic relationship
between terrorism and the illegal drug trade. With drug
money, terrorists were able to gather a motley assortment
of well-armed extremists, criminals, mercenaries and
foreign terrorist fighters to take control of Marawi and
re-establish in our part of the world their shattered
caliphate in the Middle East. We met them with all-out
force and in six months took back Marawi at a fantastic
fatality ratio of 165 of our soldiers slain to more than
1,000 dead jihadists. Our counter-terrorism efforts are
anchored in respecting human rights because a State's
first, foremost and overriding responsibility is to protect
the law-abiding against the lawless and the innocent
against those threatening their safety and well-being.
To that responsibility, my President has made an iron,
unwavering and total commitment. We just do not care
about politically compromised public opinion. To the
contrary, it will not be pretty, but we will get them. The
Philippines is pleased to have co-sponsored resolution
2462 (2019).

