Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank the Special Envoy ofthe
Secretary-General, Staffan de Mistura, for his extensive
briefing, and commend his efforts to keep the political
process moving forward. The first round of intra- Syrian
talks in Geneva demonstrated the willingness of all
sides to talk seriously with both the Government and
opposition groups, undertaking discussions without a
major pause or suspension. Mr. De Mistura described
for us today that there has been discussion on key
substantive issues while pointing out the need to move
beyond the preparatory stages.

Regrettably, the relatively positive news from
Geneva is outweighed by grim news on the ground.
The alleged use of chemical weapons last week is an
affront to humanity and a blatant violation of Security
Council resolutions. The Council must reaffirm its
determination to urgently address this alleged use of
chemical weapons. At the same time, we must not lose
sight of the humanitarian situation as a whole. Even
with a monthly meeting on the humanitarian situation,
it is important that we emphasize it here in the context
of the political process as well. We were shocked by
the use of chemical weapons; but we have also been
shocked for many months by the enormous number
of besieged people, now at 644,000 according to the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.

Japan's position is clear. We will continue our
assistance to all Syrian people in need. This means not
simply contributing funds, but taking the responsibility
to ensure that aid reaches the people who need it. For
this reason, our attention turns again to the repeated
warnings of the United Nations that bureaucratic
impediments are the main obstacles to humanitarian
access. We have repeatedly urged the Syrian
Government, which bears primary responsibility for
this obstructed access, to simplify procedures. Japan
is deeply disappointed that even on occasions when the
Syrian Government has responded, we have not seen
any significant change. We will continue to engage
closely with other relevant parties to improve access,
but we cannot fully succeed without the cooperation of
the Syrian Government.

Last year, Mr. De Mistura often used the metaphor
of a three-legged stool for Syria. The first leg, the
political process, seems more steady after the recent
Geneva talks, and we strongly support United Nations
efforts there. The second leg, the ceasefire, is starting
to wobble with news about fighting. Japan supports
efforts by the three guarantors of the Astana process,
the only functioning ceasefire mechanism at the
present time. We are also encouraged that Mr. De
Mistura is extending support to Astana. The third leg,
humanitarian access, seems to be very unstable. We
need to see major improvements to send a clear message
to the Syrian people that they have not been abandoned.

The facts are clear. The International Syria
Support Group is working despite some confrontations.
United Nations mediation is making some progress.
Humanitarian bodies are doing their utmost under
difficult circumstances. The Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and the Joint
Investigative Mechanism are ready to implement their
mandates. But what about the Security Council? We
must prove that this institution is also serious about
finding a solution to this crisis. Proof is long overdue.

