Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the Netherlands for convening this
timely high-level open debate, since it offers us the
opportunity to highlight the importance of collective
partnership in the implementation and improvement
of the mandates of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations.

In 2016, the number of violent conflicts in the
world was the highest in the past 30 years. The high
percentages of conflicts within States persist, resulting
in the unfortunate loss of human life, setbacks in
development levels and tensions over human rights
and the environment, among others. Moreover, the
report on deaths and injuries resulting from violence
in peacekeeping operations, presented by Lieutenant
General Santos Cruz to the Secretary-General last
December, states that in 2016 the number of such
incidents was the highest since 1994.

This time of major challenges to the performance
of peacekeeping operations on the ground and the
expectation of implementation of the Secretary-
General's reform proposals make it appropriate to recall
and take inventory of the recommendations from the
2015 report of the High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations (see S/2015/446) to improve peacekeeping
operations. Political options should be favoured.
Peacekeeping operations should be enabled to carry out
multidimensional preventive and peacebuilding actions.
Security, development and human rights solutions
should be channelled and the role of women in peace
underscored. Humanitarian issues should be addressed,
having communities and individuals as the ultimate
purpose of their activities throughout all phases of the
peace continuum, in partnership with relevant actors
and in close cooperation with host States.

General Assembly resolution 70/262 and Council
resolution 2282 (2016), on the review of the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture, confirmed those
recommendations and are at the centre of the Secretary-
General's proposal to reform the architecture and in
that way to enhance the effectiveness and coherence of
the United Nations system, including the peacekeeping
operations. Those consensuses are the centre of the
strategy to design and oversee the mandates that the
Security Council must forge to improve peacekeeping
operations. The Council must commit to constantly
reviewing the mandates to ensure that they are in line
with current needs and that the security of the members
of the operations can be guaranteed.
We echo the recommendations of the Secretary-
General that the Security Council should be asked
to place greater emphasize on the mandates of the
peacekeeping operations being clear, realistic and up
to date, as well as having well-identified priorities and
sequential and flexible timelines, which can change and
adjust according to the realities on the ground. We hope
that, within the framework of the Secretary-General's
review of peacekeeping operations, the Council will
consider those recommendations to improve the political
process behind the creation, updating, transitioning and
withdrawal of the operations.

The discussions in the context of this year's
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations (C-34)
reaffirmed that that is the path to take, but they also
recognized that the improvement of the peacekeeping
operations still has a long way to go and goals still to
meet. The Council needs to have greater and improved
interaction with other organs of the Organization, field-
based country teams, military- and police-contributing
countries, financial contributors, regional organizations
and recipient countries, among others, so that we can
maximize the efficiency, effectiveness and security of
their members, as well as to allocate adequate, timely
and predictable resources to operations. Without those
elements, it will be difficult for the operations to fully
and effectively fulfil their mandates and contribute to
the efficiency and image of the United Nations on the
ground.

The C-34 also showed that disagreements among
Member States regarding financial issues remains
one of the major gaps in the implementation of all the
recommendations over the past two years. That affects
the feasibility of implementing the proposals and those
contained in the United Nations action plan to reduce
fatalities due to acts of violence against peacekeeping
operations staff.

The Peacebuilding Commission and the
Peacebuilding Fund are two strategic allies of the
Council in promoting such collective action with a
strategic and coherent approach. They serve as a hinge
among the Security Council, the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council, and generally
among the peace and security and development and
human rights pillars of the Organization, so that
prevention, comprehensive approaches that address the
deep structural causes of the conflicts, mediation and
peacebuilding may be the vehicle by which we truly
achieve sustainable peace.
That is the real paradigm shift of the United Nations.
It is here in the Security Council, with all States,
that we must focus our efforts. Since 2015, Mexico
has again joined the peacekeeping operations out of
conviction and because it is aware of the contribution
we can make to sustainable peace in the world, and also
because Mexico is a stakeholder that complies with and
assumes its global responsibility. Mexico will continue
to support those operations and to join the collective
action to strengthen them.

