Mr. Bolton (United States of America): As
mandated by Security Council resolutions 1546 (2004)
and 1637 (2005), I am pleased to report to the Council,
on behalf of the 29 countries making up the
Multinational Force, on the Force's progress towards
the fulfilment of its mandate.

During this reporting period, we witnessed and
the Security Council condemned some of the most
despicable attacks in recent memory. The 22 February
attack on the holy shrine of the Imams Ali Al-Hadi and
Al-Hassan Al-Askari in Samarra and the ensuing
attacks on other religious sites were heinous crimes as
well as deliberate attempts to foment sectarian strife in
Iraq and the region.

The international community understands the
deep anguish caused by those attacks. We join in the
calls for calm made by Iraq's religious and political
leaders. We honour the memory and courage of all
those who have lost their lives in the fight for a federal,
democratic, pluralistic and unified Iraq, and we
recognize the Iraqi people's success thus far in
establishing the foundations of a new political system
through free and fair elections, as well as the
significant strides that have been made in training and
equipping Iraq's security forces.

There have been important developments since
our last report. With the successful election on 15
December 2005, the Iraqis have now met all the
political benchmarks established by the Transitional
Administrative Law and endorsed by the Security
Council in resolution 1546 (2004), save only the
seating of the new Government. The 15 December
election was marked by unprecedented voter turnout, a
low level of violence and significant participation by
all communities.

The insurgents and terrorists remain capable of
and intent on carrying out attacks against Iraqi
civilians, officials and security forces, with the goal of
destabilizing the legitimately elected Government of
Iraq and disrupting the democracy that has begun to
take root there. More than 80 per cent of insurgent
attacks continue to be concentrated in four of Iraq's 18
provinces: Baghdad, Al Anbar, Salah ad Din and
Ninawa. Twelve provinces containing more than 50 per
cent of the population experience only 6 per cent of all
attacks. Although almost 80 per cent of all attacks are
directed against coalition forces, Iraqis suffer 75 per
cent of casualties. Insurgents have learned to avoid
direct engagement with coalition forces, instead using
hit-and-run attacks and attacks from a distance.
Improvised explosive devices remain the primary
insurgent weapon of choice.

December 2005 saw an increase in insurgent
attacks leading up to the 15 December election, which
resulted in a greater number of attacks in December
than in November. Insurgent attacks decreased from
December to January but rose again in February. The
chief cause of that was the 22 February destruction of
the holy shrine of the Imams Ali Al-Hadi and Al-
Hassan Al-Askari, which spawned subsequent attacks
on other religious sites and other Violence.

Militias and other groups continue to challenge
the rule of law at the local and regional levels. Attacks
on Iraq's infrastructure continue to have an adverse
impact on the availability of electricity and on oil
revenues. Infrastructure attacks in December and
January were higher than in recent months but still
remained below the 2004 averages. Although the
number of attacks has continued to decrease, the
severity of attacks has increased. The Multinational
Force will continue to work with the Iraqi Government
and other international partners to improve
infrastructure security.

Iraqi security forces continue to grow and
improve and to conduct more and more independent
operations each day. They proved their ability to
provide security to the Iraqi people during the
15 December elections, as they had done for the
October referendum. Multinational forces continue to
train, mentor and equip the Iraqi security forces and to
hand over battle responsibilities to Iraqi forces as
proficiency allows and conditions permit. Transfers are
evaluated area by area and region by region, and are
gradual to ensure an effective and successful handover
of security responsibilities.

As of 6 March, 101 Iraqi army and special
operations battalions are conducting counter-
insurgency operations. Fifty-nine of these are in the
lead. All 28 authorized Iraqi national police units are
operational, with 8 in the lead. Sixty-five per cent of
Baghdad is under the control of the Iraqi security
forces. Overall, Iraqi security forces assuming battle
responsibilities have increased to 2 divisions, 11
brigades and 49 battalions. Iraqi forces now total more
than 240,000 Ministry of Defence and Ministry of the
Interior troops trained and equipped for counter-
insurgency operations. That includes nearly 112,900
Defence Ministry personnel, 87,000 police and 40,700
other forces from the Interior Ministry.

During this reporting period, the President of the
United States, acting on recommendations from
military commanders, authorized a decrease in the
number of United States combat brigades deployed in
Iraq from 17 to 15 - a reduction of approximately
7,000 troops. Although based on several factors, that
decision reflects primarily the growing capability of
Iraqi security forces. Several of our coalition partners
are taking or planning similar measures, also based on
assessments of current conditions, in close consultation
with all partners.

Recent examples of how Iraqi Defence Ministry
and Interior Ministry forces are progressing in the
ability to provide security to the Iraqi people include
the following. On 30 December, Iraqi police and army
units successfully rescued the brother of a member of
the Salah ad Din Provincial Council and arrested three
suspects after a failed kidnapping attempt the day
before. On 30 January, more than 20 Iraqi soldiers
graduated from the advanced weapons training
programme conducted by the Multinational Force in
Al Hillah. The programme focused on individual and
small-unit tactics as well as on improvised explosive
devices, clearing buildings and land navigation. Those
graduates will put their new skills to work training
other Iraqi soldiers.

In early February, Iraqi and United States soldiers
rescued dozens of people south-east of Mosul after
powerful storms swept through northern Iraq, causing
flooding along a tributary of the Tigris. Soldiers from
the second Iraqi army division used small boats and
braved strong currents to rescue almost 100 people
stranded on a small islands in the swollen Great Zab
river.

The Multinational Force - notably the Georgian,
Romanian and South Korean contingents - continues
to provide security for the United Nations in Baghdad,
Basra and Erbil, respectively. Those troops provided
static site security, reconnaissance, security patrols,
convoy escorts, checkpoints and, when necessary,
medevac and emergency evacuation. In addition, Fijian
troops provide static and close-in protection for United
Nations personnel and facilities in Baghdad.

The United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI), led by Special Representative Ashraf Qazi,
has made essential contributions to Iraqi progress,
particularly its support for the 15 December election
and in Government formation. We echo UNAMI's call
on the United Nations to play the fullest possible role
in Iraq.

Success will be achieved when the Iraqi people
can themselves secure their own safety, freedom and
prosperity. Training Iraqi security forces to assume
primary responsibility for security is essential.
Continued progress in forming a unity Government and
in fostering national reconciliation will contribute to
the achievement of greater stability and security. The
international community - particularly Iraq's
neighbours, especially Syria and Iran - must do more
to stop foreign fighters entering Iraq. Additionally,
they should fulfil their international obligations under
resolution 1546 (2004) to support the new Government
of Iraq by ending material and financial support for
individuals and groups that oppose the new, legitimate
Iraqi Government.

The Multinational Force and the combined efforts
of the Multinational Force and the Iraqi security forces
continue to provide security for democracy to take root
in Iraq. The Multinational Force remains committed to
the tasks in hand and to ensuring success.

