Let me begin by expressing my deepest sadness at the passing away of Mr. Saeb Erekat. The people of South Africa extend their sincere condolences to his family and all the Palestinian people. It is people of his calibre and stature who are required on both sides of this conflict in order to bring about a peaceful, long-lasting solution. I also thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing on the realities on the ground in the occupied Palestinian territory. I would like to take this opportunity to commend the work that he and his Office do in contributing to the resolution of this conflict. I also wish to express South Africa's condemnation of Israel's continued and abundant illegal actions. On 3 November, the Israeli Government conducted its largest demolition of Palestinian property in a decade. Israeli authorities destroyed the Bedouin village of Khirbet Humsa, in the Jordan Valley. They destroyed 76 structures, including homes, animal shelters, sheds, sanitation facilities and solar panels, leaving 74 people, including 41 children, homeless and exposed to the harsh elements. In 2020 alone, Israel's illegal actions have left 869 people homeless and 689 structures demolished. In addition, the destruction of agricultural and farmland also continues, which severely effects Palestinians' ability to provide a reliable source of food and generate a valuable source of income. The widespread destruction of property, including agricultural land, and the forcible transfer of protected people in an occupied territory are grave breaches of the Fourth Geneva Convention, to which all of us are signatories. Such actions continue to violate Security Council resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016), and, in the current context, are simply inhumane, especially in the light of the ongoing global coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. In addition to Israel's continued illegal demolitions, illegal settlement activity continues in the West Bank, including in East Jerusalem. Over the weekend, Israeli authorities approved a tender for over 1,200 housing units in Givat Hamatos, in East Jerusalem, in addition to previously approved settlements in the West Bank. All of those illegal settlements would severely damage prospects for a contiguous Palestinian State and any possibility of sustainable peace. South Africa once again wishes to remind Israel and Council members that such settlement activity is illegal under international law and in accordance with relevant Security Council resolutions, particularly resolution 2334 (2016). Israel's combined illegal actions of continued demolitions, including donor- funded structures, and settlement activities all contribute to Israel's illegal de facto annexation plans. While Israel and its allies may not call it annexation, the evidence that we have heard today and many times before in the Chamber points to continued de facto annexation. As we have done previously, South Africa calls on the Security Council to hold Israel accountable for its illegal actions, which are in contravention of Council resolutions as well as international law. If such events were to occur in relation to almost any other issue on the Council's agenda, we would not have hesitated to take action. The double standards perpetrated by the Council only undermine its credibility and ability to fully implement its mandate to maintain international peace and security. South Africa shares the significant concerns of Mr. Philippe Lazzarini, Commissioner-General of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), regarding the Agency's financial situation. UNRWA is an essential service provider for Palestinian refugees across the Middle East region. UNRWA's health, education, protection, social services and humanitarian assistance programmes are vital to millions of displaced Palestinians. UNRWA's dire financial situation is also jeopardizing its ability to fully pay the salaries of 28,000 staffers in the West Bank, East Jerusalem, Gaza, Lebanon and Jordan. This comes at a time when the COVID-19 pandemic is spreading across the Middle East, including through Palestinian refugee camps. Many of those refugees have no alternative to UNRWA assistance. South Africa therefore appeals to the international community to support the efforts of UNRWA in providing much- needed humanitarian assistance to Palestinian refugees. The only way to reach a viable solution to the conflict in the Middle East is through direct talks between the parties, on an equal footing, based on internationally agreed parameters that take into account the needs and aspirations of the Palestinian people. No peace plan or initiative can have any merit or success if all parties to the conflict are not included in such talks, as equal partners, from the very beginning. Conflicts can be resolved only by treating each party as part of the future solution, and not as a potential adversary or ally. In conclusion, a viable peace plan should not allow Palestinian statehood to devolve into an entity devoid of sovereignty, territorial contiguity and economic viability. In that regard, a solution must be premised on a just settlement with just laws. It must be rights-based and facilitate equality for all who have a right to live in the territories of Israel and Palestine, as well as sovereign equality between States.
