Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I join others in
thanking Ambassador Osorio for today's briefing to the
Council and for his report on the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) and
its Panel of Experts. As his report made clear, the
Committee continues to do important work in support of
the Council's resolutions.

The latest report of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) provides further evidence that Iran's
nuclear programme continues to develop in contravention
of Security Council resolutions. In particular, it is worth
highlighting the following.

First, Iran is still continuing to enrich uranium up to
20 per cent, and it is further expanding its enrichment
production capacity.

Secondly, Iran has failed to provide substantive
information to the IAEA with regard its announcement
to construct 10 new uranium enrichment facilities.

Thirdly, it has now been six months since Iran said
it was ready to engage with the Agency on the possible
military dimensions to its nuclear programme. Since
then, Iran has failed to take serious practical steps to
address the international community's genuine concerns.
It has even failed to engage seriously on a process of
agreeing modalities, let alone actions, to follow up on
issues of concern.

Iran has, time and time again, had an opportunity
to engage constructively with the IAEA by providing
unhindered access to Iranian nuclear facilities and by
behaving in a transparent manner, but it has failed to
do so. The international community needs Iran to turn
statements of intent into concrete actions. Iran should
urgently provide the Agency with access to the right
people, places and documents. It is only through
sustained cooperation with the Agency that Iran will
demonstrate to the world that it has peaceful intentions.
We welcome the 1737 Committee's Panel ofExperts
final report (S/2012/395). It is a high-quality, credible
product. We are pleased that it will be made publicly
available in full and at an early date, as should have
been the Panel's previous report, whose publication we
still await and expect. We thank the Panel of Experts for
its ongoing support to the Committee.

The Panel's report notes that sanctions continue
to slow the development of the Iranian nuclear
programme, but it also states that prohibited activities
continue. Among other things, it notes that sanctions are
hindering Iran from procuring some items for its nuclear
programme, but prohibited activity continues.

It also notes that Iran's ballistic missile programme
continues with further prohibited launches, and it notes
that Iran is illegally transferring conventional arms,
including two identified shipments to Syria. In other
words, Iran continues to flagrantly violate the Council's
resolutions.

We welcome the Panel's recommendations for
next steps for the Committee. We support the two
clear designation proposals that Yas Air and SAD
Import-Export Company be added to the list of
companies for their respective roles in illegal Iran arms
exports.

We agree that the Committee could engage in
more outreach to Member States to encourage reports
of non-compliance and violations. We also agree that
it would be useful to update existing designations
and the control lists, as the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea Committee recently did. We
encourage the Committee to work to take forward those
recommendations.

The United Kingdom looks forward to the open
meeting ofthe Committee being planned by Ambassador
Osorio. That will be an important opportunity to discuss
the Committee's work with the wider United Nations
membership. We welcome the announcement that it will
be held on 9 July.

The United Kingdom remains committed to
engaging Iran on the international community's genuine
concerns regarding its nuclear programme. We continue
to seek a peaceful, negotiated solution. We believe it is
the twin-track approach - the pressure of sanctions and
growing international isolation - that has brought Iran
to accept dialogue.

The E3+3 group went to the recent talks in Baghdad
united and ready to take concrete steps to build
confidence. We set out in detail the steps we hoped
Iran would take, including on key concerns about the
enrichment of uranium to 20 per cent and on how we
would respond. We are still waiting for Iran to seriously
engage our proposal and to address key concerns, such
as on 20 per cent enrichment. If Iran fails to respond in
a serious manner, it should be in no doubt that we will
intensify the pressure from sanctions, and we will urge
other nations to do the same.

