Mr. Al-Ashtal (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): Just a
few days ago my delegation and many other
delegations called on the Council to assume its
responsibility, to deter Israeli aggression against
Palestine and to put an end to the attacks by the
bloodthirsty Israeli military apparatus on the
defenceless Palestinian people. The Council thus
adopted resolutions 1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002). Both
resolutions have practically been rejected by Israel and
it has not implemented them. We have repeatedly
warned of the seriousness of the delay in ending the
ongoing and escalating Israeli aggression at a time
when it has been clear that some members of the
Council have been prepared to accept Israel's deceitful
claim that its military offensive is a war against
terrorism.

It has become clear today to everyone of sound
mind that these were false, deceitful claims. The Israeli
forces are besieging entire Palestinian towns and
villages. They are showering defenceless civilians with
missiles and heavy artillery, without distinguishing
between children, youth and the elderly. They are
demolishing houses and the infrastructure in a barbaric
way. They are preventing water, food and medicine
from reaching the entire population and are impeding
ambulances from reaching the injured. They are firing
at media representatives who are attempting to convey
an honest picture of what is happening there.

There is Israel, a country that claims to be
peaceful and democratic: a country whose Prime
Minister has the audacity to claim that he wants peace,
even over the dead bodies of Palestinian children; that
he wants security for Israel, even at the expense of the
future fate of the Palestinians. We do not know what
kind of peace the Israeli Government claims to seek
while it continues its barbaric aggression, its
destruction of the infrastructure in the Palestinian areas
and of the institutions of the Palestinian Authority and
its liquidation of the majority of the Palestinian
leadership.

We might also wonder how, after all this, anyone
can go back to peace negotiations, as Sharon claims is
possible. Negotiations over what and with whom? It is
clear that Israel has interpreted the Security Council's
failure to implement resolution 1402 (2002), requesting
it to put an immediate end to its aggression, as a lack of
will and the inability to implement that resolution. The
thuggery of the Israeli forces reflects that interpretation
and confirms beyond any doubt that the Israeli
Government does not give any weight to the Council
and does not respect its resolutions. It seems to us that
some members of the Council have forgotten that the
policy of appeasement attempted by the British
Government to further deter Nazi aggression against
Central European countries before the Second World
War actually failed to deter that aggression at its
inception.

The Security Council is called upon today more
than ever to immediately and firmly take concrete and
effective measures to put an end to the massacres being
carried out by the Israeli forces, which are killing
scores of defenceless Palestinians daily. We call upon
the Council, in addition to simply implementing its
resolutions, to oblige Israel to respect the legal
agreements reached with the representatives of the
Palestinian people. It should abide by its legal and
moral commitments in accordance with human rights
agreements, particularly the Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War, of 12 August 1949. We also call for Chapter VII
of the Charter to be invoked against Israel if it refuses
to implement Security Council resolutions and if it
persists in its behaviour. We also wish to request the
dispatch of international peacekeeping forces to the
Palestinian areas.

