Mr. Hill (Australia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for the opportunity to participate in this debate.
Australia places the highest priority on protecting
children, and we remain extremely concerned about the
plight of those affected by armed conflicts.

We welcome the significant steps that have been
taken to address this issue and commend the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict for her leadership and her
dedication to the issue at hand.

The United Nations system must continue to draw
upon its full range of expertise and coordinate its
efforts to address the issue of children and armed
conflict. We recognize the important role of UNICEF
in child protection. We also commend Mr. Paulo Sergio
Pinheiro, independent expert for the Secretary-
General's study on violence against children, for his
work on that crucial child protection issue.

We are particularly pleased that significant
progress has been made to operationalize the
monitoring and reporting mechanism mandated in
08-23756

resolution 1612 (2005) on children and armed conflict
and that the Security Council Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict has continued its
consideration of country reports in this regard.

We commend the real progress made in Cote
d'Ivoire in halting the recruitment of child soldiers and
in making progress on the Ouagadougou Agreement.
However, we need to maintain attention and seek
further progress in all situations of children affected by
armed conflicts, including those in Sudan, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Somalia.

Children in situations of armed conflict,
including those displaced by conflict, are vulnerable
not only to recruitment as child soldiers, but also to
other grave violations, including killing and maiming,
rape and other grave sexual violence, abductions,
attacks on schools and hospitals and the denial of
humanitarian access. All those violations are egregious,
and no hierarchy can be ascribed to the abuses suffered
by children in times of conflict. We would, however,
encourage the triggering of the monitoring and
reporting mechanism when any of those violations
occur, especially for situations of rape and other acts of
sexual violence.

We encourage the Council to continue to call on
parties listed in the annexes of the reports of the
Secretary-General to prepare time-bound action plans
to stop the recruitment of children into armed forces
and other violations against children. Many of those
who commit violations against children in situations of
armed conflict do so persistently, and have been cited
repeatedly in the reports of the Secretary-General. We
therefore encourage the Council to continue to consider
targeted measures that may be taken against those
persistent violators of children's rights.

The efforts of all key stakeholders remain
essential in combating violations against children in
times of conflict and ensuring adherence to relevant
international law. In addition to ensuring that measures
are taken at the international, regional and national
levels to combat such crimes, Governments must also
ensure that the perpetrators of those crimes are brought
to justice. We echo the Secretary-General in
highlighting the important role of the International
Criminal Court in investigating and prosecuting
violations against children in armed conflict that fall
within its jurisdiction.
3

We encourage those Member States that have not

done so to ratify the Optional Protocol to the

Convention on the Rights of the Child on the

Involvement of Children in Armed Conflict and the

Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
without delay.

If we, as an international community, are to
create an environment in which children not only
survive, but thrive - a goal of a world fit for children,
which was reaffirmed at the Commemorative High-
Level Plenary Meeting of the General Assembly in
December 2007 - then we must reaffirm our
commitment to protecting all children, particularly
those affected by armed conflict, from harm and
exploitation and to ensure that those who would abuse
them are brought to account. Australia remains firmly
dedicated to that end.

