Ms. C6rdova Soria (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Peru, Mr. Nestor Popolizio Bardales.
We also welcome the report (S/2018/43) presented by
Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, and the briefings
by Mr. Dan Neculaescu, in his capacity as Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission, and Mr. Smail Chergui,
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union. We also thank the Peruvian presidency for
convening this meeting, which allows us to address a
key issue for international peace and security, namely,
peacebuilding and sustainable peace.

The term "peacebuilding" was first used in the
1992 report entield An Agenda for Peace, by former
Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, who defined
it as,

"action to identify and support structures which
will tend to strengthen and solidify peace in order
to avoid a relapse into conflict." (S/24111, para. 21)

Peacebuilding was required in order to overcome the
effects of war and consolidate peace processes. That
is how began one of the most important and central
tasks of the Organization: strengthening States in post-
conflict situations.

There is no doubt that the international scene is not
static; it is undergoing considerable change. Persistent
threats to international peace and security from
terrorist groups, transnational crime and armed groups
have served to highlight the need to strengthen and

improve prevention mechanisms. The consolidation of
regional and subregional partnerships, for example, is a
crucial tool within the framework of the ownership and
responsibility of its members, to appropriately address
challenges to security and the rule of law.

We have insisted that sustainable peace be pursued
through political tools to find negotiated political
solutions. We believe that dialogue implies learning,
requires reflection and the recognition of differences,
but also of points of agreement. It also facilitates
recovery from a crisis and can prevent the escalation of
violence, as long as the priorities and needs ofthe parties
involved are taken into account. As a State that defends
multilateralism and the peaceful means of conflict
resolution, Bolivia is aware of the challenges facing the
international community. We insistently call for peace
through the use of multilateral mechanisms, in strict
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.

Bolivia emphasizes that a preventive approach is
essential within the framework of an in-depth study
of the situation on a case-by-case basis. Sharing early-
warning information on potential conflicts; developing
conflict prevention mechanisms; coordinatingjoint and
mutually supportive actions throughout the different
stages of conflict response and management are all
essential tasks.

As we mentioned, cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations in conflict prevention is
crucial. The exchange of information with bodies such
as the African Union, the Economic Community of
West African States and the Community of Central
African States on their views of the reality on the ground
contributes to reaching a better understanding of crises
and to finding a unified approach to their resolution
by considering the needs of each region on the basis
of comparative advantages. In that connection, we
appreciate the contribution of the Secretariat and the
African Union Commission to the establishment of a
joint working framework.

We have repeatedly stated that peacebuilding is
closely connected to the important links between good
practices, the strengthening of interactive dialogues
and coordination among the General Assembly, the
Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission.
This in turn should make it possible for complementarity
between peace and security initiatives, as well as
national ownership and inclusiveness at all levels, to
play a vital role in building a strategic partnership
aimed at ensuring efficiency and flexibility, with the
single goal of achieving sustainable peace.

Likewise, in the context of peacebuilding, it is
imperative to implement the women and peace and
security agenda, under resolution 1325 (2000). We
must reaffirm, ensure and promote the participation
of women not only in peace processes, giving them
an active role in the areas of prevention, mediation
and dialogue, with a view to finding solutions based
on conditions of equality, but also in post-conflict
reconstruction, by means of their economic, social and
cultural reintegration. It is also important to take into
account the issues of the protection of young people;
non-stigmatization; and the inclusion of youth in
peace processes.

We agree that there can be no development without
peace, or peace without development. It is imperative
that the members of the international community as
a whole pool and redouble their efforts, with a view
to enhancing synergies between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding activities as required, in the context of
their respective competencies. In addition, all of this
must take place in the context of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.

By way of conclusion, let me say that to break
the vicious circle of war, the structural causes of
conflicts must be addressed. Interventionist practices
and regime-change policies, inter alia, have led to
collateral damage and, consequently, chaos, terrorism
and militarization, with the regrettable results that are
still being experienced today.

