Mr. Adom (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
would echo my colleagues who spoke before me in
welcoming the presence here of the new Ambassador
of Ethiopia. As the representative and coordinator
of the group of African countries members of the
Security Council by virtue of the principle ofrotation, I
welcome the fact that I will soon be able to count on his
wisdom - Ethiopian wisdom as reflected in the recent
initiatives taken by the Ethiopian Prime Minister.

My delegation wishes also to thank Mr. Michael
Keating, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Somalia and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) for his
presentation of the report of the Secretary-General on
the situation in Somalia (S/2018/800). I would assure
him that the Council deeply appreciates the tremendous
work he has done in Somalia and wish him every
success in all his future endeavours.

I wish also to thank Mr. Francisco Caetano Jose
Madeira, Special Representative of the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission for Somalia and
Head of the African Union Mission in Somalia, and
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director
of the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and
the Empowerment of Women, for their informative
briefings. Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka has just returned from
Somalia, where women constitute 25 per cent of the
members of the National Assembly. That, I think, would
make many States envious, and my country would
indeed like to emulate Somalia in that achievement.

My delegation's statement will focus on the
following points: the evolution of the political and
security situation, the issue of human rights and the
economic situation in Somalia.

On the political situation, Cote d'Ivoire notes
with satisfaction the recent positive developments that
have been noted in the Horn of Africa. In that regard,
we welcome the initiatives taken by His Excellency
Mr. Abiy Ahmed, Prime Minister of Ethiopia, aimed
at strengthening regional cooperation. My country
also welcomes the commitment of Somalia's leaders to
improve bilateral relations with Ethiopia and Eritrea.

My delegation would encourage the authorities of
those countries to maintain this momentum and further
strengthen their economic, diplomatic and security
relations in order to ensure stability in the region.

However, we remain concerned by the tensions
that have led the federal member states to suspend
all cooperation with the Federal Government. While
the agreements in principle reached by the National
Security Council at its meeting in June on an electoral
model and the sharing of revenues from natural
resources gave rise to hope for an improvement in
relations among the parties, the recent spike in tensions
unfortunately demonstrates the fragility of the political
situation in Somalia.

Cote d'Ivoire therefore urges the Somali authorities
to overcome their differences. It calls on the leaders
of the federal states to seize the opportunity of the
National Security Council meeting to be convened by
the Somali President on 18 September in order to restart
discussions on the topics on which there is divergence.
Those discussions could make it possible to create a
climate of mutual trust and to work constructively to
strengthen federalism and implement the agreed road
map in the run-up to the elections scheduled for 2020
and 2021.

On the security track, my delegation remains
deeply concerned at the fragility of the situation as
described in the report of the Secretary-General. In
addition to the continuing clan violence, my country is
concerned by the renewed tension between Puntland and
Somaliland, which has displaced about 15,000 people.
We are convinced that a military option cannot resolve
the disagreements between the two states. We therefore
call on them to prioritize dialogue as a means of settling
their differences, and we take this opportunity to
commend the joint initiatives of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and UNSOM. to find a
peaceful solution to the conflict between Somaliland
and Puntland.

My country also remains concerned about the
activities of the terrorist groups Al-Shabaab and the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in Somalia. Despite
the intensification of counter-terrorist operations in the
country, we must note that Al-Shabaab continues to
possess operational capabilities to carry out large-scale
attacks. As for the presence of the Islamic State in
Somalia, it constitutes a major risk of destabilization
for the region, or even the entire African continent,
owing to its links with other terrorist groups, such as
Al-Qaida and Boko Haram.

The precarious security situation in Somalia
justifies the continued presence of troops of the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
in the country and should lead the international
community to provide financial and logistical
support on two tracks: first, to AMISOM, in order to
enable it to effectively implement its mandate, and
secondly, to the Somali Government, in order to support
the country in its security sector reform process and
enable it to effectively implement the transition plan,
which is aimed at facilitating a progressive transition
from AMISOM. to the country's security forces. In
that regard, my country supports the appeal made by
the Secretary-General to Member States to contribute
to the financing of the trust funds for AMISOM. and
the Somali National Army. Furthermore, we call
on the Somali authorities to redouble their efforts to
achieve significant progress in power-sharing and
the implementation of the security arrangements
necessary for the proper implementation of the national
transition plan.

My delegation notes with great concern the
deterioration of the human rights situation in Somalia.
We are seeing an increasing number of civilians
killed, kidnappings, rapes and other sexual abuses, as
well as the continued use of child soldiers by terrorist
groups. Given that situation, Cote d'Ivoire wishes to
remind the authorities of their responsibility to protect
civilian populations, and all parties of their obligation
to respect international law and human rights law. We
are convinced that accountability is essential to the
restoration of lasting peace and stability in Somalia.
Therefore, my country urges the Somali authorities to
identify the perpetrators of human rights violations and
bring them to justice before the competent courts.

With regard to the economic situation, Cote
d'Ivoire notes with satisfaction the progress made by
the Somali Government in the implementation of the
International Monetary Fund's reference programme.
We reiterate our conviction that, in the light of our
own experience, there can be no genuine solution to
the crisis, or peacebuilding without efforts to rebuild
the economy. Following the example of my country,
which made that strategic choice, it is imperative
that the current security responses be accompanied
by a strategy based on combating poverty and
youth unemployment in order to prevent them from
succumbing to terrorist radicalization.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire reiterates its
appreciation to UNSOM, AMISOM, the United Nations
Support Office in Somalia and all Somalia's partners
for the multifaceted support they have provided to
the people and the authorities of Somalia in under
difficult circumstances.

