Mr. Listre (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I wish
to express my delegation's pleasure at seeing you, Sir,
presiding over this debate. I congratulate your country
for having raised this subject for discussion by the
Security Council. I also take this opportunity to
commend my friends, representatives in this Council,
with whom I had the privilege to work when my
country was a member of the Council until 31
December last year, and to welcome the new members
who joined this year.

The need to strengthen cooperation with troop-
contributing countries cannot be denied, since there are
16 peacekeeping operations and about 40,000 Blue
Helmets deployed throughout the world. For Argentina,
this issue is of special interest, not only because these
operations are important to the Organization, but also
because Argentina is the main troop contributor from
Latin America and participates in 10 of the 16
operations I referred to, in the course of which it has
lost 20 of its nationals. That is why, given the
importance of this subject, in 1994, my country, as a
member of the Security Council, together with New
Zealand, gave impetus to the adoption of the

presidential statement that formalized the consultation
process among the Security Council, the Secretariat
and troop-contributing countries.

In 1994 and later in 1996, with great effort, the
criteria and framework to formalize a consultation
process with troop contributors were determined. On
this basis, the relationship was strengthened. Seven
years later, however, we must recognize that many of
the concerns then enunciated are still current. We feel
that this is a problem not of principles, but of
implementation. That is why we believe that many of
those concerns could be solved in 2001 if the
presidential statements were fully implemented. Let me
mention some examples.

The 1994 statement stipulates that the meetings
among the members of Security Council, troop-
contributing countries and the Secretariat should be
held well before the adoption by the Council of
decisions on the extension, termination or modification
of the mandate of a peacekeeping operation. In
practice, during the two years we were members of the
Council, we noted that those meetings were mostly
held a few days before the adoption of the decision by
the Council. Even on those occasions, the meeting was
held when the negotiating process on the draft
resolution had already begun or was at an advanced
stage. All this sometimes helps to make those meetings
a mere formality, obviating their main goal of alerting
the Council in advance of the concerns, interests and
potential limitations of the troop contributors, so that
these may be taken into account when the decision is
made.
Another stipulation is that meetings be held with
special representatives of the Secretary-General and
force commanders. In 1999 and 2000, such meetings
were the exception, not the rule, in spite of the
importance of receiving direct information from those
who are in the field when, for instance, the
modification of the mandate is foreseen.

One last example that we would like to cite is the
possibility for other concerned countries also to
participate in the meetings held with troop-contributing
countries. We refer specifically to the operation's host
country and to the countries especially affected in the
region where the operation takes place. On the basis of
the circumstances of each particular case, we think that
this alternative should be explored.

The essential question is: Why have these
provisions either not been implemented or been
implemented erratically and partially? There is
probably more than one reason. Let me share some of
them.

First, the members of the Council, especially the
permanent members, may fear that their decision-
making power will be weakened or that States that are
not members of the Council will impose conditions on
the implementation. Secondly, there may be an
insufficiency of staff or resources in the Department of
Peace-keeping Operations. Thirdly, some troop-
contributing countries may not be interested in
participating more actively in the meetings. In order to
overcome those fears and weaknesses and to make the
relationship among the Security Council, troop-
contributing countries and the Secretariat genuinely
fluid in practice, I would make the following
observations.

There is no doubt that the Security Council has
exclusive decision-making power. It is also true,
however, that the Council's decisions directly affect
troop contributors, since the risks of the operation fall
mainly on their shoulders. The United Nations Mission
in Sierra Leone is a clear example of this. In that case,
the Council decided to change the mandate of the
operation after its establishment and to place parts of
the mandate under Chapter VII. There is therefore a
duty to provide transparency and to apprise troop-
contributing countries of all necessary aspects so that
they can undertake an objective analysis of a situation
and take their own decisions as to whether to
participate or to withdraw their contingents.

That duty to provide transparency is not limited
to giving information, but also includes being receptive
to the opinions and concerns of contributors. Should
the Council not act in that fashion, there would be a
risk that it might adopt mandates that could not be
carried out due to contributors' belief that those
mandates cannot be implemented in practice.

The Secretariat must be able to rely on sufficient
human and financial resources. This is also related to
the need for the Secretariat to be able to rely on its own
sources of information as much as possible; otherwise,
there is a risk of communicating erroneous information
and making inaccurate analyses.

It is important that troop-contributing countries
appropriately follow up the development of a conflict
and that they increase their participation in meetings so
that such meetings can be interactive. Although such
cases are very important, we do not believe that interest
should be limited exclusively to cases in which the
security of personnel has been violated - for instance,
cases of the kidnapping of observers.

In conclusion, as we stated before the Council on
13 November 2000, at the time of the adoption of
resolution 1327 (2000), on implementing the
recommendations of the Brahimi report,

"We are pleased that the Council recognizes
the importance of improving the existing
mechanism for consultations with the troop-
contributing countries and is to implement
specific proposals in this regard. The message to
this group of countries must be clear. We need to
maintain an open line of mutual communication
and to have interactive meetings where their
concerns and interests can be expressed.
Strengthening the consultation process implies,
on the one hand, facilitating access to
consultations, and, on the other, increasing the
number of opportunities to hold them." (S/PV. 4220, p. 10)

We made that statement because it would not be
fair of us to fail to recognize that much has been done
to strengthen cooperation among troop-contributing
countries, the Security Council and the Secretariat,
which are the three pillars of peacekeeping operations.
However, there is still a long road ahead, one that will
be easier if the Council has sufficient political will to
make its decision-making process more transparent
with regard to establishing, terminating or modifying
the mandate of a peacekeeping operation.

