Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Nordic countries Denmark, Finland,
Iceland, Norway and my own country Sweden. My full
statement will be made available through other means,
and I will limit myself to some - in our view - key
elements for the sake of brevity.

First of all, I would like to express my recognition,
respect and admiration for Oxfam, the International
Committee of the Red Cross and other humanitarian
actors for the work they do every day, and I urge
everyone to give them our full support.

The besieged town of Madaya in Syria provides
the most recent image of the horrifying and totally
unacceptable suffering inflicted on civilians in armed
conflict. Reports of staggering numbers of civilian
victims at the hands of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham is another. The protection of vulnerable
populations is a core task of the United Nations, and
we must ensure that the United Nations lives up to that
task, as laid out in the Charter. Therefore, the debate
today is both timely and necessary.

Currently, 10 out of 16 United Nations peacekeeping
operations have the protection of civilians at the core
of their mandates. While host States bear the primary
responsibility to protect their population - as has been
stated numerous times today - United Nations peace
operations must be able to assist States in fulfilling
that responsibility. Peacekeeping operations, as well
as many other parts of the United Nations system, also
play a preventive role, and they need to report to the
Security Council ifcivilians are at risk. Timely briefings
by the Special Advisers to the Secretary-General on the
Prevention of Genocide and the Responsibility to Protect
in contributing to early awareness of potential crises,
in line with the Human Rights Up Front initiative, are
instruments that need to be fully utilized. I would like
to highlight three particularly important aspects related
to the protection of civilians.

First, a zero-tolerance policy must be applied
against gender-based violence, including sexual abuse
and exploitation. The United Nations should never be
seen as failing to act in holding those responsible to
account, regardless of the perpetrators. The special
protections needs ofwomen and girls must be addressed.

Secondly, the flow of arms to conflict areas further
increases the risks for civilians. The Arms Trade
Treaty, with its humanitarian goals, provides a tool for
addressing those problems, and we urge all countries
to join the Treaty. We also support the call of the
Secretary-General on parties in conflict to avoid using
explosive weapons with wide-area effects in populated
areas. Attacks on education centres and the military
use of schools and universities are on the increase.
Special efforts are needed to ensure the safe education
for children and young people in countries affected by
conflict.

Thirdly, international humanitarian law has been
established to protect civilians in conflict. We all
have a responsibility to ensure that that is upheld,
that violations are prevented and that accountability
is ensured when the law is violated. The importance
of the provision by all actors of rapid, unimpeded and
sustained passage of humanitarian relief for civilians
in conflict zones is not only a moral obligation; it is a
legal obligation.

The role of United Nations peace missions
in protecting civilians when Member States and
armed groups do not cannot be overstated. As troop
contributors, we have a responsibility to stay and
deliver. However, we know that this task is not only
challenging, but also dangerous. National caveats
should be avoided to ensure that missions can operate
effectively. We need to improve cooperation with local
and national authorities and provide proper training
and equipment to United Nations troops. The training
of local authorities is often key.

The Nordic States have actively worked on
those issues and gained first-hand experience, most
recently in the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
The efficient protection of civilians requires close
cooperation with other troop-contributing countries,
as well as coordination with local authorities. In
MINUSMA, the creation of a protection of civilians
task force with civilian, military and police personnel
has been set up, and furthermore MINUSMA has been
providing the Malian security forces with training,
enhancing their own capacity to protect civilians.

But ultimately, strengthening the capability of
United Nations peace operations requires realistic
mandates, proper preparation, strong capacity and
adequate resources. We echo the Secretary-General's
call on the Security Council to provide active, political
and operational support to that end, and we support
his focus on the political settlement of conflicts in his
report on the implementation of the recommendations of
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
(S/2015/446).

If 2015 was a year of reflection and providing
recommendations, 2016 should be the year of
implementation and concrete action.

