We commend Germany, as President of the Security Council for the month of July, on convening this important annual debate. Lithuania aligns itself with the statements submitted on behalf of the European Union (see annex 25) and the Group of Friends of Women and Peace and Security (see annex 20). Lithuania remains a strong advocate of the highest standards of conduct and continues to call for strong measures to prevent sexual exploitation and abuse. Once again, we express our principled position in support of the zero-tolerance policy, and call for full accountability for all civilian, military and police personnel, both in the United Nations and in other international peace operations. We strongly support the Secretary-General's leadership in dealing with this difficult challenge, which calls for a system-wide response based on the pillars of prevention, enforcement, victim support and accountability. We commend the Secretary General's commitment to ensuring that tackling sexual exploitation and abuse remains at the top of the Organization's agenda, including through the work of the Circle of Leadership to combat sexual exploitation and violence in conflict. We also welcome the efforts of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Pramila Patten, her Office and all others across the Secretariat working on this issue. To address today's topic, we would like to focus on three major issues: first, addressing root causes of sexual violence in conflict-related settings; secondly, fighting impunity; and, thirdly, identifying the responsibilities of United Nations peacekeepers. First, addressing the root causes of sexual violence in conflict-related settings is vital. Sexual violence in armed conflict, to a major extent and in essence, remains an issue that plagues and exacerbates many contemporary conflicts. Women, girls, men, boys and members of the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer and intersex community can all be victims of sexual violence in conflict-affected settings. Many studies have shown how unequal gender relations and patriarchal norms exacerbate crises. While women and girls remain the largest group of victims affected by conflict-related sexual violence, there is a growing number of incidents of sexual violence reported by boys and men, as well as violence on the basis of sexual orientation and gender identity. Lithuania stresses that it is of the utmost importance to address the root causes of sexual violence in conflict-related settings. Sexual violence in conflicts cannot be perceived solely as a standalone social problem arising wholly because of conflict and one which will naturally die down when peace is restored. Sexual violence is closely connected and interlinked with pre-existing power relations, social orientation and other forms of gender-based violence preceding the descent into conflict. Those fundamental issues must be addressed in order to eradicate conflict-related sexual violence and to shift the paradigm. In that context, it is crucially important to uphold human rights standards and improve respect for human rights. The full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security, and of all relevant subsequent Council resolutions, especially those focused on conflict- related sexual violence remains of the utmost importance. We must redouble our efforts and consolidate all political will to maintain a course towards eradicating unjustifiable acts of sexual violence, which has many faces, including as a tactic of war and terrorism and in post-conflict settings. Holistic approaches are critical if we are to address the root causes of sexual violence in conflict. Secondly, we must fight impunity. Combating impunity for sexual violence is a central aspect of deterring and preventing such crimes. It is essential that all reported allegations be promptly and fully investigated in order to ensure justice for victims and accountability for perpetrators. Unfortunately, the conditions and the situation are only getting harder. Already a chronically underreported crime, conflict-related sexual violence has been further obscured by the COVID-19 pandemic. Research shows that COVID-19 has a significant and detrimental impact on increased violence against women in a domestic setting, including sexual violence. Unfortunately, conflict settings create even more vulnerable environments with fewer possibilities for support due to physical-contact restrictions. COVID-19 has affected various aspects of the rule-of-law response, including accountability for conflict-related sexual violence. All additional virus-related challenges should be fully evaluated and taken into account in the context of fighting against impunity. Furthermore, every effort must be made to give victims all the assistance and support they need to report allegations and ensure that there will be no repercussions for those speaking out against their abusers. More women in police forces and prosecutorial bodies could make women and girls feel safer in reporting sexual violence, rape and other abuse without fear of exposing themselves to further violence. Accountability cannot be achieved if civilians are afraid to report or do not know their rights and whom to complain to. Building trust and ensuring timely assistance and access to information on national judicial processes is crucial. At the same time, it is important to use every opportunity to disseminate information about the United Nations and national processes put forward in order to respond to sexual exploitation and abuse. To that end, there is a need to ensure close cooperation with local non-governmental organizations (NGOs) working with victims in order to improve the protection of whistle-blowers and ease the reporting and investigation of allegations. Lithuania continues to be a trusted partner of, and donor to, the Women's Peace and Humanitarian Fund, which supports local NGOs, including those working on the issue of sexual violence in conflict. In his most recent annual report on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2020/487), the Secretary-General stresses that strengthening national rule of law institutions is critical in order to fight impunity as well as to prevent sexual crimes related to conflict in the future. Good examples on the ground prove that there is a possibility to turn words and statements into positive action on the ground. For example, the criminal code of Colombia includes extensive references to sexual violence in the context of armed conflict. In this case, a legal base brings needed attention to sexual crimes in conflict and establishes the procedure for how to bring perpetrators to justice. The third issue is the responsibilities of United Nations peacekeepers. Lithuania attaches great importance to peacekeeping - a core task of the Organization and its flagship activity in extremely challenging environments around the world. The protection of civilians is at the centre of peacekeeping, and any act perpetrated against the most vulnerable is intolerable. It is devastating that in certain instances the most vulnerable suffer sexual abuse by those who are there to protect them. The sexual misconduct of peacekeepers undermines the fundamental goals of peacekeeping operations. A number of studies have shown how sexual exploitation affects the perceived impartiality of peace operations and contributes to the mistrust of host societies. Therefore, the deployment of women protection advisers, the provision of human rights and gender-awareness training for staff to be deployed in peacekeeping missions and the inclusion of sexual violence issues in peacekeeping mandates should be further expanded. It is important to note that the actual responsibility for investigating and punishing misconduct by uniformed personnel falls to Member States. We call on all troop- and police-contributing countries to proactively address, within national jurisdictions, all sexual misconduct by peacekeepers and to ensure justice for the victims. To conclude, we must galvanize our efforts to address the root causes of sexual violence in conflicts, to work towards full gender equality in law and in practice and to continue the implementation of existing commitments. There must be no backsliding on what has been agreed. We owe it to the victims and our own contingents to set high standards and to stick to them. We must stand by the objective to enhance the credibility and the effectiveness of the United Nations to deliver.
