Ms. Sison (United States of America): As others
have done before me, I want to express our heartfelt
condolences to our close friends in the United Kingdom
in connection with the terrorist attack yesterday in
London. We pledge our full cooperation and support
in responding to the attack and in bringing those
responsible to justice.

I thank the President of the Council for the
United Kingdom's leadership on Somalia. I am also
grateful to Special Representative Keating and Special
Representative Madeira for their briefings. We were
honoured by President Farmajo's participation today,
and look forward to working closely with him and
his Cabinet.

There is a difficult job ahead, with formidable
humanitarian and security challenges complicating the
already daunting tasks of building State institutions and
extending services to communities throughout Somalia.
Let me assure President Farmajo and the people of
Somalia of continued support from the United States.

An immediate challenge facing the people of
Somalia is the worsening hunger crisis, of course. More
than half of Somalia's population needs food, water and
health services now and, as we have just heard today,
only 32 per cent of the needed $825 million has been
received. We must aggressively pursue all funding
streams to meet these urgent needs if we hope to
mitigate the possibility of another famine.

We urge the Somali federal and State authorities
to do everything possible to remove bureaucratic
impediments to the movement of humanitarian
assistance and, with the support of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), to establish conditions
conducive to the unhindered delivery of critical
humanitarian supplies.

We are especially troubled by Al-Shabaab's
increasing depravity as it intensifies its asymmetric
attacks on civilians, security services and Government
officials. We condemn Tuesday's car-bomb attack
in Mogadishu's Hamar Weyne district, and we offer
our condolences to the families of the victims. We
urge AMISOM. and the Somali security forces to be
proactive in efforts to disrupt Al-Shabaab and to deter
other terrorist organizations from gaining a foothold
in Somalia.

The United States continues to engage with
partners in working towards a suitable solution to the
issue of AMISOM. troop stipends. The United States
provides substantial assistance, including equipment,
to the militaries of many AMISOM. troop-contributing
countries. We encourage donors to contribute to the
trust fund for AMISOM. and the Somali National Army.
We recognize that AMISOM. cannot stay in Somalia
forever and, in that regard, joint planning between
the United Nations and the African Union to identify
AMISOM's immediate needs has become increasingly
important.

The upcoming joint United Nations-African Union
review of AMISOM. will be an opportunity to assess
Somalia's comprehensive security needs and identify
a way forward for AMISOM. Given the severity of
the remaining security challenges in Somalia, we
do not believe that it is appropriate at this time to
transition to a United Nations peacekeeping mission.
AMISOM. should continue its principal mission - to
reduce the threat of Al-Shabaab - while setting the
conditions for a successful security transition. To that
end, we encourage President Farmajo to work with the
Somali regional presidents to reach agreement on a
national architecture for the Somali National Army and
security forces.

Somalia's international partners must carefully
consider how best to provide coordinated support to
Somalia's security sector. If we are frank, we must
recognize that at times our efforts to train and equip
the Somalia National Army have not translated directly
into sustainable gains. Security assistance works well
when donors coordinate closely behind a Somali-
led process, and we have welcomed intensified donor
coordination in recent months under the auspices of the
"S6" mechanism.

Strong Somali leadership from Villa Somalia and
Parliament is needed to begin the constitutional review
process that will formalize State formation and provide
a legal foundation for Somali institutions. A spirit of
reconciliation must undergird those efforts to ensure
inclusiveness. It is crucial that the Somali Government
also protect its citizenry and prevent the unlawful use
and recruitment of child soldiers, sexual and gender-
based violence, and the harassment of journalists by
security forces.

We look forward to the London conference on
Somalia as an opportunity for the Federal Government
of Somalia and its international partners to reach
agreement on the key issues that we have discussed
here today. We hope that we will emerge from the
conference with a shared path for the next phase of
supporting Somalia's development, while addressing
urgent humanitarian needs and building on the recent
political and security successes that give us hope that a
brighter future is possible for the Somali people.

