Mr. Puente (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Let me
begin by congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this
month. I assure you once again of my delegation's
support as you guide the work of the Council to
success. My thanks go also to the delegation of
Burkina Faso for its successful presidency last month. I
join in thanking the delegations which have just
completed their term on the Security Council for their
great contributions to the Council. I also welcome the
five new non-permanent members.

I also join others in thanking the Secretary-
General and his Special Representative for their
comments and for their valuable reports. We appreciate
the work done by Mr. Kai Eide over the past two years
in the face of the challenges his Office has confronted
in the effort to achieve development in Afghanistan; he
has done a good job of meeting those challenges. We
wish him the best in his future endeavours.

As a new year begins, my delegation notes with
concern that old challenges in the areas of security,
human rights, strengthening the rule of law and
institution-building continue to be obstacles to stability
and progress in Afghanistan. Along with these, new
challenges have arisen as a result of major events in the
final months of 2009 relating to a political and
electoral process that was under the cloud of
irregularities, as well as to the precarious security
situation, which obliged the United Nations itself to
reformulate its strategy in the field in order to protect
its personnel.

In such circumstances, strengthened coordination
and support from the international community to
ensure stability in Afghanistan are clearly necessary.
The establishment of a coordination mechanism within
the framework of a transition strategy, under a United
Nations umbrella, is of key importance in mobilizing
the resources needed for programmes in support of the
country's security forces and civil institutions and,
hence, its economic development.

We hope that the London Conference planned for
28 January and the subsequent Kabul conference,
which will analyse new security and development
strategies, will help buttress that proposal on the basis
of a clear definition of the roles that the Afghan
Government and the international community must
play, as noted by the Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan.

The electoral process was a watershed in the
international community's support. It revealed the
weakness of Afghan institutions. In that situation, the
Government of Afghanistan is now facing the difficult
task of enhancing the credibility of its actions among a
sceptical population, through a renewed political pact,
as rightly suggested by the Secretary-General. My
delegation agrees with the Secretary-General that the
recently elected Government should redouble its efforts
to make good on the commitments it entered into on
the basis of priorities established by President Karzai.
These relate directly to goals such as fighting
corruption and impunity in the country. It is clear that
rapid and determined action against those evils will
enhance the Government's authority and generate trust
among the population, thus strengthening the
Government's position with respect to insurgent
activities.

The endeavours of Government bodies will have
a key role to play in furthering the interests of the
Afghan people. We therefore believe it to be of
fundamental importance that institutional unity be
maintained. We hope that the appointment of new
members of President Karzai's Cabinet will be another
step towards the strengthened confidence and unity that
are so necessary. We encourage the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and
other United Nations entities in the field to support the
Afghan Government, with a view to reaching that goal,
which will enable the Government to strengthen its
institutions and extend its authority within the country.

With regard to security, the figures in the report
we are considering today (S/2009/674) cause concern.
They reflect a considerable increase in violent
incidents compared to past years. Certainly those
figures show that insecurity continues to be the main

factor affecting progress in Afghanistan. While we
support the efforts to address that situation, we
reiterate our conviction that such actions should go
hand in hand with parallel measures to promote
development, respect for human rights and the
strengthening of the rule of law, thus tackling the root
causes of the insecurity.

Furthermore, my delegation regrets that as a
direct consequence of the insecurity and the political
instability in Afghanistan, attacks against humanitarian
and United Nations personnel continue, restricting and
threatening their commendable and valuable work.

The Security Council and the Organization as a
whole must deploy all their forces when it comes to
protecting the Organization's own personnel. Thus we
support all efforts of the Secretary-General to review
the security mechanisms in order to protect the
personnel deployed in the field, and we reiterate the
obligation of the parties to comply with resolution
1502 (2003), on the security and protection of
humanitarian and United Nations personnel, promoted
by my delegation during its earlier participation in the
Security Council. In that regard, it is essential to
eliminate the threat of terrorism, while respecting
human rights in those efforts.

To conclude, I would like to note that my
delegation believes that President Karzai and the
Afghan authorities have before them an inescapable
commitment to themselves and to the international
community. That is why we reiterate our support for
any efforts both by President Karzai and by his
country's political class to foster an environment of
reconciliation and security and to resolutely address
the main challenges afflicting the country.
We are confident that the international presence
in Afghanistan, together with the support and
leadership of the United Nations, will help to establish
the conditions that Afghanistan needs to exercise fully
its national capacities and responsibilities as a
sovereign State.

