Mr. Quarrey (United Kingdom): I join
colleagues in thanking Mr. Pascoe for his briefing this
morning, and I also thank the representatives of Israel
and the Palestinian Authority.

I would like to associate the United Kingdom
with the statement to be made later today by the
Permanent Representative of the Czech Republic on
behalf of the European Union.

The situation in Gaza remains of the utmost
concern. Little has changed since we last discussed it.
The unilateral ceasefires declared by both parties in
January are still not underpinned by a proper ceasefire
regime. We reiterate our call for both parties to
implement in full resolution 1860 (2009).

The humanitarian situation in Gaza remains
perilous. The United Nations, in particular the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, is playing a critical role. We
urge Israel to allow free and unfettered access for
humanitarian aid and materials into Gaza.

We commend the United Nations framework for
the provision of humanitarian assistance in Gaza.
Based on important humanitarian principles that all
parties should respect, the framework would allow a
broader range of material to enter Gaza in such a way
that is monitored to ensure that it reaches only its
intended recipients.

Gaza also needs help for reconstruction. We were
encouraged by the commitments made at the Sharm
el-Sheik conference. The United Kingdom announced
that we were making available an additional $44
million to help rebuild schools, homes and hospitals.
That brings the United Kingdom's response to the
recent Gaza crisis to roughly $70 million. Sharm el-
Sheik also reiterated the need to reopen the Gaza
crossings to legitimate trade and the movement of
people. We believe that is essential both for the
reconstruction effort and the peace process more
broadly.

While Israel should reopen the crossings, its
concerns about the smuggling of illegal arms and
ammunition into Gaza must also be addressed. Egypt
continues to have the immediate security responsibility,
but the international community could do more. That is
one of the reasons why we hosted a meeting in London
on 13 March, which agreed a programme of action
aimed at enhancing efforts to prevent the smuggling of
arms, ammunition and weapons components, in support
of resolution 1860 (2009).

As the Permanent Representative of Israel said,
we should also recall today the plight of Gilad Shalit,
who has now been held by Hamas for over 1,000 days.
We regard it as deeply regrettable that negotiations to
secure his release appear to have broken down. We
were also deeply disturbed by the attempted car
bombing at a shopping mall in Haifa. It is particularly
horrifying that the device was clearly designed to kill
and injure innocent civilians.

The recent Gaza conflict was marked by serious
allegations of misconduct by both sides. We welcomed
the Secretary-General's decision to set up a board of
inquiry and to report on incidents of attacks on United
Nations facilities. We also welcome the Israeli
Government's decision to undertake their own
investigation into allegations against its forces,
including, we hope, those that have emerged most
recently in the media.

While the Council's focus has rightly been on
Gaza in recent months, we should not ignore events in
the West Bank. We remain deeply concerned by the
increase in settlement activity there, including in East
Jerusalem, including threats of house demolitions in
the Silwan area adjacent to the Old City and the
eviction notices issued to the al-Rawi and Hanoun
families. As the British Minister for the Middle East,
Mr. Bill Rammell, said on 21 March,

"These eviction notices are not conducive to
peace. We call on the Israeli Government to
suspend these eviction notices immediately."

The ongoing problems in Gaza and the West
Bank reinforce the need to reinvigorate the Middle
East political process. We welcome the recent talks in
Cairo aimed at Palestinian reconciliation as a step
towards creating the Palestinian unity necessary not
only for rebuilding Gaza, but also for holding elections
and delivering peace. President Abbas should lead that
process, supported by the international community.

We look forward to working with the new Israeli
Government towards lasting peace in the region. We
hope that new Government will make a strong early
statement of its intent to engage in the Middle East
peace process, based on the two-State solution and the
Arab Peace Initiative. We believe that is the only way
to achieve peace and security for both Israelis and
Palestinians.

Finally, Lebanon's problems too remain
unresolved, although there has been some progress, as
Mr. Pascoe reported. Ongoing rocket attacks and
overflights remain a concern. We would urge all parties
to do everything possible to remain calm and make
further progress on outstanding issues, including
disarmament of militias, securing and delineating the
border, and on the status of Ghajar and Sheba'a.

