Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): Allow me
to begin my remarks by thanking you, Sir, for organizing
this debate on conflict prevention at a moment when
the world is being convulsed by a number of conflicts
and by the expansion of extremism, terrorism and
fanaticism, with their toll of innocent victims and
criminal atrocities.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his detailed briefing and his personal commitment
to keeping conflict prevention at the heart of his
priorities. I recognize the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, Ms. Navi Pillay, whose leadership has
brought impartiality, neutrality and objectivity to the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights. Since her mandate has run its course,
I would like to take this opportunity to pay special
homage to her for the progress achieved by her Office
and to tell her that it was a personal privilege for me to
work with her.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of Iran on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries.

Enshrined in Article I of the Charter of the United
Nations, conflict prevention lies at the heart of the
United Nations mandate. Support for conflict prevention
is not merely a choice but rather an international
obligation aimed at preventing the horrors of war and
armed conflict. Article I is more relevant than ever
in the aftermath of the international community's
commemoration of the outbreak of the First World War
and at a moment when armed conflicts and a surge
in extremism and terrorism are shaking a number of
regions, with tragic consequences for their populations.
That explains the duty of the international community
to act together to prevent and resolve conflicts by
investing in efforts at conciliation, negotiation and
mediation, instead of acting a posteriori, with the risk
of exacerbating conflicts.

As highlighted in the concept note (S/2014/572, annex), for which we commend the British presidency,
the Security Council is the primary organ with respect
to conflict prevention and is supported to that end by
various mechanisms. The mission of the good offices
of the Secretary-General is also a highly valued
instrument for conflict resolution, and we would like
to register our appreciation for the Secretary-General's
commitment, his diplomatic expertise and his vision for
the noble aim of preventing and resolving conflicts.

Resolution 2171 (2014), unanimously adopted
today, highlights the important conflict prevention
role of peacekeeping operations, the special political
missions and the regional offices of the United Nations,
which have played a leading role, especially in Guinea
and in Kyrgyzstan. The United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa is currently playing a decisive role as
mediator in the political process in the Central African
Republic. In that regard, we believe that it is essential
to increase the human and financial resources accorded
to those offices, as well as to the special envoys of the
Secretary-General, in order to ensure the successful
fulfilment of their mandates.

An increasingly firm commitment to our continent
on the part of regional and subregional organizations
should also be stressed. In that context, regional
integration comes to the fore as a factor in conflict
prevention and as a means for considerably reducing
the risk of conflict.

Despite their proven efficacy, those mechanisms
for conflict prevention have struggled to adapt to the
evolving nature of conflicts, which are increasingly
intra-State. Indeed, they have not managed to keep
situations from deteriorating, whether in the Sahel, in
the Central African Republic, in South Sudan or in any
number of other theatres of conflict.

Those conflicts have thrown a spotlight on the need
for an integrated, global approach to conflict prevention
that takes into account the changing nature of conflicts,
with the advent of threats linked to terrorism and to
signs of separatism, along with their root causes. It
would be beneficial to revisit those mechanisms in
order to improve their efficacy, bringing an innovative
approach to the process and including new players
who might have a positive impact. In that context, it
is essential to strengthen the support offered to States
that request it, particularly with regard to technical
assistance and national capacity-building, since in
the end it is States that are responsible for preventing
conflicts in their countries.

Recent events in North Africa have amply
demonstrated that States with strong institutions can
avoid civil war, while in others rival armed groups
have faced off with consequences for the countries of
the Maghreb as a whole, confirming the critical need
for strengthening cooperation among neighbouring
countries. Moreover, greater involvement on the part
of civil society, in particular women and youth, should
be encouraged, because they can have a positive impact
with respect to promoting dialogue and reconciliation.

Morocco has made conflict prevention one of the
main paradigms of its foreign policy. In that regard,
our country has become an advocate for the values
of tolerance, dialogue, conciliation and negotiation
in Africa and the Middle East. The root causes of the
recent conflicts, often traceable to ethnic or religious
differences, highlight the importance ofinitiatives such
as the Rabat plan of action on the prohibition of the
advocacy of national, racial or religious hatred, which
constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility
or violence, an achievement and initiative for which
Ms. Pillay deserves credit, or the recent international
meeting on strengthening the dialogue between cultures
and civilizations, which saw the adoption of the Fez
appeal, which stresses the urgent need for new forms
of interaction and understanding among civilizations.

To conclude and in direct alignment with Ms. Pillay's
proposals, Morocco believes that conflict prevention
is a complex problem. We are more convinced than
ever that the difficulties can be surmounted if the
international community and the Security Council unite
in a proactive manner with good will and determination
and commit themselves to that goal by prioritizing
dialogue, conciliation and negotiation.

