The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of Cote
d'Ivoire.

I thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, for her briefing on the
twenty-eighth report on the work of the Court on the
situation in Darfur, pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005).

Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the gradual improvement
of security conditions in Darfur, after several years
of conflict. We also welcome the decrease in the level
of violence against civilians, as mentioned in the
report presented by the Prosecutor. The improvement
in the situation is the result of the good collaboration
between the Government of the Sudan and the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
My delegation therefore encourages the Sudanese
Government to build on those gains and engage
resolutely in finding solutions to the root causes of
the crisis, in order to restore peace and stability to the
region and prevent a recurrence of the conflict.

Despite the considerable progress made, my
country notes with concern the allegations of sexual
and gender-based violence against women, as well
as those related to human rights violations in Darfur.
Driven by its recent experience and firm commitment
to respect for human rights, C6te d'Ivoire maintains that
the fight against impunity provides important leverage
for the national reconciliation process. We also believe
that lasting peace in Darfur remains dependent upon
holding accountable those guilty of serious crimes
and human rights Violations. In that regard, Cote
d'Ivoire reiterates its appreciation to the International
Criminal Court for its efforts to promote justice and
combat impunity for crimes committed in Darfur. My
delegation therefore calls on the Sudanese authorities to
engage in constructive cooperation with the Office of
the Prosecutor in order to address its concerns.

Despite the efforts of the Sudanese Government
to restore State authority throughout Darfur, weak
institutional capacity and the lack of financial resources
have an adverse impact on rule-of-law, justice and
security institutions. Therefore, in accordance with
resolution 1593 (2005) and other relevant Security
Council resolutions, Cote d'Ivoire encourages
the international community to support efforts to
establish the rule of law and build the capacity of
the Sudan's legal and judicial institutions. With the
transition in Darfur from a peacekeeping operation to
a peacebuilding mission now a priority, it is essential
for the Government of the Sudan, the international
community and the various United Nations entities to
work closely and constructively to ensure a successful
transition, in accordance with the recommendations
of the Secretary-General in his report of 12 October
(S/2018/9l2).

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire, a State party to the
Rome Statute, commends the high quality of work
carried out by the International Criminal Court and
reaffirms its unwavering support for the Office of the
Prosecutor in its efforts to combat impunity.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Sudan.

