Mr. Skoog (Sweden): Sweden, together with
France, the Kingdom of the Netherlands, Poland, the
United Kingdom and the United States, has asked that
the situation in Ukraine be addressed in the Council
today, with updates on the broader situation from the
Department of Political Affairs and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, in View of the
upcoming so-called elections in what are misleadingly
referred to as the Donetsk and Luhansk People's
Republics, in eastern Ukraine.

We welcome the fact that Council members agreed
to this briefing, which is now convened, as stated by
the President, with reference both to the letter dated
28 February 2014 from the Permanent Representative
of Ukraine to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2014/l36) and
the letter dated 13 April 2014 from the Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (8/2014/264), without the formal creation of a
new agenda item. The two agenda items remain separate
and distinct, and future Security Council meetings can
be held on each of them separately.

The so-called elections, to be held on 11 November,
are being organized in Violation of the Minsk
agreements. The issue at hand is not about technicalities
relating to the proposed elections but about holding the
elections in the first place. The organization of those
elections should be the result of the agreement of all
parties, which is still being negotiated. The elections
are an infringement on the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Ukraine, and in breach of the letter and the
spirit of the Minsk agreements. The suggested briefer
does not represent the legal authorities or civil society of
Ukraine. To allow the participation of a representative
of an illegal separatist entity in a Council meeting
would set a dangerous precedent. We therefore do not
consider the briefer proposed by the Russian Federation
competent to the purpose at hand, as stipulated in
rule 39 of the Security Council's provisional rules of
procedure. If the matter is put to a procedural vote,
France, the Kingdom of the Netherlands, Poland,
Sweden, the United Kingdom and the United States
will therefore oppose an invitation by the Council to the
additional briefer proposed by the Russian Federation.

