Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): I join previous
speakers in thanking you, Mr. President, for convening
this open debate and welcoming the presence of
Minister Westervelle and other honourable foreign
ministers earlier today, as well as the Executive
Director of UNICEF.

We also thank the Secretary-General for his
report on children and armed conflict (S/201l/250),
which focuses on the growing trend of attacks against
schools and hospitals, and his recommendation that the
Council expand the gateway to the annexes to include
parties that attack or threaten to attack schools and
hospitals. We welcome the recommendations and the
positive developments referred to in the report. The
report is a useful guide for coping with the continuing
challenges in the implementation of resolutions 1612
(2005) and 1882 (2009) and other relevant documents
of the Council.

Conflicts have devastating consequences on
children, whose protection is of the utmost importance,
deserves the attention of the international community,
and should be a primary responsibility of all because it
is a serious humanitarian concern and a significant
security issue. The protection of children therefore
requires a multidimensional and comprehensive
approach.

For Armenia, a country hosting tens of thousands
of refugee children as a result of war and aggression
imposed on us, this debate is of particular importance.
In the early 19905, innocent Armenian civilians, in
particular children, were subjected to a barrage of
heavy artillery, missile shelling and bombing. We
witnessed indiscriminate firing upon homes, schools,
kindergartens, hospitals and even ambulances.

Armenia therefore believes that concerted actions
are necessary at the national, regional and international
levels to put an end to such brutal actions and policies.
At the same time, our efforts should complement each
other, with all stakeholders utilizing the comparative
advantages of their respective mandates and
experiences.

I would like to take this opportunity to express
my Government's gratitude to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, for
her tireless efforts to ensure that children can live and
grow in peace and dignity. Ms. Coomaraswamy's role
has been growing in recent years, with her field
missions now serving multiple purposes, including the
dissemination of the recommendations of the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict. For its part,
the Working Group has showed renewed improvement
in its working methods and continues to play an active
role in mainstreaming the issue in the Council this
year.

It is unfortunate that, despite the legal safeguards
in place, horrendous violations of children's rights,
such as the use of child soldiers and the killing,
maiming and rape of children still continue in many
parts of the world. Obviously, it would be naive to
expect that problems of such gravity could be resolved
by the mere provisions of relevant legal norms. After a
high-level debate on peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
conflict prevention in September 2010 (see S/PV.6389), the Council reaffirmed in its presidential
statement the conviction that the

"protection of civilians in armed conflict,
particularly women and children, should be an
important aspect of any comprehensive strategy
to resolve conflicts" (S/PRST/2010/18).

We share the view expressed in this Chamber that
the Council should also focus on the application of
targeted measures against persistent perpetrators of
grave violations against children through the possible
imposition of sanctions. My delegation therefore fully
supports the adoption of today's resolution, which,
inter alia, requests enhanced communication between
the Working Group and the relevant Security Council
sanctions Committees.

This debate represents an opportunity to become
engaged in a serious discussion on how to address
issues of cross-border violations against children,
reaching out to persistent violators. We believe that the
commitment from Governments in addressing the issue
of violations against children can also provide the
impetus needed to begin to seriously address this
matter.
Child protection is everyone's responsibility, and
the future of children is dependent on the actions we
take today. The Government of Armenia is committed
to doing its utmost and to constructively contributing
to global efforts to promote this noble cause.

