Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): My
delegation should like to begin, Madame, by thanking
you for convening this public meeting to solemnly
acknowledge the withdrawal of the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL). I take this
opportunity to pay a very well-deserved tribute to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ambassador Mwakawago, his predecessors and the
UNAMSIL personnel now preparing to leave Sierra
Leone with a sense of pride in a job well done. Our
thoughts are with those who paid with their lives to
help the people of Sierra Leone to put war behind them
and to live in peace and security.

In his remarks introducing the Secretary-
General's report, the Special Representative briefed us
on the situation in the country on the eve of the
departure of UNAMSIL. He analysed the Mission's
exit strategy, its achievements and its shortcomings. He
also spoke of the future and opportunities now open to
that country.

Sierra Leone has undoubtedly made progress
towards stability with the assistance of its partners and
UNAMSIL. It has developed its own capacity to deal
with internal crises. Its security services - primarily
the police - are now able to deal with problems
related to law and order, and have done so for some
time without UNAMSIL's assistance. Considerable
progress has also been made towards strengthening the
authority of the State and towards economic recovery.
Moreover, positive signs are emerging in the political
and security climates in the subregion,

Despite all this, the country remains fragile and
vulnerable on several fronts, and an urgent response is
called for. Sierra Leone indeed remains vulnerable to
structural problems. Owing to the weakness of the
State and its institutions, the Government is not yet
able to take complete responsibility for the essential
and pressing needs of its people. Despite the
performance of the economy, the country is still
suffering from extreme poverty and a very high rate of
unemployment, in particular among young people.
That poses a threat to the country's fragile stability.

Inadequately equipped and lacking the resources
to carry out restructuring, the Army is not yet in a
position to take sole charge of providing external
security for the country. Sierra Leone must improve its
relations with its neighbours, and subregional
cooperation must be intensified, in particular in the
framework of the Mano River Union, in order to
overcome national insufficiencies and provide
essential, complementary efforts in the area of security
and the fight against cross-border problems.

The role of the United Nations peace missions in
the subregion is Vital in that regard. The success of the
peace process in Sierra Leone largely depends on the
international community's capacity to provide adequate

assistance to the country during the peacebuilding
phase. The international community's determination
will be demonstrated through the implementation of a
peacebuilding strategy that builds the country's long-
term capacity for conflict prevention and that improves
economic governance. The international community's
determination will also be demonstrated through donor
support for the United Nations Integrated Office in
Sierra Leone, which is tasked with assisting the
Government in implementing that strategy.

In that context, the 2007 elections constitute a
test for the new State institutions, for the society of
Sierra Leone and for the country's emerging
democracy, as well as for the international community,
which aspires to make its handling and settlement of
the conflict in Sierra Leone a model of success and a
textbook case that can be applied in other situations.

In that regard, it should be recognized that,
although the tasks are still not completed, there are
certainly lessons to be drawn from that experience that
can enrich the body of best practices for the design and
the management of peacekeeping operations. The
concept of benchmarks has turned out to be highly
useful for measuring and assessing the progress of
strategies implemented, and the United Nations would
benefit from implementing benchmarks more
systematically.
In conclusion, I would like once more to convey
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
my friend Mr. Daudi Mwakawago, our sincere thanks
for the work that he has accomplished at the head of
the United Nations Observer Mission in Sierra Leone,
and we wish him every success in his future
endeavours.

