Lieutenant General Prakash: At the outset, I
would like to take this opportunity to thank you, Sir,
for the support that you provide to the men and women
in uniform who proudly serve under the United Nations
flag in the Democratic Republic of Congo. I also thank
you for giving me an opportunity to talk to the Council
about the need for a system to assess and support
common military standards in peacekeeping operations
and avoid underperformance of units.

I will cover this subject in three parts: what this
issue is about, what needs to be addressed and what is
already being done in this regard, and what more can
be done.

Turning to the first part concerning why this is an
issue that needs to be addressed, Council members are
well aware that a force component in a Chapter VII
mission is made up of troops from different regions
of the world with different military orientations. They
hold varied types of equipment and the troops back
home are trained to adhere to their national doctrines
and objectives. This is further complicated by issues of
culture and language, and sometimes by the perceptions
of their performance as per national expectations.
Some may observe from what I have just said that
there is nothing new here and that the United Nations
forces have managed to get by not withstanding these
challenges. But it also needs to be highlighted here
that, over time, the peacekeeping environment has
become increasingly complex and challenging and
come under increasing scrutiny. Thus, the ability to
absorb the differences and shortcomings that I have
just outlined is getting weaker and weaker. When one
thinks of missions in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, South Sudan and Darfur, it is very evident that
the business of military peacekeeping is now a specific
and demanding affair in its own right, especially
when it comes to the highest priority mandated task of
protection of civilians.

I now turn to the issue of what is being done in this
regard. The Department ofPeacekeeping Operations and
the troop-contributing countries (TCCs) already have a
process of predeployment procedures, memorandums
of understanding and laid-down training standards and
concept of operations. This is supplemented by training
material, standard operating procedures and manuals
issued by the Office of Military Affairs, missions and
even the troop-contributing countries.

In spite of the fact that all this is happening, we still
face some situations and challenges in the field missions
that highlight the fact that more needs to be done. For
instance, the protection of civilians requires the force
component to be very agile and flexible, and to operate
in difficult terrain and risky and demanding situations.
Not all contingents find themselves optimized to be
able to effectively perform in that kind of scenario for
reasons of training, equipment and sometimes even
mental psyche. Some peacekeepers still arrive with
a mindset and orientation of peacekeeping as a soft
operational tour.

In the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO), we continue to find that contemporary
peacekeeping, when it comes to the protection of
civilians under imminent threat, is a fine balance
between prompt and robust action required from a
soldier in uniform and a person who cares and nurtures
the vulnerable civilian community in his area of
operational responsibility. The traditional training of
an officer and a soldier fielded to the missions does not
equip them with all of the range of skills, techniques
and sometimes even the mental attitude to operate in
this wide band.

At this point, I am reminded of a statement in a
recent publication of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, which states that "United Nations
peacekeeping is ostensibly a political endeavour".
Therefore, having a system that conditions our young
men and women peacekeepers to operate in such a
challenging environment is a reality of the business
of modern-day peacekeeping. As to what more can be
done, I would like to make a few suggestions.

First of all, the initiative of the Office of Military
Affairs to base all contributions from TCCs on a
generic infantry battalion is a welcome initiative in the
right direction. To give members a practical example
of standardization, in MONUSCO we have contingents
holding varied types of armoured personnel carrier,
in varied numbers. We have been pushing hard for the
standardization of holdings based on operational needs.
That has resulted in optimized use of holding of critical
equipment and has generated much-needed financial
savings, without jeopardizing operational efficiency.

Going further, we need to have a system that covers
the whole lifespan of activities - from preparation to
deployment to de-induction - and that addresses the
issues related to operational performance and the image
projection of the United Nations in the field. While
some of that already exists, as I previously explained,
nevertheless there are some gaps that need to be plugged
in order to have a fully effective system in place. In
my opinion, the preparation and predeployment phase
is most critical. We need to place greater emphasis on
issues that make United Nations peacekeeping under
Chapter VII peacekeeping different from war fighting.
Also, greater attention needs to be paid to preparing
units under orders for deployment to a mission area
on the mission-specific tasks. If the TCCs so desire,
missions can provide teams to those units to brief and
focus potential peacekeepers on their forthcoming
tasks and duties.

In addition to the forum that already exists, there
would be an advantage in facilitating greater interaction
and communication between policy/decision-makers in
national capitals and missions that are beneficiaries
of troops provided by the capitals, so that both the
contributor and the receiver are on the same page when
it comes to understanding the requirements, constraints,
limitations and performance of units.

Moreover, for contingents deployed in the mission
area, there is a need for a regular formal feedback
system to be introduced tokeep the troop-contributing
countries informed, of course through the permanent
missions, about the operational performance of
their troops. In MONUSCO, the chain of command
in the Mission is conducting operational readiness
inspections, the findings of which could well be
formally shared with TCCs. I may highlight here that
that feedback will comment on the multidisciplinary
facets of peacekeeping, even to include issues
related to community liaison and dealing with civil
populations and humanitarian actors under challenging
circumstances.

While I have made some suggestions for the
collective improvement of the performance of units, I
think there is also a need to have the very best leaders
for the future missions, ideally with comprehensive
and good grounding in United Nations peacekeeping
missions. To support that, there needs to be a rigorous
and honest personnel reporting system to inform national
and United Nations authorities to facilitate the selection
system, the aim being to have the right person for the
right job. Also on this requirement, troop-contributing
countries could be encouraged to incorporate a specific
United Nations peacekeeping module into the junior
and senior staff college courses syllabuses. That would
help military officers to pick the various nuances and
intricacies of peacekeeping, such as the political and
humanitarian aspects, which is currently a shortcoming
noticed in military peacekeepers.

In conclusion, while I have provided some
suggestions for the adoption of a system to improve the
performance of military components in United Nations
peacekeeping, I request that this not be interpreted as the
current system falling short of expectations. As a force
commander, I am proud of what troops in MONUSCO
are delivering today in a most challenging environment.
That said, it is the mark of any professional set-up that
we constantly endeavour to improve. It is in that context
that I have provided members with some ideas and
suggestions.

