Mr. Leon Gonzalez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba welcomes the holding of this open debate of the
Security Council to tackle such an important topic as
the maintenance of international peace and security.

We believe it timely to start by recalling that
this Organization that brings us all together was
born when its founders set the goal of preserving
succeeding generations from the scourge of war. The
founding Charter of the Organization calls on us
to practice tolerance and to live together in peace as
good neighbours and to unite our strength to maintain
international peace and security. That is precisely the
primary objective of the Charter of the United Nations,
that is, to maintain international peace and security
and, to that end, to take effective collective measures
for the prevention and removal of threats to the peace
and for the suppression of acts of aggression or other
breaches of the peace, and to bring about by peaceful
means, and in conformity with the principles ofjustice
and international law, adjustment or settlement of
international disputes or situations that might lead to a
breach of the peace. Likewise, another objective of the
Charter is to foster friendly relations between nations
based on respect for the principle of equal rights
and self-determination of peoples and to take other
appropriate measures to strengthen universal peace.

We believe that the pacifist vocation of the
Organization has been endorsed by its Member States
since its foundation. Unfortunately, international peace
has not been achieved.

In our opinion, the lessons of war are only, on
balance, a litany of losses: millions of human victims,
the destruction of the historical and cultural heritage
of our civilization and a panorama of devastation that
various peoples across the world have suffered. Longing
for peace and creating organs and mechanisms seeking
to implement it are not enough. We must eliminate the
causes conspiring against peace.

Some of such dangers to peace include hegemonic
and imperialistic domination and its interests, acts of
aggression, the struggle to seize natural resources,
persistent colonialist and neocolonialist strategies
and practices, the unjust and exclusionary current
international order, unequal exchanges, discrimination,
xenophobia, interventionism and violations of peoples'
right to self-determination.

There cannot be peace and security as long as
unilateral and extraterritorial measures are imposed
by one State against another, as is the case with the
economic, commercial and financial blockade imposed
against Cuba has been for over 50 years now. Solidarity,
cooperation, international assistance andjoint action to
eliminate poverty, unemployment, hunger, inequalities
and the underlying causes thereof are necessary to
prevent conflicts. There cannot be development without
peace and stability and peace and stability will not
exist without development. There will be no peace and
security for a people that are seriously threatened by
hunger, malnutrition, a lack of sanitation and access to
drinking water, illiteracy, high rates ofinfant mortality,
a short life expectancy and death from preventable
diseases.

International peace and security can be maintained
only if there is respect for the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and international
law. Such principles establish the sovereign equality
of all States, the peaceful settlement of international
disputes, the renunciation of the threat or use of force
against any other State and non-interference in matters
that are essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of
States.

The Security Council has the primary responsibility
for maintaining international peace and security and
should fulfil that role in accordance with the powers
vested in it by the Charter. We advocate an urgent
and thorough reform of this organ that turns it into a
democratic and effective forum for the accomplishment
of its mandate. The Security Council should promote
peaceful solutions and resist resorting to war. Those
solutions should never stir up armed confrontations, let
alone be champions of the philosophy of regime change,
which, in practice, contradicts the pacifist essence of
the Organization.

We are concerned about the increasing tendency
by the Security Council to reinterpret the mandate
entrusted to it under the Charter and to take on functions
that do not belong to it, appropriating the role granted
by the Charter to other main organs ofthe Organization,
in particular the General Assembly. We reiterate the
key role and authority of the General Assembly in the
maintenance of international peace and security as the
most democratic and representative principal organ of
the United Nations.

The effectiveness of United Nations peacekeeping
operations requires those operations to be established
in full compliance with the principles of consent
of the parties, impartiality and the use of force only
for self-defence. We support an integrated and
coordinated vision among the various levels and actors
in peace configuration processes. The criteria of the
Peacebuilding Commission and its offices in the field
should have a greater say in decision-making within
the United Nations system, in particular on matters
concerning peace and security that are assessed by the
Security Council and relate to certain States under the
Commission's consideration.
We agree that the topic of peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and international security today is
undoubtedly one of the major challenges of the
international community. We strongly believe that
international peace and security will continue to be
at risk as long as nuclear weapons, which threaten the
survival of humankind, are not completely eliminated.
Cuba will continue to work actively in its national
capacity and as a member of other groups of States,
such as the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and
the Community of Latin American and Caribbean
States (CELAC), to achieve the complete elimination
and prohibition of nuclear weapons.

I take this opportunity to recall that, on
26 September, we will celebrate for the first time the
International Day for Nuclear Disarmament as a result
of the decision of the General Assembly. That will be
an important time for renewing our efforts towards the
complete elimination of such weapons.

Allow me to underscore that the second summit
of the Community of Latin American and Caribbean
States is taking place in Havana today as a consolidation
of the integrationist will of the peoples of the region.
As proof of the commitment to peace by CELAC'S
members, the Heads of State and Government of
CELAC have just declared the Latin American and
Caribbean region a zone of peace, in which differences
among nations will be solved peacefully by means of
dialogue and negotiation or other forms of settlement,
in full accordance with international law.

My delegation reaffirms in this forum the
unwavering commitment of the Cuban people to
peace. In that regard, the historical leader of the Cuban
Revolution, Fidel Castro Ruz, said that the struggle
of peoples for their sovereignty and independence is
the struggle for peace. Cuba has struggled for peace
by fighting the exploitation of man by man. Cuba has
struggled for peace by defending its sovereignty.

I will conclude with the words of Cuba's national
hero, Jose Marti, when, seeking a bright future for the
people, he declared, "The future is peace".

