Mr. McLay (New Zealand): Mr. President, as
others have noted, this is your last time in the Security
Council. As it is my first, I want to thank you for your
very able stewardship of the Council in June and wish
you the best as you come to the end of your time in
New York. There could, I would suggest, be few more
distinguished ways to spend your last day in this place
than to preside over the Council. I am also very
mindful that our two countries share a very special
bond, best epitomized by the memorial to Kemal
Ataturk that stands looking over the harbour of my
capital city.

I also thank the Secretary-General for his
quarterly report (S/2009/323) on the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), the
3
Special Representative for his incisive comments, and
the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan for his
very constructive response.

New Zealand is grateful for the opportunity to
participate in this debate. Ours is a small nation of
4 million people a long way from Afghanistan, but it
has made a long-standing commitment to that country.
We seek an Afghanistan that is sustainable as an
independent nation, free from the scourges of subversion
and terrorism.

Despite the security challenges that we face
elsewhere, particularly in our own Pacific
neighbourhood, we lead the provincial reconstruction
team in Bamyan province. New Zealand personnel
support the International Security Assistance Force
headquarters and the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan, and provide police training
and mentoring in Bamyan.

New Zealand contributes to other priority areas of
the Afghanistan National Development Strategy, such
as rural livelihood programmes, education and health
services, and the capacity-development of provincial
governmental, non-governmental and civil society
organizations. We welcome the new national agriculture
strategy and plan to increase our support to improve
agricultural productivity and related research. New
Zealand also welcomes the increased emphasis on
civilian contributions to Afghanistan and more effective
coordination of the international community's efforts,
as expressed during The Hague Conference in March.
UNAMA will play a key role in those areas.

New Zealand agrees that there is a need for a
clear strategy for engagement in Afghanistan that
achieves the right balance between stability and security,
on the one hand, and development and diplomacy on
the other. Effective implementation of that strategy is
vital. Coordination of international contributions
supporting the Government of Afghanistan is critical,
and Afghanistan's neighbours also have an important
role to play in this regard, as has already been noted.
New Zealand is encouraged by the Secretary-General's
reports of recent progress on such regional cooperation.

New Zealand is concerned about increasing levels
of violence in Afghanistan in the lead-up to the
elections. As has been made clear, Afghanistan continues
to face deep-seated problems with governance, human
rights, development, justice and narcotics. The security
situation, especially in the South and the East,
seriously hampers development and limits the reach of
the Afghan Government and its ability to improve the
lives of all Afghans. All this makes strengthening
Afghan military and police capability a key
commitment for the international community, because
development in Afghanistan needs to be underpinned
by sound, credible and effective Government.

New Zealand also welcomes the progress towards
elections to be held on 20 August and is encouraged to
see a greater number of women candidates than in the
previous election. We also welcome the additional
security to help enable the Afghan people to express
their democratic rights at the polls without fear of
violence, and we are providing NZ$500,000 to support
the elections.

While we welcome the progress in Afghanistan in
recent years, we believe that a continued, sustained
commitment of the international community will
remain necessary to help Afghanistan build a positive
future, and New Zealand is committed to playing its
part in achieving that future.

