Ms. Citaku: I am pleased to be here and seeing
the Council every three months, but I would like to
remind everyone why we are here. On 10 June 1999, the
Council adopted resolution 1244 (1999) with the aim of
resolving the grave humanitarian situation in Kosovo
and providing for the safe and free return of all refugees
and displaced persons to their homes in the aftermath
of a terrible war and a time of ethnic cleansing.

If we try to read resolution 1244 (1999) again for
a moment, confusion awaits, since it talks about a
country that no longer exists - the former Yugoslavia.
The United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) was initially established for
a period of 12 months. However, not only has it
continued to operate for more than 12 months, today,
18 years later, we are still here because of resolution
1244 (1999) - which, by the way, does not include a
requirement that the Secretary-General must report on
the Mission every three months.

Let us therefore get real and bring UNMIK to an end.
Times have changed since 1999. Kosovo today is free,
independent and a sovereign State. There is absolutely
no need for UNMIK to be present, because it has no role
or function except for some self-invented initiatives that
have been put in place to justify its existence. In terms
of budgets alone, since 2009 more than $400 million
has been spent to maintain a Mission whose mandate
ended years ago. Let us think of the millions of refugees
currently all over the world 4 there are 65 million of
them, the largest number since the Second World War.
I am sure UNMIK's millions and resources can be
put to much better use. It is a shame to use taxpayers'
money for repetitive, ill-considered projects. Instead of
shrinking its budget and returning its funds, UNMIK
has been building and funding permanent solar panels
for a rented building in Kosovo. Member States should
take action on an issue that has been gone over many
times in this Chamber - downsizing the Mission at
every level and bringing it to an end.

Furthermore, at a time when the world is facing
serious challenges and crises across every continent,
we continue to come to New York and take up the
Security Council's valuable time simply because our
northern neighbour insists on a Charade. Just last month,
leaders ofthe Western Balkans met in Trieste to discuss
economic cooperation between our countries. Today,
Kosovo is an equal member in the forums and meetings
of the Berlin Process. When we meet in Berlin, Vienna
or Paris, Serbia and Kosovo sit at the same table as
equals, as two States. Serbia has no problem when it
sees our flags standing next to each other.

So the question is why Serbia insists on asymmetry
in this forum here. Why is this dichotomy being
tolerated, when it is clearly being misused to project
an image that does not match the reality? In fact, let
us try to guess what would happen tomorrow if today's
meeting did not take place. The answer is - nothing.
I know that. My colleagues from Belgrade know that.
We all know that. From our point of View, it is not only
unnecessary but irresponsible for us to come here and
bother the Council with useless debates at a time when
its attention is needed to address real challenges and
problems in which the United Nations has an important
role to play.

In the meantime, on 11 June Kosovo held democratic
elections for the third time since its independence. They
were the most successful, competitive and peaceful that
we have held to date. The turnout was especially high
among the Serbian community. International observers
noted that Kosovo's parliamentary elections met the
highest international standards, except in northern
Kosovo, where local Serbian leaders faced pressure and
threats, often from the Serbian State itself.

Like all democracies, in the wake of the elections
we are now creating a Government. As we speak, the
parliamentary constituent session is meeting in order
to reach the necessary quorums for electing its various
bodies and, later, the Government itself. Despite their
obvious differences and disagreements, all the political
parties in Kosovo share a common objective, that of
Euro-Atlantic integration. On that issue, the Council
can rest assured. While our path towards membership in
the European Union has been settled with the entry into
force of our Stabilization and Association Agreement,
we are now focused more than ever on starting the
NATO Partnership for Peace process.

In that regard, Kosovo's institutions have been
working hard, alongside our partners, to conclude the
process of transforming our security forces into armed
forces. For far too long we have been consumers of
security. We believe it is time not only to fulfil our
sovereign duty by establishing our own armed forces,
but also to contribute to the regional and international
security infrastructure. The challenges we face
today know no borders, and they demand that we all
work together, side by side. Kosovo cannot afford to
sit and be a silent observer. We want to be an active
participant and to contribute. We were very grateful
for the statement that United States Vice-President
Pence made two weeks ago in Podgorica at the Adriatic
Charter Summit, in which he articulated the support of
the United States for Kosovo's full membership in the
United Nations loudly and clearly.

For our part, we will do everything we can to
convince our Serbian citizens that Kosovo's army will
be their army too, and that there is absolutely nothing
to fear. I am pleased to inform the Council that we have
already started to reap the fruits of our efforts. On
7 July, Kosovo's security forces organized a graduation
ceremony for 61 new cadets - 58 Kosovo Serbs and
three Kosovo Montenegrins. Today they are active
members of the security forces serving in all of its
units. So while we will talk to our Serbian citizens in
order to address their concerns, we will allow no one to
have veto power over that process.

During the past few months, we have had to deal
with a very aggressive and unconstructive attitude on
the part of our neighbour to the North.

Instead of normalizing relations, Serbia has been
creating unnecessary obstacles in different regional
and international forums. That includes the violation of
the implementation of other Brussels agreements, some
of which have been completely blocked - such as the
ones on energy, justice and the recognition of diplomas.
Others have been disrupted in different phases of
implementation, such as the agreement on cadastre,
civil protection dismantlement, the revitalization of the
Mitrovica bridge, the revitalization of the main street in
North Mitrovica and the full dismantlement of Serbia's
parallel structures in Kosovo. Sabotage continues, and
of greatest concern is Serbia's duality in pretending to
implement agreements and simultaneously continuing
to support its parallel structures in Kosovo, including
the illegal municipalities in the north and in other parts
of Kosovo. Let me reassure the Council that Kosovo,
for its part, will implement all agreements reached in
Brussels and, in line with recommendations from our
constitutional court, we will establish the association
of the Serbian municipalities.

We always talk about normalization, but
normalization cannot be unilateral. Normalization
and reconciliation cannot be achieved at the expense
of truth and justice. One of the latest shameful actions
from Serbia was banning former Kosovo President
Atifete Jahjaga from entering Serbia to participate at an
event in Belgrade that was meant to boost the dialogue
between the two countries. Madame Jahjaga was
intended to attend the promotion of a book containing
testimony from women that were tortured and raped
during the 1998-99 Kosovo war.

Acknowledging the truth about war crimes in
Kosovo is the only way for both societies to move
forward. Former President Jahjaga was not able to read
her speech in Belgrade, therefore I want to read out a
part of it here.

"The stories presented in the book are not only
stories of torture and abuse. They are stories of the
cruellest form of torture. These are stories of rape
used as a tool of war. These are stories of a truth
that has been attempted to be concealed, hidden
and buried. Over the years, I have met hundreds
of survivors of sexual violence during the war,
in different parts of my country. Carefully and
patiently, I have listened to their stories; I have
cried for those who needed me to cry with them,
and I have stayed strong for those who needed me
to be strong. I have heard the story of a woman
from the Drenica region who was gang-raped
continuously by Serbian paramilitaries for over
six months. I have spoken to a woman in Dakovica
whose body was mutilated while she was raped.
Just recently, I met the child of a war rape victim
who died without receiving the justice she hoped
for, for so many years.

"I truly hope that you read this book,
share it with your friends and family, ask your
Government to punish the perpetrators and call
for reconciliation with your neighbours. We shall
not let anybody hold us hostage to the past. The
victims of these crimes will never be able to find
peace unless the perpetrators are brought to justice.
This is a precondition for long-lasting peace, good
neighbourly relations and a stable future for the
next generations. The future of our countries lies
in our hands. Let it be a future of reconciliation
and peace."

No trial, no allegation, no insinuation and certainly
no statements today can change history. The war in
Kosovo happened as the world watched, as the Chamber
watched. That is why the world decided to take action.
Any attempt to rewrite history will fail. The Kosovo
Liberation Army is not a terrorist organization. It is the
most successful liberation movement in recent history.
Sami Lushtaku and Ramush Haradinaj did not travel
to Belgrade to fight. They fought in their homes, in
their country with the aim of protecting civilians and
liberation a nation. Even as we fuel those kinds of fake
narratives, it is difficult to imagine how one is being
sincere about the past.

Serbia needs to deal with its own past, not only
because of Kosovo, as Kosovo has its own path
now - we are free, we are independent and that will
never change - but for the sake of their children and
their future. Denying Kosovar citizens their right
to exist as a State because I am Albanian is a notion
that I have heard before. There was actually an entire
operation to deport us from Kosovo because we were
Albanians. Does that mean that I have to go live
in Albania?

Kosovo is a State that belongs to all of its
citizens - Albanians, Serbs, Montenegrins, Roma,
Turks, Bosnians. It belongs to all of us and no one will
ever tell me again that just because I am an Albanian
I do not deserve to live there. We have lived there for
centuries. I am sure the Council is not here to listen to
a history lesson, but I invite members to find a book
on the subject if they visit during summer holidays.
There are many such books, written by professionals
and academics, that tell the story of Albanians in
the Balkans.

In the last couple of days, a new debate has been
generated in Serbia - one initiated by the Serbian
President, calling for a historic deal between Serbia
and Kosovo, calling for a compromise. Allow me to
state, Kosovo's independence, as declared in 2008,
is a compromise. President Ahtisaari's proposal was
a difficult and painful compromise. Now, all of a
sudden, has the compromise become our position?
That will not stand. Renewing the ideas of solutions
along ethnic lines is dangerous for the entire region.
If we reject multiculturalism and ethnic diversity
within our own States, within our own borders, then
how on Earth do we plan to exist and coexist in the
European Union, much less in an ever-interdependent
and -interconnected world?

Allow me to say it loud and clear - Kosovo and its
independence are not a temporary project. Kosovo is
here to stay, forever. Normalization and reconciliation
cannot be achieved through partition and subjugation.
This debate does not do justice to what Kosovo is today.
I would be remiss not to mention that Kosovo has
emerged as a place where young people excel in many
fields on a daily basis. Just last month, six youngsters
from Kosovo - three girls and three boys from Bonevet,
a makerspace - constructed Europe's first teen-built
electric car in Gjakova. This extraordinary example of
ingenuity not only makes us proud of our youth, but of
these teens themselves, who, through their innovations,
educate all of us, helping us to become aware of our
surroundings and environment.

Dokufest, the biggest cultural event in Kosovo, took
place last week in the beautiful city of Prizren. Even
though Kosovo - because of the circumstances - did
not have a film school for many years, it managed
to develop and host one of the top 10 international
documentary and film festivals in the world. Each year,
Dokufest grows larger and brings people together to
work and collaborate with not only the best producers
and artists from the region, but from across the world,
placing Kosovo where it belongs: on the world stage. As
the slogan of this year's edition of Dokufest suggests,
the future is not dead for Kosovars. It is very much alive,
and this future is alive for all of its citizens: Albanians,
Serbs and the rest. It is unfortunate that this Chamber
is being misused to promote narratives and to fuel hate
in our own domestic audiences.

It is true that some Serbs left Kosovo after the war.
In the same way, Serbs left Croatia, Bosnia and Serbia
itself. But to wave numbers here that are simply not
true is not correct. The only reason why Serbs did not
participate in large numbers in the census is because the
Serbian Government called on them not to participate
in the census. There was a massive campaign on the
part of the Belgrade Government, calling on Serbs not
to participate in the census. We have the census data,
but we agree that it needs to be revised. We also have
election data. Who is voting on behalf of the Serbs in
Kosovo? The numbers do not add up. In the last election
alone we had around 70,000 Serbs voting inside
Kosovo, and that was just in the north. So, please, let
us be realistic. Come and visit Kosovo, and you will see
that this debate here does no justice to it.

