Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I
would like to begin by reading out the text of a
statement that has been agreed by the Foreign
Ministers of China, France, Germany, Russia, the
United Kingdom and the United States of America,
with the support of the High Representative of the
European Union. The statement reads as follows:

"The unanimous adoption of Security
Council resolution 1747 (2007) reflects the
international community's profound concerns
over Iran's nuclear programme. We deplore Iran's
failure to comply with the earlier resolutions of
the Security Council and the International Atomic
Energy Agency, and we call upon Iran once again
to comply fully with all its international
obligations.

"We are committed to seeking a negotiated
solution that would address the international
community's concerns. The purpose of
negotiations would be to reach a comprehensive
agreement with Iran, based on mutual respect,
that would re-establish international confidence
in the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran's
nuclear programme and would open the way to
improving relations and developing wider
cooperation between Iran and all our countries.

"We recognize Iran's rights under the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT) to develop research, production and use of
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes in
conformity with its NPT obligations. In that
respect, future arrangements, modalities and
timing will be dealt with in negotiations.

"Full transparency and cooperation by Iran
with the International Atomic Energy Agency is
essential in order to address outstanding
concerns. We reiterate our full support for the
Agency and its staff.

"We stand by our suspension-for-suspension
proposal. That means that for the duration of
negotiations - which would take place within an
agreed time frame, extendable by mutual
agreement - Iran would maintain an Agency-
verified suspension, as required by Security
Council resolution 1737 (2006) and, now,
resolution 1747 (2007). Security Council
discussion of Iran's nuclear programme would
also be suspended, as would the implementation
of the measures adopted under the relevant
Council resolutions.

"We reconfirm that the proposals we
presented to Iran in June 2006 stay on the table.
They include cooperation with Iran on civil
nuclear energy, legally binding guarantees on the
supply of nuclear fuel and wider political,
security and economic cooperation. Those
proposals remain on the table.

"We urge Iran to take this opportunity to
engage with us all to find a negotiated way
forward. Our proposals would bring far-reaching
benefits to Iran and to the region, and they
provide a means to address the international
community's concerns while taking account of
Iran's legitimate interests.

"In a region that has known too much
instability and violence, let us find an agreed way
forward that builds confidence and promotes
peace and mutual respect. In that spirit, we
propose further talks with the Islamic Republic of
Iran to see if a mutually acceptable way can be
found to open negotiations."

That concludes the statement on behalf of the six
Foreign Ministers. I should like now to make some
remarks in my national capacity.

It is just short of a year since the Security
Council first took action on the Iranian nuclear issue,
following the referral of the issue to the Council by the
International Atomic Energy Agency. Our concern
throughout has been twofold: to promote prospects for
a negotiated solution, on which suspension of
enrichment by Iran depends; and, secondly, to reinforce
the role of the Agency, as our resolution today again
does.

Those concerns led to the elaboration of a
detailed offer of long-term cooperation from the six
nations whose Ministers' statement I have just read.
But those Ministers also agreed to seek further Security
Council action on Iran should our demands not be met.

Iran's continuing defiance prompted the adoption
of resolution 1696 (2006) in July 2006, setting the
framework for the Council's actions, including a
binding Chapter VII decision that Iran should suspend
its enrichment-related and reprocessing activities.
Despite that, Iran ignored the Council.

That led in turn to further Council action. On
23 December, the Security Council adopted - as
today, by unanimity - resolution 1737 (2006),
reaffirming the mandatory requirement that Iran
suspend its enrichment-related and reprocessing
activities, and clarifying that Iran must also suspend
construction of the heavy-water research reactor at
Arak. It also introduced a number of measures aimed at
restricting Iran's development of sensitive nuclear
technologies and its development of ballistic missiles
that could deliver them.

Those measures were an incremental and
proportionate response to Iran's continued failure to
comply with the requirements of resolution 1696
(2006), aimed at persuading Iran that its interests were
best served by putting in place the conditions necessary
for discussions to seek a negotiated resolution of the
issue.

As requested in resolution 1737 (2006), the
Director General of the Agency, Mohamed ElBaradei,
reported on 22 February that Iran had continued to
pursue these sensitive technologies in defiance of its
obligations under international law. This situation was
a backdrop to the intensive and constructive
deliberations that have led to this resolution
unanimously adopted today.

By adopting this resolution, we have continued
our incremental and proportionate approach, increasing
gradually the pressure on Iran to address the concerns
shared across the international community. We have
strengthened the restrictions on individuals closely
associated with Iran's sensitive nuclear activities and
with its ballistic missile programme. We have
prohibited arms sales from Iran and urge vigilance over
the supply of heavy weapons to Iran. We have also
urged restraint in making finance available to the
Government of Iran.

I should clarify that the United Kingdom's
undertaking and understanding that the new resolution
does not introduce any changes to the provisions in
paragraph 15 of resolution 1737 (2006). The asset
freeze, therefore, does not prevent a person or entity
designated in the annexes to resolution 1737 (2006)
and to this resolution from making payments due under
a contract entered into force before that person or
entity was listed in cases covered by paragraph 15.

This resolution, building upon resolutions 1696
(2006) and 1737 (2006), sends a unanimous and
unambiguous signal to the Government and people of
Iran. To both, we say that we prefer and are committed
to the path of cooperation. But we say, also, that the
path of proliferation by Iran is not one that the
international community can accept. We want Iran to
make the right choice - cooperation with the
international community, which requires the removal
of any doubt that Iran could develop nuclear weapons.
The resolve of the Council is clear. Iran must make its
choice.

