Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): We thank you,
Sir, for convening this debate and for giving us an
opportunity to speak. We thank Mr. Lacroix, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, for his
comprehensive briefing.

As a lead troop- and police-contributing country,
Bangladesh takes pride in its value-driven contribution
to United Nations peacekeeping operations, with its
current presence in eleven missions. Our commitment
is further validated by our engagement at the
mission-leadership level, with one force commander,
one deputy force commander and three sector
commanders serving at present.

Our delegation has endorsed the call for developing
an integrated performance analysis framework for
all peacekeeping components, and has stressed the
importance ofa consultative process in that regard. The
exercise so far has highlighted that there is a plethora
of policies and standards available across the system
that nevertheless fall short of building a cohesive and
transparent narrative on performance. We therefore
expect to have a data- and evidence-based performance
evaluation and analysis framework above and beyond
the mere compilation of existing polices and standards.
In order to have a culture of performance instituted
throughout United Nations peacekeeping operations,
it should be required to move away from a business-
as-usual approach towards a more performance- and
results-oriented approach based on impact evaluation.
It remains crucial for our policymakers at the national
level to understand the exact performance gaps and
shortfalls so as to make the necessary investments
and improvements. The integrated performance
analysis framework should give consideration to
institutionalizing the feedback loop.

The mandates authorized by the Security Council
need to be clear, realistic and achievable in order for
those on the ground to deliver on them effectively. In
complex, multidimensional peacekeeping contexts,
prioritized and sequenced mandates have been
generally recommended as the pragmatic approach to
adopt. In that regard, we reiterate the importance of
triangular consultations among the Council, troop-
and police-contributing countries and the Secretariat.
Such consultations should take place in both formal and
informal settings and move beyond a routine exercise
immediately preceding the Council's consideration
of a given draft resolution. The question of adequate
resources and personnel for peacekeeping operations
is inextricably linked with performance. Without the
necessary capabilities at their disposal, peacekeepers
often find themselves in compromising situations. Such
evident gaps expose them to increasing threats posed
by non-State actors, mostly acting in an environment
of impunity.

It remains critical to rise above extraneous
factors and considerations in deploying forces on
the ground. Priority should be given to troop- and
police-contributing countries that have invested in
fulfilling the requirements under the Peacekeeping
Capability Readiness System. Furthermore, troop-
and police-contributing countries that commit to
deployment without caveats should not be considered
in the same light as those that resort to caveats on a
range of issues. As a troop- and police-contributing
country, Bangladesh has generally shown its readiness
to adapt to systemic and operational changes and work
in partnership with others on enhancing capabilities
and training. We have also taken proactive measures to
invest in critical enablers that we consider essential in
certain contexts for the protection of civilians and the
safety and security of our peacekeepers. In conformity
with the agreed principles of peacekeeping operations,
host countries and troop- and police-contributing
countries should take a pragmatic approach to taking
advantage of evolving technologies.

A culture of performance should be predicated
on transparency and accountability on the part of all
concerned. The Secretariat may draw on its recent
positive experiences of sharing certain investigations
and review reports with the Council and, in some cases,
with the wider membership. There needs to be a free
exchange of information on the role and performance
of regional and subregional forces endorsed by the
Organization and those endorsed by non-United
Nations forces, and on their respective impact on the
performance and safety and security of United Nations
peacekeepers. The Council, the Member States and the
Secretariat should cooperate on strategic communication
with the media and civil society in order to share their
challenges and promote their common interests.

The issue of training evaluations should be an
integral part of performance assessment and analysis.
In Bangladesh, we initiate mission-specific training
for our contingents at least six months ahead of their
deployment. Our premier peacekeeping training
institute complies with the relevant United Nations
standards and is ready to offer a range of United
Nations-specific courses next year with participation
from abroad. It may be relevant here to state that a
United Nations-led seminar is being organized later this
year, in cooperation with United States Indo-Pacific
Command, for troop-contributing countries in the
region on contingent preparation and the deployment
process. We are steadily working on increasing women's
participation in peacekeeping operations.

In conclusion, Bangladesh remains committed to
enhancing peacekeeping performance, in cooperation
with all stakeholders concerned, in order to ensure a
demonstrable and constructive cultural shift in the
United Nations.

