Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): Brazil's affirmative vote for
resolution 1977 (2011) confirms our unequivocal
commitment to the cause of a safer world in which
weapons of mass destruction - nuclear, chemical and
biological - will no longer exist. The possibility that
those weapons could fall into the hands of non-State
actors, especially terrorists, remains a matter of great
concern to the international community. In that regard,
in resolution 1540 (2004) we recognize an important
instrument to prevent non-State actors from acquiring,
developing, trafficking in or using nuclear, chemical
and biological weapons and their means of delivery.

However, restricting our efforts only to fighting
proliferation represents a limited perspective. There is
an urgent need for concrete actions towards effective
2

disarmament by States possessing those weapons. We
bear in mind President Obama's commitment to
seeking a nuclear-weapon-free world, which we fully
support (see S/PV.6191). We concur with his vision
that moving towards a safer world requires fulfilling
the grand bargain envisioned in the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, which amounts
to countries with nuclear weapons moving towards
disarmament, countries without nuclear weapons not
acquiring them, and all countries being able to access
peaceful nuclear energy.

In that regard, we appreciate the efforts that have
been made within the Security Council to highlight the
significance of disarmament in the resolution that we
have adopted today. The risk of proliferation will be
eradicated only once we achieve a world free of
nuclear weapons.

Brazil believes that a broad approach to the
subject covered by resolution 1540 (2004) that takes
into account the possibility of peaceful uses under
international cooperation is also essential to efforts for
a safer world. It is also important to avoid an approach
that would cast generalized suspicion on the good faith
of countries that develop such peaceful programmes.

Concerning the important role that the group of
experts can play, we commend the inclusion of the idea
of equitable geographical distribution among the
criteria for selecting experts. That responds to the
international community's legitimate concern over
balance and fair representation. The resolution
determines the official establishment of the group of
experts. The criteria on which the selection of experts
will be based are an important aspect of the continued
legitimacy of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004).

The group of experts plays a technical role in
assisting the 1540 Committee. The working methods
and structure of the group will be discussed in the next
few months and recommendations will be issued by
August. While we strongly support an effective and
well-coordinated group of experts, Brazil does not
favour the idea that the group should have a leadership
position on a par with or superseding the authority of
the 1540 Committee.

The 1540 Committee has carried out important
and useful work since 2004. It has kept the Security
Council updated on the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) and has facilitated the provision of
11-30512
assistance to States, at their request. The important
work done by the 1540 Committee will continue in the
coming years. We fully support the Committee and will
continue to do so in the future. Examining the mandate
of the Committee every few years is an important
opportunity for the international community to adjust
its work to an evolving scenario. Some questions may
become less relevant or disappear, while new ones may
emerge. Brazil will continue to take part in the work of
the 1540 Committee in a positive and constructive
manner.

