Mr. Suescum (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): First,
we wish thank Mr. John Holmes for his visit to
Somalia on 12 May and for his excellent report on the
humanitarian situation in Uganda. Similarly, we wish
to recognize the efforts led by Mr. Francois Loseny
Fall in Somalia and Mr. Joaquim Chissano in the areas
affected by the Lord's Resistance Army.

We note that the climate remains tense and
volatile, although the humanitarian situation shows
some signs of improving in both countries. We are glad
to hear that the citizens of Mogadishu and in the north
of Uganda are slowly returning to their homes, which
is a hopeful first step. Unfortunately, their return is

encountering many obstacles, as Mr. Holmes as told us
today. It is imperative that the international community
provide more collaboration and financial assistance to
supply, in both countries, a minimum level of
humanitarian conditions and thus successfully stabilize
the region. At the same time, it is equally imperative
that Governments eliminate all obstacles to the
effective development of humanitarian operations.
Today's report by Mr. Holmes has provided some
examples of those obstacles.

With regard to Somalia, many displaced persons
refrained from returning to areas under military control
in Mogadishu, as they have been scared off by the
recent skirmishes. As a first step towards resolving this
problem, the Government must recognize the
magnitude and nature of the humanitarian crisis. It will
also have to redouble its efforts to hold the inclusive
national reconciliation congress.

In the absence of any lasting prospect for peace,
the survivors want to avoid, at any cost, being caught
in crossfire if hostilities resume. That is
understandable, given that the tension could turn into
unrest with little difficulty. Mr. Holmes' report shows
that the outbreaks of violence continue. He gave us
examples of incidents on 12 May, which unfortunately
cut his trip to Somalia short. He also told us about the
atrocious attack, only four days later, that cost the lives
of four Ugandan soldiers in that country. This all
demonstrates the violent reality. There are also reports
of outrages against minority merchants in Mogadishu
by the municipal authorities themselves. In the context
of such daily violence, efforts for genuine
reconciliation will be few and far between.

Given that sad reality, and as a bitter epilogue to
the hostilities, there is the common denominator of
serious violations of international humanitarian law.

The most recent report of the Secretary-General
on children and armed conflict in Somalia
(S/2007/259) draws a devastating picture. In Uganda,
the reluctant involvement of children in the conflict has
even darker nuances. In addition to being direct
victims, boys and girls are hostages in conflicts that
systematically recruit them as actors. While these
practices persist, the commitment of the authorities and
the other parties involved, and those responsible for
holding them, will remain in doubt.
We wish to avail ourselves of this opportunity to
reiterate the part played by women in conflict
resolution. We call on the parties to increase the
representation of women in the negotiation process in
Juba.

It is essential to combat impunity in all these
contexts. Respect for international human rights
standards should not be negotiable. As Mrs. Louise
Arbour, the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, has pointed out, any agreement reached
between the Lord's Resistance Army and the Republic
of Uganda must be consistent with international law
and must rule out any amnesty for war crimes, crimes
against humanity, genocide and serious human rights
violations. In 2005 our heads of State were emphatic in
that respect. The United Nations also has the
responsibility to use diplomatic, humanitarian and
other appropriate peaceful means to help protect
populations from those crimes.

Finally, regarding Somalia, we reiterate our
request for the prompt and complete deployment of
African Union (AU) troops so that the Ethiopian troops
can withdraw from Somalia territory and so that the
AU troops can support Ugandan troops in the reduction
of hostilities. In Somalia as well as in Uganda, we have
seen the need for a thoroughgoing exchange among the
parties involved, for it is only through dialogue that a
lasting solution can be found in these sad conditions.
We again urge a political solution to that crisis through
the successful installation of the national reconciliation
congress in Somalia. As for Uganda, we urge that the
opportunity involved in this new round of negotiations
not be wasted.

