Mr. Mufioz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We too
wish to express our gratitude for the briefing by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Kosovo, Mr. Harri Holkeri, who has shed light on the
situation on the ground. We completely agree with the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General that
without the rule of law, without returns and without
economic development it will be impossible to fulfil
the overall mandate of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) to
promote an autonomous and substantive self-
government in Kosovo in accordance with Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999).

In our opinion, a significant event took place in
Vienna on 14 October 2003. Apart from any
interpretation of the magnitude of the results achieved
in Vienna, at least the beginning of the direct dialogue
between Pristina and Belgrade on practical questions of
mutual interest is a step that we hope will result in
tangible improvements in the daily lives of the
population.

We therefore encourage the working groups to
discuss the four fundamental areas of the programme:
energy, missing persons, the return of internally
displaced persons and transport and communications.
In this regard we would like to express our
appreciation for the active involvement of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in the
preparations for the direct dialogue.

In our opinion there continues to be some
significant progress in the transfer of non-reserved
responsibilities listed in chapter 5 of the Constitutional
Framework to the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government. We encourage this progress, but it can be
complemented with further progress in the transfer of
responsibilities given to the Special Representative, in
accordance with chapter 8 of the Constitutional
Framework.

The report also reflects limited progress in areas
such as privatization and unemployment, and greater
progress in income and customs services and in the
establishment of a range of proposals to reform and
amend fiscal policy in Kosovo during 2004. There have
been improvements in the representation of women
over the past year at the professional level and in the
public sector. There has also been progress in work in
the areas of housing and property in respect of claims
over property in Kosovo.

In spite of all these positive factors and the
progress achieved, it is regrettable that the perpetrators
of the condemnable acts of violence against the Serb
community in Kosovo, as well as those responsible for
acts of violence against the authorities of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK), have not been apprehended. We want to
condemn, as many others in this Hall have done, the
acts of violence of August 2003 that took lives and
caused casualties in Gorazdevac, Bica and the village
of Cernica. Equally grave are the growing acts of
violence against UNMIK staff who are there precisely
to support the rule of law. We believe that this
condemnation must be as vigorous and resolute as
possible and we appeal strongly for efforts to be
increased so that those guilty will not go unpunished,
because impunity is an invitation to further acts of
violence.

We appreciate measures taken by UNMIK to try
to find the perpetrators of these violent acts and bring
them to justice. We believe that any acts of violence,
any ethnic discrimination or harassment based on
ethnic grounds, runs counter to a multi-ethnic Kosovo
and is contrary to the spirit of Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999).

We are concerned that the Secretary-General's
report (S/2003/996) indicates that the level of
integration among the communities and the joint use of
public services remains limited. There have been some
gestures of support for the return process, such as the
open letter signed by leaders of the Kosovo-Albanian
population and non-Serb minorities, as well as the
resolution adopted by the Kosovo Assembly in July
2003 in this regard. It is also noteworthy that public
funds have been allocated by the Government of
Kosovo for this process.

We agree with the Special Representative that the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government, the
political entities of Kosovo and the representatives of
communities should continue to work to achieve,
within a political context, the "standards-before-status"
benchmarks.

Lastly, in addition to the dialogue process
between Belgrade and Pristina, the deepening of
dialogue between UNMIK and the Kosovo Assembly
can contribute, we believe, to the attainment of
concrete results regarding the major challenges that lie
ahead, challenges we believe must be met for the well-
being of the population.

