Mr. Alzate (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
want to thank Pakistan for its initiative in convening
today's meeting and its Minister for Foreign Affairs
for presiding over it earlier today. We also thank the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive statement.
We express our solidarity with Pakistan and our deep
sadness about the recent events there.

Terrorism is a threat to international peace and
security. That is why the international community
must intensify its efforts to fight it in a coordinated
and effective way. As we have made clear, Colombia
condemns terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
and reiterates that no motives or circumstances can
justify it.

The international community is endowed with
an ample legal framework in the matter, including 14
international treaties and four additional protocols,
as well as resolutions of the Security Council and the
General Assembly. We note the progress made towards
the universalization of that framework in recent years,
and we call on Member States to remain vigilant in
their effective implementation of those measures.

The ongoing efforts in the fight against terrorism
have highlighted the need for a more coordinated and
creative approach. Achieving that goal will require
us to address the complexities of terrorism through
international cooperation and coordination. To address
such a global phenomenon, the United Nations,
especially the General Assembly as its principal organ,
will have to act as a central axis of policy cooperation,
even as the Security Council, in the framework of its
mandate, must adopt measures to complement and
supplement international counter-terrorism activities
through its resolutions and subsidiary organs. My
country supports all efforts to avoid duplication of
effort and to promote coherency and coordination
among the Organization's various entities involved in
the fight against terrorism.

The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy is the instrument that best reflects the
consensus of the international community, and its four
pillars must therefore continue to guide a balanced
response to terrorism. Building the capacities of States
is a fundamental aspect of global counter-terrorism
activities and should serve to support the development
of internal normative frameworks. Counter-terrorism
measures must be in full accordance with the rule of
law, due process and human rights. We must continue
to provide technical assistance to States to facilitate
national capacity-building so that they can implement
their international obligations.

Colombia reiterates the importance, as a central
aspect of the fight against terrorism, of adopting
measures to protect the rights of victims and of
compensating them for the harm they have suffered.
We must continue to work to ensure that victims are
heard and that States have appropriate mechanisms for
helping them, healing them and protecting their rights.

Fighting terrorism requires us to attack its financing
sources. We believe that this should be one ofthe highest
international priorities in the struggle against terrorism.
Most sources of terrorist financing can be traced to
organized crime. In order to prevent terrorist networks
from tapping into the financial and logistical resources
that fundamental their activities, we must develop
comprehensive measures incorporating elements of
judicial instruments addressing transnational organized
cr1me.

Terrorist financing derived from crime opens
new opportunities for States to engage in effective
international cooperation in exchanging information
and intelligence. That is why we continue to work with
the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force and
the Executive Directorate of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, to which we have made consistent financial
contributions. Late this month, our country will host an
international conference to develop national strategies
for the fight against terrorism, the purpose of which is
to strengthen countries' national capacities and support
them in developing strategies.

No country is immune to terrorism, which is why
the international community must remain united in
the project to eliminate the scourge of terrorism in a
comprehensive way. Colombia will continue to work
bilaterally, regionally and multilaterally to achieve
tangible results in the fight against terrorism.

