Mr. Zannier: The report that the Council has
before it today (8/2008/692) describes in detail the
activities of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) for the period 26 June to
31 October 2008.

The overall security situation has remained calm
and stable throughout that time. However, the political
situation and the institutional landscape remain
complex. I first addressed the Council just over a
month after my arrival in Kosovo (see S/PV.5944).
Since then, I have had the opportunity to gain a more
nuanced reading of the situation on the ground.

Kosovo is undergoing a period of transition and
adaptation to the new circumstances created by its
declaration of independence on 17 February and the
subsequent entry into force of its constitution. In fact,
that transition is proving to be more complex than
many observers expected. Against the expectation that
Kosovo would be recognized quickly by a large
number of United Nations Member States, in fact, the
pace of recognition slackened over the summer and it
has now reached the number of 52.

The slower than predicted process of recognition
is hampering Kosovo's ability to forge ties with
external actors, obtain membership of international
organizations and reinforce the institutions of self-
government. Nevertheless, Kosovo expects to become
08-6204]
a member of the International Monetary Fund and the
World Bank next year.

Assisted by many of the United Nations Member
States that have recognized Kosovo, the Government,
the presidency and the Assembly have continued to
consolidate their control and authority over Kosovo's
institutions. In any case, it has been encouraging that
the overall atmosphere in Kosovo was generally calm
throughout the summer, that there have been no major
security incidents and that a series of minor problems
have been managed and contained by low-level
intervention.

As far as UNMIK is concerned, it is now entering
a new phase of its nine-year existence. In his report of
12 June (S/2008/354), the Secretary-General indicated
to the Council his intention to reconfigure the
international civil presence in Kosovo, since basic
consent to direct administration by UNMIK has, in
practice, disappeared.

UNMIK has since undertaken a thorough review
of its size and functions, in order to be able to operate
in the most appropriate way in this environment of
change. We need to concentrate on the fields where we
can still make a difference for good, rather than
attempt to continue functions that are neither relevant
nor needed.

UNMIK's role is becoming much more political.
For example, it is providing an interface for the process
of dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina. Since it has
not yet been possible to establish conditions for the
two sides to talk to each other, UNMIK has a role as an
interlocutor for both, although each side interprets that
role in a different way.

I have visited Belgrade several times during the
reporting period and seen some progress towards
resolving some very controversial issues. I consider
particularly important the recent reopening of the
courthouse in northern Mitrovica, which had not
functioned since the public disturbances there in
March. That step, in its initial phase, with the court
being operated by UNMIK under resolution 1244
(1999), appears to be acceptable to both Belgrade and
Pristina.

Complex negotiations are continuing on seeking
agreement on the next phases, with the objective of
fully normalizing the operation of the court. However,
those negotiations are proving very difficult, especially
08-62041
on issues such as the future jurisdiction of the court
once there has been a transition.

I urge all parties to continue acting responsibly
and constructively and to accept the current transitional
arrangements until those issues are resolved. If we can
build up trust and cooperation through the constructive
engagement of all sides, there is hope for progress in
other areas. Maintaining the momentum requires the
good faith and the necessary political will of all
concerned.

I would now like to say something about how
UNMIK is adapting in order to maintain its relevance
and usefulness in Kosovo in implementing resolution
1244 (1999). We have planned the process in three
phases. The first phase is almost complete. It is
intended to enhance the political and diplomatic
elements of the Mission, joining the residual elements
of the civil administration with political affairs and
with more modest adjustments to the public
information office and other departments. The plan
during that phase was based on the premise that,
although resolution 1244 (1999) remains in force and
still provides a mandate, recent actions by Kosovo's
institutions have made it no longer possible or practical
for UNMIK to function as an administrator. As a result,
we are reorienting our field presence to concentrate on
areas occupied by non-Albanian communities, with a
mandate to monitor the interests of those communities
and retain a supporting and mediation role.

In my previous address to the Council, I indicated
the intention to enhance our interaction with the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) pillar. I have since made the explicit
suggestion at the OSCE Permanent Council in Vienna
for the OSCE to consider strengthening and focusing
its activity in Kosovo. We are now taking steps to
better integrate our common efforts, especially at the
field level, in the spirit of resolution 1244 (1999) and
in a status-neutral mode.

The next phase, which involves essentially the
administration and support services internal to the
Mission, cannot be completed until reconfiguration in
the area of the rule of law is under way, because the
size of the support services depends on the total size of
the Mission. Our broad target is a reduction in staff of
approximately 70 per cent, including the rule of law
elements, but that will not be achieved until all three
phases are complete. For now, UNMIK remains the
3
principal international guarantor of the rule of law in
Kosovo.

The Council is aware of the European Union's
willingness to launch its own rule of law mission in
Kosovo within the framework provided by resolution
1244 (1999). European Union Rule of Law Mission
Kosovo (EULEX) staff are now deploying at an
increasingly accelerated rate. Once EULEX has
deployed throughout Kosovo, under the umbrella of the
United Nations, in the police, justice and customs
sectors, UNMIK will review its own presence
accordingly.

The report presented by the Secretary-General
describes the conditions under which EULEX is to be
deployed and the acceleration of UNMIK's
reconfiguration that that will entail. The report also
describes the results of the dialogue with Belgrade
mandated by the Secretary-General's letter of 12 June
(S/2008/354, annex I). Those arrangements, which
have been accepted by the Serbian Government, will
largely translate into a more focused dialogue between
the sides to address the issues identified in the six
areas. In view of the strong objections by the Pristina
authorities to those temporary arrangements and taking
into account an alternative four-point plan put forward
by them, the Secretary-General has asked me to
reassure the authorities in Pristina that implementation
will proceed on the basis of close cooperation and
coordination.

Before concluding, I would like to offer a
personal observation. Nearly a decade after the end of
the conflict in this region, Kosovo fundamentally
remains an ethnically segregated society. Although the
authorities in Pristina are firmly committed to a multi-
ethnic society, including on the basis of their
constitution, Kosovans - Albanians and Serbs - live
apart, in parallel worlds. To a certain extent this
happens peacefully, but the potential for conflict is
always there, and recently, we have seen an
intensification of small incidents in the north.

Although the questions regarding Kosovo's status
contribute to this situation, the international
community should redouble its efforts to promote
better conditions for safe and sustainable returns,
which are currently at the lowest level since 2000, and
for unimpeded freedom of movement throughout
Kosovo for all communities. As we look for practical
solutions through the ongoing process of dialogue - a
process requiring great patience, persistence and good
will - I will continue to be guided by the basic
principles of inclusion, integration and protection of
the most vulnerable elements of Kosovo society.

In conclusion, let me say that UNMIK has
constantly adapted itself to change, but the Mission has
always sought to carry out its mandate under Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999). That mandate has to
be interpreted in the light of events. We are no longer
engaged in relief work, for example, and have not been
for a long time. By focusing on the fields where there
is still some room for intervention and where we can
still make a difference, UNMIK can best discharge its
responsibilities to the Security Council under its
mandate.

