The President: I shall now make a very brief
statement in my capacity as the representative
of Sweden.

I should like to thank the briefers and to honour the
presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Somalia
and the representative of civil society, Ms. Dirie.

I would like first to convey our condolences to the
Government of Somalia and the Government of Kenya,
as well as to the victims' families, for the deplorable
terrorist attacks over the past several days.

Sweden welcomes the successful electoral process,
and we commend the Somali security forces and the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) for
having provided a secure environment in which the
process could take place. The new Parliament is
inclusive: 25 per cent of parliamentarians are women
and 16 per cent are under 35-years-old, with half of its
members elected for the first time. It is now important
that there be no further delays and that the presidential
election be held on 8 February, as scheduled, so
that a Government can be formed to take peace and
State-building efforts forward.

Building a better future for Somalia should benefit
from the input of all Somalis. The presence in the
Chamber today of Ms. Asha Gelle Dirie is testimony
to a vibrant civil society. We hope that the increased
representation of women and youth now seen in
Parliament will be replicated at every level in the
peace and State-building effort. I want to congratulate
Ms. Gelle on her leadership in Somalia. 1 think she is
breaking new ground in a way that could also serve as a
model for other countries beyond Somalia.

The report (S/2016/1032) before us today also
highlights a severe humanitarian situation, which
is likely to worsen. Five million people are already
suffering from acute food shortages. I call in this open
Chamber on all donors to seek in their pockets funds
and assistance for the humanitarian response plan and
call on Somali authorities to facilitate humanitarian
access in order to prevent humanitarian disaster.

Finally, we believe that AMISOM. remains
crucially important for the stabilization of Somalia.
We commend the troop-contributing countries and
their soldiers and pay tribute to their efforts and
sacrifice. Sweden and the European Union are and
remain committed to supporting AMISOM, both
financially and politically, but funding gaps must be
dealt with. We join the African Union in calling on
the international community at large to assist, while
recognizing the need to find more sustainable means.
However, achieving sustainable peace and stabilization
goes beyond AMISOM; the development of a credible
and capable Somali national security sector must be a
priority within a well-coordinated and comprehensive
approach to security.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I have the pleasure to give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Somalia.

