Mr. N esho (Albania): I would like to congratulate
you, Sir, on your excellent leadership and the strong
commitment that you have shown as the President of
the Security Council this month. The Albanian
Government highly appreciates the two missions of the
Security Council to Kosovo headed by you, which have
been successful and have assisted in the policy of the
international community for peace and stability in the
region.

On 12 June 1999, the first international
peacekeeping troops of the Kosovo Force (KFOR)
were deployed in Kosovo, together with the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). Since then, the Albanian Government has
followed with great attention and interest the
developments in Kosovo. We think that there has been
a lot of progress in Kosovo, which is reflected in the
promotion of the democratization process, the return of
refugees, improved security, economic reconstruction
and other equally important achievements. On this
occasion, we would like to commend the great work of
UNMIK and KFOR and stand ready to support it and to
make our own contribution to this process.

The holding of the first-ever free municipal
elections in the history of Kosovo was a very
successful undertaking of the international community
and the political forces of Kosovo. Those elections
testified to the fact that the Albanians of Kosovo are
fully determined to embrace democratic values and
standards. With these elections, Kosovo undertook an
important step towards building institutions and the
democratic process.

The Albanian Government fully supports the
holding of general elections in Kosovo. These elections
will create the central institutions and increase the
responsibility of the Kosovar Albanians in the process
of self-governance. The United Nations and the
political forces in Kosovo should work together in
preparing the appropriate steps which will contribute to
building confidence and the achievement of a multi-
ethnic Kosovo.

First, efforts should be stepped up to resolve the
issue of missing persons and the release of all
prisoners, a problem that continues to be an impeding
factor against the process of reconciliation among the
ethnic groups in Kosovo.

Secondly, the international community and the
Belgrade regime should try to influence the Serb
community in Mitrovica to abandon the policy of
cantonization and the isolation of Mitrovica. Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999) aims at creating a free
and democratic society in Kosovo in which all
members are free and equal. The solution to the
problem of Mitrovica will not only eradicate a source
of tension and conflict, but also serve to create a
feeling of responsibility among the Albanians of
Kosovo for respecting all of the democratic rules and
for living in equal co-existence with the other ethnic
groups. We welcome the recommendation of the
Security Council mission regarding the situation in
Mitrovica on the need for multi-ethnic initiatives in the
social, economic and religious areas with the objective
of rebuilding confidence between the communities, in
particular in the field of economic development.

Thirdly, in order to achieve the necessary
confidence and reconciliation in Kosovo, the Albanians
should work further to respect the rights of the
minorities. At the same time, the minorities, in
particular the Serb minority, should understand that
only by participating in the process of democratic
institution-building and in the upcoming general
elections will they contribute to the goal of a multi-
ethnic Kosovo.

We think that there can be no discussion on the
final status of Kosovo without having in place the
central institutions, including the Government and the
Assembly of Kosovo. Only these bodies will have the
legitimate right to negotiate with the international
community on this very important issue. The will of
the people of Kosovo should be respected as a
fundamental element of the right to self-determination.

We support the continued presence of UNMIK
and KFOR in Kosovo, which are guarantees for
preserving peace and stability there. Evaluating the
situation and the great efforts of the United Nations to
achieve its goals, we believe it important that this
Organization remain in Kosovo as a guarantor of the
process in the future. As a neighbouring country,
Albania would like to establish broad cooperation with
Kosovo with the objective of Kosovo's becoming a
model for the entire region. It is in this context that the
Albanian Government has proposed and asked for
financial assistance to the structures of the Stability
Pact for the reconstruction of the road from Durres to
Pristina.
The issue of Kosovo is as old as traditional
European policy towards the Balkans - a policy of
creating zones of influence and of solving the problem
by the imposition of force and dominance - embodied
in international treaties and agreements over the past
two centuries. The tendency of some countries today to
solve the issue in the traditional way, without
respecting the new reality in the Balkans, will surely
provoke insecurity and tension and keep the region
unstable. We think that only the continuation of the
democratic process and the integration of Kosovo into
the European Union is the right perspective for peace
and stability in the Balkans. We believe that the
contribution of the international community in Kosovo
will soon yield the necessary result of strengthening
peace and stability in the region. This process will
always be easier and fair when the will of the people
corresponds with the interests of the international
community.

