Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome you, Sir, as President of the
Security Council, and we thank you for taking the
initiative to convene today's meeting. We also thank
Mr. Fedotov and Mrs. Ukonga for their briefings.

We share the concerns about the expansion of
international criminal groups' activities, including
on the high seas. Sadly, we have failed to halt the
worsening spiral of illegal migration, while the scale
of the illicit trade in arms and drugs has grown and
human trafficking continues. We are encountering
threats of piracy and robbery at sea in many regions
today. The Russian Federation is especially concerned
about recent robberies of commercial vessels involving
hostage-taking of Russian crew members.

Establishing a systematic approach to preventing
and eliminating complex criminal activity is not an easy
task. We welcome the efforts in that regard ofa number
of United Nations mechanisms that have frequently
proved effective, including the regular sessions of
the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime
and the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal
Justice, based in Vienna. The General Assembly and its
Third Committee continue to focus on various aspects
of countering illegal activity. There is also successful
cooperation in regional formats, particularly those
such as the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of
Somalia, the Gulf of Guinea Commission, the Maritime
Forum of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
and the East Asia Summit on Maritime Security and
Cooperation. The United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime is actively involved, primarily by providing
interested States with specialized technical assistance
at their request. We welcome and support such efforts.

The Russian Federation has traditionally advocated
strengthening the central coordinating role of the
United Nations in fighting crime, and we believe it is
essential to establish under the auspices of the United
Nations a universal, intergovernmental coordination
mechanism with a mandate for broad functions and
geographic scope that is independent of the Contact
Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia and other
regional forums that combat maritime piracy and crime.
Establishing such a specialized structure would make it
significantly easier to resolve a number of issues in the
fight against new challenges and threats at sea.

In the context of such threats, the Council naturally
will not remain on the sidelines. It has frequently
discussed specific aspects of piracy and robbery at
sea in various regions of the world, as well as human
trafficking in situations of armed conflict. Needless to
say, it has also given major attention to the ongoing close
links between armed conflicts, terrorism and the various
forms of transnational organized crime, including illicit
trafficking in weapons, drugs and cultural heritage
objects as well as illegal migration. The Security
Council has developed a serious legal foundation in all
those areas through its adoption of specific resolutions
and presidential statements. However, there are areas
where its power and prerogatives are not so clear. A
lot of questions would be asked if the Security Council
took it upon itself to regulate illegal, unreported and
unregulated fishing, or the degradation of the maritime
environment, for instance. Under the Charter of the
United Nations, the Council's job is to respond as
effectively, situationally and efficiently as possible to
crises that threaten international peace and security.

That said, we reaffirm our determination to
continue to contribute to expanding international
cooperation on law enforcement in order to eliminate
urgent threats posed by transnational organized crime.

