The President (spoke in Spanish): I would like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Armenia, Canada, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Egypt, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Japan, Mali,
Mexico, New Zealand, Norway, Peru, Republic of
Korea, Syrian Arab Republic, Sierra Leone, South
Africa, Switzerland, Ukraine and Zimbabwe, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion, without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Nobuyasu Abe, Under-Secretary-
General for Disarmament Affairs.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Nobuyasu Abe to take a seat at the
Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General, entitled "Small arms",
document S/2003/1217.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I wish to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than five minutes,
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate the texts in writing and to
deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.

As a measure to optimize the use of our time, in
order to allow as many delegations to take the floor as
possible, I will not individually invite speakers to take
seats at the table, and invite them to resume their seats
on the side. When a speaker is taking the floor, the
conference officer will seek the next speaker on the list
at the table. I hope that I have your understanding
regarding those changes, given the fact that there are
15 speakers in the Council and on this occasion 20 or
21 speakers under rule 37.

I now call on Mr. Nobuyasu Abe, Under-
Secretary-General for Disarmament Affairs, to
introduce the report of the Secretary-General. I give
him the floor.


