Mr. Jenie (Indonesia): It is a pleasure for me to
be here in the Security Council today to make a
contribution to the Council's consideration of the
agenda item, "Justice and the rule of law: the United
Nations role". Before I go any further, however, I
would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this
month of October, and to pledge the full support of the
delegation of Indonesia.

My delegation takes note of the report of the
Secretary-General on this subject (S/2004/616). None
of us could disagree that justice and the rule of law are
vital elements for the functioning of States. They are
important for creating stability, peace and democracy,
and their establishment is an essential element, not
only in peacekeeping operations or transitional
societies, but in all societies. Justice and the rule of law
are important to every human being.

Indonesia believes that, in providing support for
the rebuilding of justice and the rule of law in a
transitional society, we in the international community
must begin with the recognition of differences in the
national context. If a peacekeeping mission is to
succeed, its actions, based on justice and rule of law,
must relate to, and be grounded in, the national
situation. As the Secretary-General has aptly put it, the
role of the United Nations and the international
community should be solidarity, not substitution. As he
also said in his report, we must be careful to avoid
importing foreign models that may not be of any help
to the local situation.

The international community and the United
Nations need to redouble their efforts to assist Member
States in fulfilling the objectives of justice and the rule
of law. That should be done in cooperation with
Member States, with the United Nations identifying
those areas in which it can render support. For
example, the United Nations can play a more active
role in enhancing a general awareness and
understanding of internationally agreed principles that
are essential to the realization of justice and the rule of
law. Such an initiative can be realized by, inter alia,
making information widely available to legal
practitioners responsible for justice and the rule of law.

The United Nations can further assist by
providing training in Member States to legal personnel
who are fulfilling their responsibilities in the area of
justice and the rule of law. Whatever initiatives are
taken by the United Nations, it is important to bear in
mind that the objective is to strengthen, not undermine,
the national legal process.

In this connection, my delegation believes that
any proposals for strengthening United Nations support
for transitional justice and the rule of law in any
society must be made with a view to promoting and
abiding by the principles enshrined in the United
Nations Charter and international law.

Some legal scholars have drawn attention to the
variety of legal mechanisms available today for
addressing this subject. Another important process, as
recognized in the report, is the use of truth and
reconciliation commissions, an instrument that has
been helpful to the recovery process in some post-
conflict societies. Although it is not a substitute for the
judicial process, we should not underestimate its
contributions.

While the Secretary-General is eloquent in his
analysis and recommendations, he indicates in his
report that he will be instructing the Executive
Committee on Peace and Security with regard to a
proposal for further action on the issues he has
identified. In our view, the issues involved here might
require a higher level of executive attention than that
Committee can provide. Caution must be exercised,
however, so that any such new structure is in line with
the reform process of the Organization and does not
impose an unnecessary burden on its programme
budget.

