Mr. Grima (Malta): At the outset, I would like to
express my appreciation to the Jordanian presidency of
the Security Council for its leadership in addressing
an issue to which my Government attaches particular
importance. Malta also aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier on behalf of the European Union.

Violent extremism is not a new phenomenon, but
the recent dramatic surge in extreme Violent acts by
individuals and groups has thrust the issue to the top
of the international agenda. For that reason, today's
debate provides a most welcome opportunity to discuss
the issue from a youth perspective and share initiatives
and best practices with one another.

Technological progress and the modern media have
ensured that the Violent extremist narrative can have a
virtually global reach. No longer confined to specific
countries or regions, this phenomenon is fast becoming
one of the most pressing contemporary challenges.
More and more violent extremists and radicals turn
to modern media to spread their extremist messages.
More technologically savvy young people therefore
naturally find themselves at greater risk of this threat.
By the same token, however, through good use of the
media, young people have a particular role to play in
countering the extremist narrative and rejecting it.

Violent extremism feeds on people's desperation.
Young people, often experiencing isolation, exclusion
and deprivation, are particularly vulnerable to the
designs of extremist groups or individuals who seek
to exploit their vulnerabilities, playing on their
anxieties and insecurity. A better understanding of the
needs, aspirations and circumstances of young people
therefore becomes an essential tool for addressing that
challenge. More inclusive, tolerant societies, in which
no one - especially young people - feels left behind
or marginalized, are just as important. That requires
a participatory approach in which young people feel
part of the society to which they belong by also actively
contributing to its socioeconomic development.

There is perhaps no better way to achieve this
than by empowering our younger generation through
education, including education in tolerance and
non-discrimination. Education is the key to providing
young people with the knowledge and skills that will
ultimately empower them to reject violent extremism.
That has always been the View of my Government and
is the underlying factor in the national youth policy
framework that we have adopted for the period 2015
to 2020. The framework addresses this phenomenon
first by supporting and encouraging young people
in fulfilling their potential and aspirations while
addressing their needs and concerns, and secondly
by upporting young people as active and responsible
citizens who fully participate in and contribute to the
social, economic and cultural life of their nation and
Europe.

Malta has an array of programmes and initiatives
aimed at empowering young people and promoting
and supporting the social inclusion of minorities,
cultural, religious or ethnic, as well as that of young
people with fewer opportunities. The programmes
range from national initiatives to others that are
implemented in conjunction with the European Union
and other international partners. They aim to promote
integration, awareness and tolerance among the various
sectors of Maltese society, including refugees and
migrants who have obtained subsidiary protection. The
Government implements them through partnerships
with non- governmental organizations and the European
Refugee Fund. It is important that young people be
provided with avenues in which to channel their energy,
enthusiasm and talent. The performing arts can make
an important contribution to inter-cultural dialogue and
are one of the tools we use to facilitate social cohesion
and interaction between different segments of society.

Malta believes that one effective way to counter
violent extremism is by strengthening the rule of law
and the judiciary in States. Addressing root causes is
crucial, and we are firmly convinced that effective
counter-extremism strategies should be linked to
promoting and protecting human rights and sustainable
development. Malta is the proud host of the International
Institute on Justice and the Rule of Law, established
in June of last year. One of the objectives behind its
creation is countering violent extremism through the
rule of law and criminal justice by providing rule-of-
law-based training to lawmakers, police, prosecutors,
judges, corrections officials and other justice-sector
stakeholders. Given its geographic location, the
Institute is paying particular attention to supporting
countries in transition in North, West and East Africa
and the Middle East. We believe that such initiatives
could serve as a regional catalyst to counter terrorism,
radicalization and Violent extremism among young
people as well.

