Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): In order to save time, I shall deliver an
abridged version of my statement, which will appear in
full on our Mission website.

In the face of asymmetrical threats, it is clear that
United Nations troopsdo not have the vocation to fight
terrorist organizations. Nevertheless, they must be able
to protect themselves. How can they do that? I would
like to make four points on that subject.

First, we must focus on training. It is absolutely
essential for United Nations forces to be appropriately
trained before deployment. Likewise, appropriate
equipment is absolutely indispensable. I note in that
regard that Belgium will pursue training efforts in the
framework of training-of-trainers courses.

My second remark concerns the need to recognize
the importance of intelligence as a factor in ensuring
the effective deployment of the Blue Helmets. In the
context of a deteriorated situation, it is essential to make
use of improved intelligence concerning the situation
on the ground. The progress made in that area needs to
be taken forward.

Thirdly, it is essential to ensure that we enjoy the
support of the local population. We must therefore
create a network of confidence-based relations among

the population. Furthermore, it is of course important
to ensure that the troops deployed have the linguistic
competence to ensure the best interaction possible with
the local population.

My fourth and final point touches on peacekeeping
operation mandates. Clear mandates - sequenced
according to priority, better aligned with the consistent
efforts of the United Nations system on the ground, and
the suject of consultations with the troop-contributing
countries - are absolutely crucial. In that framework,
it would also be interesting to consider the possibility
of redesigning mandates in the light of the global or
regional context of asymmetrical threats.

The three strategic reviews of peacekeeping
operations in 2015 all stressed the importance ofconflict
prevention. That finding is even more relevant today.

