Mr. Cardi (Italy): Italy condemns in the strongest
terms the latest missile test conducted by the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea. This latest
provocation confirms once again that the North Korean
regime continues to pursue its nuclear and ballistic
missile programmes in flagrant violation of Security
Council resolutions, and thus in open defiance of the
international community.

The latest launch, having an intercontinental range,
is particularly worrisome. Equally worrisome is the
fact that the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
claimed to have reached its objective of acquiring
intercontinental ballistic missile capacity. The
advancement of missile and nuclear capabilities by the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea is undermining
our collective security.

The Democratic People's Republic of Korea's
escalation and destabilizing activities pose a clear,
serious and growing threat to international security
and the global non-proliferation regime. We call on
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to take
immediate steps to abandon its provocative, illegal and
self-isolating policies, put a verifiable and irreversible
stop to its missile and nuclear programmes, and embark
on a different path. That objective continues to require
a concerted multilateral effort by the international
community to maintain the high level of pressure on
the North Korean regime.

In that context, Italy stands ready to work
with all relevant stakeholders and members of the
Council in order to devise additional and significant
restrictive measures. In that endeavour, maintaining
the Security Council's unity of purpose will be crucial.
We must also not forget that the civilian population of
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea continues to
be highly vulnerable as a consequence of the regime's
policies. We must therefore ensure, as we have in the
past, that new restrictive measures do not have any
negative unintended consequences for the humanitarian
situation in the country. The ultimate objective of the
pressure must continue to be a change in behaviour of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, framing a path
towards the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula
and the achievement of a peaceful and comprehensive
diplomatic solution through dialogue.

The full and effective implementation of relevant
Security Council resolutions by the whole United
Nations membership continues to be Italy's priority
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1718 (2006). Maintaining an open channel
for dialogue with Member States, specifically through
regional outreach meetings, is proving to be an effective
way to engage the membership and facilitate national
efforts to enforce the sanctions regime that is in place.

In that respect, I wish to point out that the rate
of submission of national implementation reports
has steadily increased. As of today, the Committee
has received 94 national implementation reports on
resolution 2270 (2016) and 70 on resolution 2321 (2016).
Moreover, all national reports under resolution 2321
(2016), the latest adopted, have been received in the past
four months, showing a higher submission rate than
under previous resolution regarding the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea. While encouraging, that is
still not sufficient. Let me therefore, as Chair of the
1718 Sanctions Committee, make an urgent appeal to
all Member States to continue to provide the necessary
attention to this urgent matter.

