Mr. Noriega (United States of America): The
United States appreciates Argentina's initiative to focus
the Council's attention on Haiti. The United States stands
committed to our collective effort to improve stability,
strengthen the rule of law, consolidate representative
democracy through elections and lay the foundation for
long-term economic recovery and growth in Haiti. The
international community has responded to the crisis in
Haiti with a coordinated effort to establish security and
promote political reconciliation. I wish to highlight the
contributions of Brazil, Argentina and other western
hemisphere countries to this important and worthy
effort.

As the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH) approaches its fully authorized
strength, it has demonstrated that it has the will and the
wherewithal to improve the security conditions of the
Haitian people, consistent with its mandate. Since it
intensified such operations in December to confront
gang activities and to defend the rule of law in the
capital city, Port-au-Prince, MINUSTAH has made
significant, important progress in augmenting security
in the Haitian capital's most impoverished
neighbourhoods.

We call upon the international community and the
interim Government to work in concert on a
comprehensive programme to disarm, demobilize and
reintegrate into productive society all irregular forces
and irregular armed groups in Haiti. Also, we
encourage the international community and the interim
Government to focus on building an effective civilian
police force to improve security and to protect the
rights, lives and property of all Haitians.

Security and development are inseparable. The
improved security climate offers the opportunity to
deliver on our collective commitment to helping to
bring real political and economic recovery and growth
to Haiti. At the World Bank donor's conference last
July in Washington, DC, the international community
pledged more than $1 billion to help Haiti. The United
States is delivering on its commitment to Haiti,
spending over $113 million on economic development,
health care, jobs and disaster relief in 2004, which
accounts for approximately half of the international
community's donations to Haiti for that year. We
expect to spend well over $150 million in Haiti during
the course of this year.

It is important to remember that pledges alone
will not improve Haiti's conditions. We must work to
overcome the bureaucratic hurdles in each of our
Governments and institutions to disburse the funds that
we pledged at last year's conference. Haitian
authorities should redouble their efforts to identify
concrete projects and to accept appropriate technical
advisors and support to implement those programmes
in an urgent fashion. Similarly, we call upon donors to
intensify their efforts to remove any bureaucratic
hurdles to projects that would improve the lot of
average Haitians today and give them precious hope
for the future.

We support efforts by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and MINUSTAH, consistent
with the mandate provided in Security Council
resolutions 1542 (2004) and 1576 (2004), to join with
other United Nations organs, the international financial
institutions and Member States to assist the interim
Government of Haiti in designing and implementing
those urgent, high-impact projects for the recovery and
development of Haiti.

During his visit to Haiti last month, Secretary of
State Colin Powell consulted with Haitian authorities
and representatives of civil society about the need for a
broad national dialogue in Haiti. We believe that any
party in Haiti that accepts democratic principles and
rejects the path of violence should have a place at the
table in such a dialogue. We commend MINUSTAH's
efforts in support of that process.

Such a dialogue represents an important step
towards inclusive, free and fair elections this fall and
national reconciliation in the long run. My Government
is pleased to support the work of the Organization of
American States (OAS) and the United Nations in
helping Haiti to prepare for those elections. The United
States has contributed some $9 million to that effort
through the OAS and another $1.25 million through
our bilateral assistance programmes. We understand
that the election effort will require substantial
additional funds for voter education, infrastructure
improvements and security. To ensure successful
elections, we strongly encourage donors to give
generously to that effort.

In conclusion, those of us who are fortunate
enough to have persons of Haitian origin in our
communities know them to be extraordinarily talented
and industrious. For that reason, if we meet our
commitment to working together to strengthen a
Government that empowers and protects all citizens of
Haiti, there is good reason to be hopeful about Haiti's
future.

