Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
thank the Azerbaijani presidency of the Security Council
for convening this open debate on the working methods
of the Security Council and for providing a very useful
concept paper to guide our discussions (S/2013/6l3, annex). This open debate has become an established
annual tradition. It is a good tradition, since it allows
non-members of the Council to share their views on
improving the working methods of the Council.

This debate can feed the discussions in the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Matters. Since the beginning of the
year, the Luxembourg has actively contributed to the
Working Group, which is chaired with competence and
commitment by Ambassador Perceval of Argentina. I
thank my colleague and her team for their efforts to
improve the efficiency and enhance the transparency of
the work of the Council.

Thanks to these efforts, this year we have adopted
presidential notes S/2013/515 and S/2013/630 to
strengthen exchanges and dialogue with non-member
States, in particular countries that contribute troops
and police to peacekeeping missions. The two notes
strengthen the provisions of note 8/2010/507. They give
the body to the commitment undertaken by our Heads of
State and Government on participation, accountability
and transparency at the World Summit of 2005.

Tangible progress has been made in recent years.
I note the increased use of new technologies, such
as video-teleconferencing, the improvement of the
Security Council web site, the more frequent resort
to Arria Formula meetings and interactive informal
dialogues, for example to address issues related to
the International Criminal Court. Upon accession to
Security Council membership, Luxembourg also took
stock of the efforts made to consult with newly elected
members about the leadership of subsidiary bodies. We
hope that this process will be made more inclusive in
the future, on the basis of note S/2013/937, adopted in
December 2012.

In our view, however, there is still room to improve
the working methods of the Council, particularly in
five areas.

First, the Peacebuilding Commission can provide
additional information useful in situations of transition
and thereby facilitate informed decision-making by
the Council. I would therefore reiterate our suggestion
that the chairs of the Commission's country-specific
configurations to participate, on a case-by-case basis,
in the informal consultations of the Council.

Secondly, we must continue to ensure the best
possible interaction between the Security Council
and regional and subregional organizations, such as
the African Union, in the context of crisis prevention.
The Council should seek to make the best use of the
expertise available to these organizations and other
stakeholders, such as the European Union.

Thirdly, the Security Council should further
employ the means at its disposal to prevent conflicts.
We of course welcome the more regular holding, since
the beginning of the year, of meetings summarizing
the month's work, which allows us not only to draw
lessons from the concluding month but also to look into
situations that could potentially require the Council's
attention in future. Nevertheless, we are convinced that
greater recourse to horizon-scanning briefings from
the Secretariat will make it possible for the Council
to more resolutely take a preventive approach and,
ultimately, to better assume its responsibilities.

Fourthly, the Security Council would benefit from
further utilizing the various sources of information
available in the United Nations system. The light shed
by special committees on the prevention of genocide
and the responsibility to protect could be useful when
populations are at risk of mass atrocities. The regular
contributions of the Special Representatives on children
and armed conflict and on combating sexual violence
in armed conflict also seem to us to be important.

Lastly, we support the proposals and considerations
under way for the right of the veto not be used to block
a decision by the Council to prevent or halt genocide,
war crimes and crimes against humanity. In our View,
such progress would make it possible to strengthen the
Council's credibility and its ability to act.

In conclusion, I would like in advance to thank the
many Member States that will put forward proposals
in the course of this open debate. In particular, I
am grateful for the efforts of our colleagues in the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group,
which, in line with the work of the group of five small
nations, are committed to strengthen the responsibility,
coherence and transparency of the Security Council. We
count on everyone's suggestions to help the Council to
rise to the level of the task that the Member States have
conferred upon it by virtue of the Charter of the United
Nations, namely, to take the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security
and to act on behalf of Members to carry out the
duties incumbent upon the Council by virtue of that
responsibility.

