Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express our appreciation to the
Indian presidency of the Council for organizing this
debate on the important issue of the "Maintenance of
international peace and security: piracy", as well as to
thank the Deputy Secretary-General for his valuable
contribution.

We would like to align ourselves with the statement
to be made later by the representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

There is no doubt that the grave threat posed by acts
of piracy and armed robbery at sea to the major maritime
routes of the world - particularly in the Gulf of Aden,
off the coast of Somalia, in the Gulf of Guinea and in
the western Indian Ocean, as well as the hostage-taking
associated with such acts - causes serious security,
economic and humanitarian repercussions that demand
that the international community redouble its efforts to
combat those acts, especially by addressing their root
causes.

In that regard, Egypt stresses the importance of
sharing lessons learned and best practices in combating
piracy, taking into account their different political and
security considerations, as well as the various operating
methods adopted by piracy networks from one region
to another. In that context - whereas piracy networks
operating in the Gulf of Aden and off the coast of
Somalia exploited the absence of State authority in
Somalia for two decades so as to make that country
a base from which to launch attacks, hijack ships and
take seafarers hostage for ransom - acts of piracy and
armed robbery in the Gulf of Guinea are focused on
seizing cargo aboard vessels transiting the area. The
different objectives and operating methods of criminal
piracy networks therefore clearly demand different
approaches to suppressing them.

Nevertheless, the key factors for success in
combating acts of piracy, wherever they occur, include
helping to build national counter-piracy capacities;
enhancing cooperation and information-sharing at
the regional level; promoting the maritime industry's
commitment to following best practices in high-risk
areas; and fighting impunity by ensuring that suspected
pirates and their leaders and financiers are prosecuted,
as well as by dismantling the illicit funding and
financial flows related to piracy.

While acts of piracy and armed robbery at sea
pose threats to international trade and international
peace and security in general, such acts have a more
profound impact on African countries, as they affect
stability, economic growth and development in Africa.
In that respect, Egypt welcomes the steps taken by the
States of the Gulf of Guinea to suppress acts of piracy,
including by conductingjoint patrols. Egypt emphasizes
the importance of developing a regional anti-piracy
strategy, as outlined in resolution 2039 (2012), and calls
for enhancing the international community's assistance
in building national and regional maritime capabilities.

Among other things, piracy and armed robbery off
the coast of Somalia are the result ofthe absence of State
authority and the lack of development that prevailed
in that country for two decades. Despite the success
of the international community's efforts to reduce the
number of successful attacks, maritime piracy cannot
be eliminated by military means alone; those must be
part of a comprehensive strategy aimed at addressing
the root causes of piracy in all its political, security,
economic and humanitarian dimensions.

In that context, Egypt - as a member of the
Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia
and the Contact Group's Trust Fund Board, as
well as through its chairmanship of the Contact
Group's Working Group 4 - has always stressed the
importance of a comprehensive approach on the part of
the international community in addressing piracy off
the coast of Somalia, one that builds on the progress
made in Somalia's security and political situation by
providing more resources to support development and
reconstruction in order to create job opportunities for
Somali youth and thereby end the risk of becoming
involved in piracy networks.

Egypt is confident that the new political regime in
Somalia, under the leadership ofPresident Hassan Sheikh
Mahmoud, will lead to further positive developments
in strengthening stability and development in the
country. Egypt reiterates its commitment to supporting
the Somali Government, including through capacity-
building in the fields of education and health, as well
as by training security forces, the army and the coast
guard.

Egypt reaffirms that the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea defines the legal framework for
combating piracy. We would also like to underscore the
importance of all States upholding their obligations and
responsibilities under the Convention with regard to the
prosecution of suspected pirates. Egypt attaches great
importance to the proper definition of the high risk
area, where the risk of piracy abounds, and emphasizes
that the definition should be based on clear and well-
defined criteria, so that the resources allocated for
counter-piracy measures can be more effectively used
by focusing on the areas where actual incidents of
piracy take place.

Finally, Egypt emphasizes the importance of
establishing regulations for the deployment of privately
contracted armed security personnel on commercial
ships. Putting in place such regulations should be
done through an open consultative process, with the
participation of all parties, particularly the International
Maritime Organization.

As the representative of Saudi Arabia said a few
moments ago, my delegation also finds it difficult to
understand why the Council is discussing an issue such
as piracy while it remains silent with regard to acts
similar to piracy that are being perpetrated by the Israeli
occupation authorities through the blockade of the
Gaza Strip, as well as with regard to the repercussions
of the humanitarian situation there due to the military
operations that have been conducted there over the past
few days.

