Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): It is a special
pleasure for me and my delegation, Sir, to see you preside
over the deliberations of the Security Council. We would
like express our deep admiration to you for the wise,
effective and, if I may add, proactive manner in which
you are performing this task.

Bangladesh welcomes the initiative taken by Canada
and you, Mr. President in convening this open meeting.
It gives the Member States of the United Nations in
general an opportunity to share their views and ideas on
how the international community can contribute to
ensuring the protection of civilians in armed conflicts. As
the world is commemorating this year the fiftieth
anniversary of the Geneva Conventions, as well as the
centenary of the first International Peace Conference in
the Hague, it is fitting that the Security Council is holding
this open meeting to consider the important issue of
civilians in armed conflict.

As we look at the nature of conflicts and social strife
that the world is experiencing today, we notice that inter-
State wars and foreign occupations have been on the
decline since the end of the cold war. This encouraging
development, we believe, is expected to contribute to the
lessening of global violence in the long run. However,
intra-State conflicts, social strife, deprivation, abuses of
human rights, ethnic exclusion and xenophobia continue
to pose problems that result in violence and impinge on
international peace and security.

Most of the conflicts that the Security Council is
handling today are internal armed conflicts in which
civilians are the worst victims, taking the brunt of the
large-scale human suffering. They are being displaced.
They are being assaulted. They are being killed. All sorts
of atrocities are being perpetrated against civilians. It is
a matter of grave concern that in armed conflicts the
percentage of civilian casualties has gone up incredibly in
the recent decades. As we have heard before, in the First
World War civilians accounted for only 5 per cent of the
casualties. In the Second World War, the number went up
to 45 per cent. Now the number exceeds 90 per cent.
Such a sharp rise in civilian casualties is due, among
other causes, to deliberate targeting and indiscriminate
killing of civilians by the combatants. Recent
developments suggest that ethnic and/or religious
minorities are increasingly becoming targets of parties
involved in armed conflicts.

 

Conflicts in many countries have their roots in
poverty, hunger, ignorance, deprivation and lack of
accountability in the use of political power. At the same
time, various forms and manifestations of colonial legacies
continue to prevent social and political assimilation and
equitable distribution of resources. This can only foment
tensions and conflicts within and among nations. We need
to address the root causes of conflicts in a comprehensive
and holistic manner. Poverty and social injustice constitute
a source of frustration and a possible cause of new
conflicts. Stability, security, democracy and peace are yet
to be consolidated on a global scale. This will require a
reversal of growing international inequities.

In wars and conflicts of today, parties involved quite
often take recourse to actions that constitute flagrant
violations of international laws, particularly humanitarian
and human rights laws. The weaker and vulnerable groups
of society become easy victims of conflicts. Abuses of the
rights of women and children are most common. The
statement of the President of the Security Council of 29
June last year is worth recalling in this regard. In this
context, we value the role being played by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and
Armed Conflict, Olara Otunnu. We also reiterate strongly
Bangladesh's endorsement of the idea that in a conflict
situation children should be treated as a "zone of peace".
The Convention on the Rights of the Child, with its near
universal adherence, should be invoked more effectively
and be respected by all.

We have noted with concern that United Nations and
other humanitarian personnel are being threatened, abducted
and killed. It is outrageous that despite the existence of so
many international conventions and laws regarding
humanitarian activities, particularly in respect of conflict
situations, the protection and safe access of humanitarian
personnel cannot be ensured. We are concerned that
humanitarian personnel do not get sufficient security
coverage to smoothly conduct their activities. We must
address this problem more seriously and sincerely. Here we
pay tribute to the significant role being played by the
International Committee of the Red Cross.

Bangladesh believes that an important first step
towards ensuring protection of civilians is to take adequate
and effective measures to stop the supply of weapons to
parties in conflict. The supply and proliferation of small
arms, in particular, have contributed in a major way to
jeopardizing the security of civilians. We reiterate the need
for full compliance with Security Council resolution 1209
(1998) of 19 November 1998.

Bangladesh believes that international peace and
security can best be strengthened not by actions of States
alone, but through the inculcation of a culture of peace
and non-violence in every human being and in every
sphere of activity. The elements of a culture of peace are
drawn from age-old principles and values that are
respected and held in high esteem by all peoples and
societies. The objective of a culture of peace is the
empowerment of people. It contributes effectively to
overcoming authoritarian structures and exploitation
through democratic participation. It works against poverty
and inequities and promotes development. It celebrates
diversity, advances understanding and tolerance, and
reduces inequality between men and women. We regard
the culture of peace as an effective expedient for
minimizing and preventing violence and conflict in the
present-day world. My delegation strongly recommends
that the culture of peace be given due consideration in the
report of the Secretary-General, as called for in the
statement of the Security Council President of 12
February 1999, and that the Council devote its attention
to this issue when it deliberates on the report. We also
encourage the Secretary-General to consult the
Inter-Agency Committee in formulating his
recommendations.

In conclusion, let me say that Bangladesh is
committed to the cause of international peace and
development. We are a signatory to most of the
humanitarian conventions and laws. We have been a
major contributor to peacekeeping and peacemaking
efforts of the United Nations. Through our participation
in this debate, we reiterate our readiness to continue to
work constructively with the other Member States in
ensuring effective protection of civilians in armed
conflicts and, most importantly, in eliminating the root
causes of such conflicts.

