Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would first like to thank you, Mr. President,
and the Ethiopian delegation for including today's
meeting in the Council's September programme of
work and for your efforts in preparing for it.

Exactly 16 years ago, on 28 September 2001, the
Security Council adopted a core counter-terrorism
resolution, resolution 1373 (2001). Today's meeting
is aimed at conducting a long-overdue analysis of the
current situation with regard to the implementation of
that resolution and the other Council resolutions that
define States' counter-terrorism obligations. In our
View, today's discussion is particularly essential in the
light of December's forthcoming review and extension
of the mandate of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED), and the opinions
expressed today will constitute an significant basis for
drafting the relevant Council resolution before the end
of the year.

The Russian delegation would like to thank
Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Under-Secretary-General and
Head ofthe United Nations Office ofCounter-Terrorism,
for his briefing, and to congratulate him on his first
appearance in the Council. We are glad to see him here.
We are also grateful to Ambassador Aboulatta, Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism,
and to Mr. Scharia for their briefings and for presenting
their approaches to the subject of today's meeting.

As terrorist threats evolve, it is increasingly
clear, among other things, that international as well
as regional efforts to combat terrorism can hinge on
how conscientiously individual States view their
obligations. Breaches in counter-terrorism systems
do not go unnoticed. Terrorists skilfully exploit such
loopholes, and as they flee justice in one country they
will inevitably pose threats to other States, especially
neighbouring States. Unfortunately, national counter-
terrorism legislation is often still at a rudimentary
stage even now. For example, the global survey of the
implementation by Member States of resolution 1373
(2001) (S/2016/49, annex), prepared by CTED in 2016,
points out that the legislation of numerous countries
lacks the standards needed for the criminal prosecution
of foreign terrorist fighters. A number of countries have
not established proper mechanisms for information
exchange and interdepartmental coordination or
adequate immigration and visa controls. Many are
not connected to the relevant INTERPOL databases.
There are also shortcomings where the suppression of
terrorism financing is concerned. And unfortunately
the list does not end there.

We have to take into consideration the fact that the
type of terror taking centre stage at the moment does
not require significant financial support. It is based on
the threat posed by suicide bombers who are subject to
potent propaganda. For example, all that is needed to
stage an attack is a truck, and of course it is impossible
to control such murder weapons. That is why we
have to emphasize preventive measures and the fight
against radicalization.

Against that backdrop, it is easy to see glaring
inadequacies in the implementation of resolution 1624
(2005), on combating incitement to terrorism, including
instances of public justification and even glorification.
The global survey on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1624 (2005) by Member States
(S/20l6/50), for example, notes a number of factors that
present obstacles to the prosecution of instigators of
incitement and other terrorist accomplices, including
the fact that in some States such acts are not criminalized
or that there is inadequate enforcement of the "extradite
or prosecute" principle.

We firmly believe that coordinated measures are
urgently needed to identify and remove the terrorist
content on the Internet through which propaganda
flows and terrorists are actively recruited. We welcome
the fact that last week, at the initiative of the United
Kingdom, France and Italy, a special high-level event
on this subject was organized on the sidelines of the
general debate of the General Assembly at its seventy-
second session. At the same time, it is paradoxical
certain countries were previously been unwilling to
cooperate on Russia's draft resolution on combating
terrorist ideology, which was focused on resolving
these very issues.

We are convinced that in general we have to extract
better results from the Council's counter-terrorism
resolutions, create a climate that demands more from
States on the enforcement front and establish the
conditions necessary for strengthening the capabilities
of national counter-terrorism systems. We must always
remember that Member States have agreed to comply
with Security Council resolutions and implement them
strictly, and that obligations based on the Charter of the
United Nations prevail over all others.

During the previous renewal of the CTED
mandate, in 2013, the Security Council underscored
the key role of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) and its Executive Directorate in ensuring the
full implementation of Security Council resolutions
1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005). We are grateful to the
Executive Directorate and to Mr. Laborde, its able
leader for the past four years, for the effective work
they have done since 2013. We hope that this goal will
be a top priority for CTED's new Executive Director,
Ms. Michele Coninsx, We welcome her appointment
and are confident that her experience as prosecutor and
head ofthe European Union's Judicial Cooperation Unit,
Eurojust, will be what is needed in her new position.

Overall, in our View, against the background of
the reform of the architecture of the United Nations
counter-terrorism bodies, a new chapter is beginning for
international efforts in the fight against terrorism. We
look forward to close cooperation between the CTC and
its Executive Directorate and the Office for Counter-
Terrorism. We believe that the information that has
emerged from CTED's analytical work is an important
indicator for States' needs in the area of technical
assistance. Ensuring its effectiveness therefore depends
largely on the proper exchange of information, without
excessive bureaucratization, between CTED and the
United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism Office.

We believe that the upcoming review of the CTED
mandate will be the right moment to consider how
the Council can strengthen the effectiveness of the
Executive Directorate, particularly given the significant
amount of useful work that it has done during and after
country visits. It seems clear to us, for example, that we
should get better returns on the recommendations made
based on their results. At the moment, it appears that
CTED's efforts are sometimes unfairly overlooked by
States. That should be rectified. In our view, there are
reserves that the Counter-Terrorism Committee could
harness to streamline its procedures in the preparation
stages for country visits. We trust that the Executive
Directorate will summarize the opinions expressed
today by States and use the time remaining until the
review of its mandate to take stock of the experience
of previous years and come up with its own ideas in
this regard.

We look forward to constructive collective work
in the Security Council during the forthcoming review
of the CTED mandate. Our common goal is to achieve
the full and honest fulfilment of Security Council
resolutions, which the Committee has the unique
potential to promote.

