Mr. Jomaa (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): First of
all, I would like to express to you, Mr. President, the
warm congratulations of my delegation on your
presidency of the Council for this month. I am
convinced that, thanks to your broad experience, the
work and deliberations of the Council will be
successful. I would also like to pay tribute to you for
choosing peacekeeping operations as the main item on
the agenda under your presidency. I would also like to
thank Mr. Le Roy, the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, and Ms. Malcorra, the
Under-Secretary-General for Field Support, for their
participation in this debate and for their valuable
briefings on developments in the subject that we are
discussing.

I would like to support the statement made by
Morocco on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

There is no doubt that this debate on United
Nations peacekeeping operations is very timely and
extremely important, due to the growing challenges
facing such operations. We are invited to consider the
various initiatives undertaken recently to contribute to
the development of peacekeeping operations, in
particular the study published by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field
Support, along with the French-British initiative.

Here, I would like to highlight the need to ensure
that all Member States, in particular troop-contributing
countries, participate actively in such debates
throughout the consideration of all items related to this
pivotal issue, in the light of the increased need for
peacekeeping operations and the need to ensure peace
and security in the world. My delegation believes that
the General Assembly and the relevant bodies and
committees, particularly the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations, remain the appropriate
framework in which to examine this issue, with the
participation of all Member States and the Secretariat
and with the valuable contribution of the Security
Council and its Working Group of the Whole on
Peacekeeping Operations.

Tunisia has participated for over 40 years in
peacekeeping operations and continues to participate in
and contribute to these operations. We are convinced of
the noble goals of our Organization, and thus the
maintenance of peace, stability and security in the
world is an essential issue for us. Here, I would like to
reiterate our determination to support and participate in
peacekeeping operations, which are among the greatest
successes of our Organization in spite of the
difficulties faced, as these operations provide hope to
people who are living in a climate of conflict, crisis or
war.

While we strive to coordinate our activities and
experience with the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, I would like to highlight the following
points.

With respect to the structure and organizational
framework of peacekeeping operations, transparency
must be ensured with regard to all resolutions related
to the creation and enhancement of a peacekeeping
operation or to the renewal of a mandate. This must be
accomplished through ongoing coordination with
stakeholders, particularly troop-contributing countries,
the Secretariat and the Security Council. This is one of
the main and pivotal points contained in the
presidential statement that has been proposed by the
United Kingdom for adoption at the conclusion of this
meeting.

Next, we must pool our efforts to develop the
capacity of peacekeeping operations and ensure their
coherence, and we must examine the contents and
objectives of these operations in the light of the New
Horizon study. Given the importance and sensitivity of
this subject, there should an ongoing in-depth dialogue
between Member States and the Secretariat before the
study can be adopted.

With respect to the management on the ground of
peacekeeping operations and their governing
principles, we would like to highlight the importance
of respecting the basic principles governing
peacekeeping operations, that is, the consent of
stakeholders, non-resort to force except in self-defence
and the principle of neutrality, which is very essential.
In addition, the primary responsibility of these
missions is to endeavour to ensure the protection and
safety of civilians. We should also take care to
guarantee that forces are protected when they are
deployed or redeployed by providing them with the
equipment they need to carry out their mission and by
creating favourable conditions for doing so in order to
ensure success. Prior consultations should take place
with the troop-contributing countries on logistics issues
related to the mission.

Those are the observations that my delegation
wanted to share with the Council. I think that these are
points that are of importance to all. I think too that this
debate will enable us to compile the points of view and
the visions of Members in order to ensure greater
effectiveness and benefit in peacekeeping operations,
given the increased demand for these operations, due to
the unfortunate increase in the number of hot spots of
tension and crises in the world.

