The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Azerbaijan in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Azimov
(Azerbaijan) took a place at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to documents S/l995/249 and 5/1995/321,
which contain the texts of letters dated 30 March and
20 April 1995 from the Permanent Representatives of the
Russian Federation and Sweden to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the reports
S/ 1995/249 and S/ 1995/321 of the Co-Chairmen of the
OSCE Minsk Conference on Nagorny Karabakh
presented in accordance with paragraph 8 of its
resolution 884 (1993). It expresses its satisfaction that
the cease-fire in the region agreed upon on
12 May 1994 through the mediation of the Russian
Federation in cooperation with the OSCE Minsk
Group has been holding for almost a year.

"At the same time, the Council reiterates the
concern it has previously expressed at the conflict in
and around the Nagorny Karabakh region of the

Azerbaijani Republic and at the tensions between the
Republic of Armenia and the Azerbaijani Republic.
In particular, it expresses its concern at recent
violent incidents and emphasizes the importance of
using the mechanism of direct contacts for the
settlement of incidents as agreed upon on
6 February 1995. It strongly urges the parties to the
conflict to take all necessary measures to prevent
such incidents in future.

"The Council reaffirms all its relevant
resolutions, inter alia on the principles of
sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States in
the region. It also reaffirms the inviolability of
international borders and the inadmissibility of the
use of force for the acquisition of territory.

"The Council reiterates its full support for the
efforts of the Co-Chairmen of the Minsk Conference
to assist in conducting speedy negotiations for the
conclusion of a political agreement on the cessation
of the armed conflict, the implementation of which
will eliminate major consequences of the conflict for
all parties, inter alia ensuring withdrawal of forces,
and permit the convening of the Minsk Conference.

"The Council stresses that the parties to the
conflict themselves bear the main responsibility for
reaching a peaceful settlement. It stresses the
urgency of concluding a political agreement on the
cessation of the armed conflict on the basis of the
relevant principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and of the OSCE. It strongly urges those
parties to constructively conduct negotiations without
preconditions or procedural obstacles and to refrain
from any actions that may undermine the peace
process. It emphasizes that the achievement of such
an agreement is a prerequisite for the deployment of
a multinational OSCE peace-keeping force.

"The Council welcomes the decision of the
Budapest summit of the CSCE of 6 December 1994
on the 'Intensification of CSCE action in relation to
the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict' (S/l995/249, Appendix). It confirms its readiness to provide
continuing political support, inter alia through an
appropriate resolution regarding the possible
deployment of a multinational OSCE peace-keeping
force following agreement among the parties for
cessation of the armed conflict. The United Nations
also stands ready to provide technical advice and
expertise.

 

"The Council underlines the urgency of the
implementation by the parties of confidence-building
measures, as agreed upon within the Minsk Group on
15 April 1994, in particular in the humanitarian field,
including the release of all prisoners of war and
civilian detainees by the first anniversary of the
cease-fire. It calls upon the parties to prevent suffering
of the civilian populations affected by the armed
conflict.

"The Council reiterates its request that the
Secretary-General, the Chairman-in-Office of the
OSCE and the Co-Chairmen of the OSCE Minsk
Conference continue to report to the Council on the
progress of the Minsk process and on the situation
on the ground, in particular, on the implementation
of its relevant resolutions and on present and future
cooperation between the OSCE and the United
Nations in this regard.

"The Council will keep the matter under
consideration."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1995/21.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.

