Mr. Barbalie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I wish
to thank Judges Patrick L. Robinson and Khalida
Rachid Khan, the respective Presidents of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), as well as the
Prosecutors of the Tribunals, Mr. Brammertz and
Mr. Jallow, for both detailed reports and extensive
briefings today. We wish to congratulate Judge Rachid
Khan on assuming her important position and to thank
Judge Byron for his years of tireless work and efforts
in pursuing justice for victims and their families. For
so many years now, the Presidents and Prosecutors of
the Tribunals have shown their dedication to justice
and the fight against impunity, for which we commend
them. I also wish to underline the contribution of all
the staff of the Tribunals and to thank them for their
tireless work.

For almost 18 years now, the Tribunals have been
led by the idea of justice for all those who suffered
and, although slow, their course has been steady and
unyielding. Justice is the only consolation for those
who lost their loved ones, or even their entire families.
In that context, we welcome the fact that Ratko Mladic'
and Bernard Munyagishari will finally face justice and
be seen for what they truly are. We also hope that
Goran Hadzic', F e'licien Kabuga and the eight other
fugitives will also face justice sooner rather than later.

Bosnia and Herzegovina has extended
unconditional support to the Tribunals throughout the
years, especially to the work of the ICTY. The crimes
that were committed deeply affected our respective
regions, and, as a significant contribution to
reconciliation and a better future, the Tribunals' work
is of great importance. My country remains committed
and dedicated to providing continued support for both
Tribunals until the full completion of their mandates
and transition to the Residual Mechanism.

That dedication is further reflected in the record
of continued positive cooperation between Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the ICTY. As stated, authorities of my
country, at both the State and entity levels, have
responded promptly and adequately to all the requests
for documents and access to Government archives.
Assistance in facilitating the appearance of witnesses
before the Tribunal is consistent, together with assisted
witness protection matters. Urgent requests are handled
satisfactorily. The cooperation has been particularly
constructive with regard to the rule llbis cases
transferred by the Office of the Prosecutor to the War
Crimes Chamber of the State Court of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. As stated in the report, all cases
transferred pursuant to rule llbis have been completed.

Furthermore, we fully agree that cooperation
between the countries in the region is highly important,
and all efforts are aimed at improving and enhancing
cooperation through numerous bilateral agreements
that will address possible deficiencies.

Considering the reports before us, we note all the
steps the Tribunals have taken to meet their completion
strategies. It is a demanding task, especially having in
mind the numerous unforeseen obstacles they face that
are beyond their reach and out of their control. Those
obstacles seem especially characteristic of the work of
the ICTY, with several of the accused exercising their
right to defend themselves and the difficulties and
delays arising from such trials. We also commend both
Tribunals for undertaking preparations for the timely
transition to the Residual Mechanism, in accordance
with resolution 1966 (2010), and find this also a very
important aspect in preserving their legacies. We
encourage the Tribunals to continue their work in an
expedited and efficient manner, without affecting due
process and the interest of justice.

Final successful completion of the Tribunals'
mandates will close out a chapter that will be
considered historic, just as their contribution to
international jurisprudence is groundbreaking and the
international justice system has been irreversibly
changed with their establishment. Their contribution to
the advancement of the rule of law, peace and
reconciliation is undoubted, as there would be no
meaningful peace without justice and no common
future until the past is put to rest.

