Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency. May I add my voice to others in welcoming

five new colleagues to the Security Council; we look
forward to working with them over the next two years.
And special thanks go to the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2009/674) and his comments, to Special
Representative Kai Eide for his very informative
comments, and also to Ambassador Tanin for his
comprehensive comments.

The international community's goal remains a
stable and secure Afghanistan that can exercise
sovereignty over all of its territory, offer its people
representative Government and the conditions for
economic prosperity, and play a constructive role in the
region. None of us underestimates the scale of this
challenge, as the Special Representative set out very
clearly earlier. Building a stable and secure
Afghanistan will be a long-term task, but the
international community is determined to support the
Afghan Government in seeing it through. I would like
to say a few words first about the forthcoming London
Conference before turning to some issues raised in the
Secretary-General's latest report.

The London Conference on 28 January will be
co-hosted by Prime Minister Gordon Brown, President
Karzai and the Secretary-General, and we welcome the
Secretary-General's strong support for it. The purpose
of the Conference will be to deliver and coordinate
international support to enable President Karzai to
meet the ambitions that he set out in his recent
inauguration speech, and it will focus on three key
areas: security, development and governance, and the
regional framework and international architecture. The
London Conference should be seen as an important
step towards the international community's taking a
more supportive role in Afghanistan and a further
acceleration in the Afghanization of the strategy. In this
sense, the London Conference will pave the way for a
conference in Kabul later in the spring, at which we
hope the Afghan Government will present its
commitments to the people of Afghanistan and build on
the groundwork laid in London.

I would now like to turn to four issues raised in
the Secretary-General's report. First, on aid
effectiveness, we strongly agree with the Special
Representative that donors need to build rather than
substitute for Afghan capacity. We need to see a greater
donor willingness to coordinate with the Government
of Afghanistan and the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), rather than
operating unilaterally.

Secondly, we strongly support the efforts led by
General McChrystal to reduce civilian casualties. We
are pleased that the Secretary-General's report
highlights this. The report notes that the
anti-Government elements were responsible for 78 per
cent of civilian casualties, with 54 per cent of those
due to suicide and improvised explosive device attacks.
The approach of the International Security Assistance
Force stands in stark contrast to that of the insurgents,
who seek deliberately to target civilians in
Afghanistan.

Thirdly, we agree with the Secretary-General
about the importance of the Afghan National Army and
National Police. Developing the Afghan national
security forces in terms both of quality and quantity is
key to enabling Afghans to take responsibility for their
own security, and we hope that the Joint Coordination
and Monitoring Board and London Conference will
give impetus to this progress.

Fourthly, the Secretary-General's report
highlights the importance of community defence
initiatives, and we welcome this emphasis. It is
essential that they be given sufficient training to be
effective and that they be held accountable. A national
security sector strategy would provide a framework for
the roles and functions of Afghan security forces, but it
needs to be made clear how the community defence
initiatives would fit into such a national strategy.

I would also like to raise one issue that is not
specifically covered in the Secretary-General's report
but was referred to by the Special Representative:
corruption, which was an important backdrop to events
in 2009. UNAMA, working with others, is helping the
Afghan Government to build a capacity to tackle
corruption and to build the necessary sustainable
institutions to underpin good governance in the longer
term, and we strongly welcome this.

No one would deny that Afghanistan has been
through another challenging period over the past three
months. The presidential election process was not easy,
but we look forward to the endorsement of a strong and
capable Afghan Government that can take forward the
important commitments made by President Karzai in
his inauguration address, with the support of the
international community and to be confirmed at the
London Conference this month.

Finally, I would like to thank Kai Eide for his
efforts in Afghanistan over the past two years. His hard
work, including delivering elections last year and
steering UNAMA through a traumatic period following
the attacks on its staff, deserves our admiration, and I
would like through him to pay tribute to all of
UNAMA's staff as they take forward their important
work in extremely difficult circumstances.

In this respect, I was concerned to hear about the
challenges he faces in UNAMA's staffing and
recruitment. The General Assembly agreed only last
month on a significant increase in the budget and
staffing of the UNAMA mission, and I hope that the
Secretariat will look imaginatively at ways to unblock
any impediments at United Nations Headquarters to
effectively staffing critical missions around the world,
including that of UNAMA in Afghanistan.

