Mr. O'Brien: I thank Under-Secretary-General
Jeffrey Feltman and His Excellency Mr. Apakan for
their briefings. I am also grateful for this opportunity
to join them in briefing the Security Council on the
humanitarian situation in Ukraine.

Over three years into the conflict in eastern
Ukraine, in what has become yet another protracted
humanitarian crisis, we are now faced with a significant
deterioration in the situation following the sudden and
recent escalation in violence. That escalation on both
sides of the contact line in Donetsk oblast near Avdiivka
and Donetsk city has claimed the lives of four civilians,
all women, since 18 January, according to the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights. According to the United Nations team on the
ground, it is resulting in widespread fear, panic and
a real struggle to survive by civilians. We call on all
parties to immediately cease all hostilities in order to
prevent a further loss of life and further unacceptable
human suffering.

The current escalation in violence is causing severe
damage to critical infrastructure - water, electricity
and heating. Combined with low winter temperatures,
the result is a deteriorating humanitarian situation.
Today temperatures are -10°C but, -20°C is not unheard
of at this time of the year. Adequate shelter, heating
and access to water are therefore essential to people's
survival. Shelling has damaged electricity and water
systems, with a knock-on effect on the heating supply;
once damaged, it could take days, or weeks, for systems
to restart. For civilians living on both sides of the front
line, that means they are not only traumatized, living
a precarious and dangerous existence, but damage to
critical services is making survival an issue. We are
also concerned about the reported presence of heavy
weapons in urban areas, which further heightens the
risk to civilians' lives.

For example, critical water and electricity systems
in Avdiivka, a front-line town in Government-controlled
areas, were damaged by the the recent violence on 29 and
30 January. The United Nations and other humanitarian
partners joined a Government-led assessment team to
the town on 1 February, and are working to ensure that
critical needs are met in support of the Government.
That is not without risk. For example, two technical
teams sent to repair infrastructure were promised a
ceasefire for a few hours on 1 February in order to carry
out their work, but were subjected to small-arms fire in
non-government controlled areas and, as a result, were
forced to abandon their work. A similar incident took
place earlier today. The arrival of powerful generators
on 31 January in Avdiivka provided some temporary
respite to 17,000 people, including 2,500 children,
but that is not sufficient. Unless repairs are made, the
power that keeps the heating system functioning in
Avdiivka cannot be fully restored. The result could be
displacement on a large scale.

Avdiivka is not alone. Approximately 1 million
people in non-government controlled areas in Donetsk
city were without water or heating for 24 hours
following the shelling. A repair team has managed to
fix some power lines, thereby managing to preserve the
city's heating systems and avoid a major catastrophe.
Elsewhere, the 500,000 inhabitants of Mariupol are
now reliant on a backup reservoir after the water main
on which the city depends developed a massive leak. It
will take several days - once hostilities are over - to
ensure the area is demined and heavy machinery can
access the area to carry out repairs. Unfortunately,
shelling could be heard again last night in Donetsk and
in other areas along the contact line.

I welcome yesterday's statement of the Trilateral
Contact Group in Minsk, which called for not only
strict adherence to a full and comprehensive cessation
of fire but also the facilitation of humanitarian efforts
aimed at the restoration of water, electricity and heating
supplies, including through the repair of infrastructure.
I also acknowledge the efforts of the Government of
Ukraine and the de facto authorities to provide critical
heating and water for those most at risk, but I highlight
that that is not enough. On 31 January, the Government
of Ukraine appealed to international organizations to
prepare to support civilian evacuees from Avdiivka
should it be necessary. The United Nations and
international non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
stand ready to lend their support.

If hostilities continue, we may also face a serious
environmental crisis. Damage to the phenol plant near
the village ofNovgorodske means that waste chemicals,
including deadly sulfuric acid and formaldehyde, are
now at critical levels. Leakage into the surrounding land
and the Seversky Donets River would have disastrous
humanitarian consequences in a highly industrialized
part of Europe. Similarly, there is a real risk at present
that damage to water facilities could have further
deadly consequences for the population living in the
surrounding areas, with the potential leak of chlorine
gas, which is routinely stored at such facilities.

This latest escalation in Violence is exacerbating the
ongoing needs of an estimated 3.8 million civilians who
continue to bear the brunt of this protracted conflict
and who require various degrees of humanitarian
assistance. There are 700,000 more people in need
this year as compared to those identified in the
2016 humanitarian response plan. More than 60 per
cent of those in need - approximately 2.3 million
people - reside in non-Government controlled areas.
Furthermore, over 70 per cent of people in need are
the elderly, women and children. Those demographic
groups are particularly vulnerable and must be accessed
immediately with lifesaving assistance and protection
interventions. When I visited Luhansk and Donetskjust
over a year ago, I met an octogenarian woman living in
one room in the bombed-out ruins of her house, whose
son had been killed in the cracked remains of what
was once her front door when he just happened to be
visiting to check on her safety and a bomb came down
on him - an innocent non-combatant nipping back in
the lunch hour from his market store. While tending to
her rambling rose bush growing up the charred remains
of her house, she told me of her unconscionable grief,
of the cold she endures and that she would only light a
camp fire during the night, as she was afraid that any
smoke during the day would allow others to target her
location. It was truly heartbreaking. That is the reality
for so many civilians caught in this conflict, trapped
by the fighting with minimal shelter, critical services
cut-off and in desperate need of assistance and building
repair materials to prevent death or injury by either the
violence or the elements.

While some humanitarian response efforts continue,
since July 2015 the de facto authorities in Donetsk and
Luhansk have imposed undue bureaucratic restrictions
that are severely affecting humanitarian access. That is
in contradiction to their commitments under article 7
of the Minsk full package of measures, as well as their
responsibilities under international humanitarian law.
Few partners are officially allowed to operate in those
areas and, on 25 November 2016, the international
NGO People in Need 4 the last international NGO to
have access - was summarily ejected from Donetsk
non-Government controlled areas, depriving 140,000
people of immediate lifesaving assistance. The United
Nations repeats its appeal to all parties to guarantee
secure and unimpeded access for United Nations and
humanitarian partners to all people in need, wherever
they may be.

Finally, Government-imposed bureaucratic
impediments, particularly in relation to the ban on
commercial trade and the importation of food and
medicines across the contact line, remain a serious
constraint to alleviating the humanitarian crisis.
In addition, the suspension of social payments by
the Government has severely affected hundreds of
thousands of displaced people.

I am alarmed about the turn that this conflict has
taken and about the increasing toll it has on the civilian
population. As the humanitarian situation in Ukraine
deteriorates, increasing numbers of people are at risk

and in need - their resilience eroded and their hope
fading. The inability to reach a political solution to this
crisis is resulting in further civilian casualties, damage
to critical infrastructure and more human suffering.
This suffering will continue until this conflict comes
to an end once and for all.

