Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I am
pleased to address the members of the Council in my
capacity as Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1572 (2004) concerning Cote d'Ivoire.

At the outset, I would like to summarize the main
findings in the final report of the Group of Experts
on C6te d'Ivoire pursuant to paragraph 27 of Security
Council resolution 2219 (2015), contained in document
S/2016/254, and a review ofthe Group's findings arising
from the informal consultations the Committee held on
11 March.

The Group highlighted that Cote d'Ivoire achieved
importantprogresswithregardtotheoverallstabilization
of the country since the end of the post-election crisis
in 2010-2011. It noted the good cooperation of the
Government of Cete d'Ivoire throughout its mandate. It
also recognized that the sanctions regime, since it was
established in 2004, has succeeded in preventing the
import of heavy weapons systems, including combat
aircraft and tanks, and the escalation ofthe conflict. The
political and security situation in the country is stable
and, in the period from 14 June 2015 and 22 February
2016, the Group identified only one violation of the
arms embargo, with respect to night vision devices, a
violation that Cote d'Ivoire subsequently disclosed to
the Committee, showing that its compliance with the
sanctions regime has improved dramatically.

The Group highlighted the positive developments
in the country, the success of the presidential elections
of October 2015 and the role of the sanctions regime,
which was positively reviewed in the past, taking into
account the progress made. However, the Group did
express concern about the significant quantities of
arms and ammunition that remain beyond the control
of the Ivorian authorities. The Group emphasized that
more efforts need to be made by the Ivorian authorities
to control unregistered weapons and ammunition and
that there is a need to address major issues including
the improvement of the Ivorian security forces'
functionality, dealing with former zone commanders
and the integration of ex-combatants.

The disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
process, which ended on 30 June 2015, was an important
achievement for the stabilization process. The Group
deemed it only partially successful, given that at least
16,500 ex-combatants still need to be fully reintegrated,
and large quantities of weapons and ammunition remain
unaccounted for. Although significant progress was
made with regard to the security sector reform process,
the Ivorian security forces continue face challenges.
The former zone commanders, who occupy key roles
in the C6te d'Ivoire security apparatus, continue to
have access to private assets, financial resources and
weapons.

With respect to weapons, the Group acknowledged
the progress made in the cooperation with the Ivorian
authorities, who gave the Group access to military
cantonments and allowed it to conduct inspections. The
Group continued to identify and document materiel
acquired by the Forces Nouvelles in the immediate
aftermath of the crisis of 2010-2011 in violation of the
arms embargo. In this context, the Group expressed
concern that such materiel could be diverted to armed
and terrorist groups such as Ansar Dine and Boko
Haram.

On the issue of customs and transport, the Group
noted progress in the redeployment of the customs
administration, but also highlighted the need to develop
the capacity of the customs administration to monitor
effectively cross-border-related traffic, implement a
comprehensive and coordinated border-management
strategy and provide adequate training, personnel,
equipment and infrastructure. As a result of capacity
shortfalls, large quantities of goods, including natural
resources, cross the borders of Cdte d'Ivoire without
customs control.

In terms of natural resources, the Group referred
to positive developments in the fight against the
smuggling of cotton, cashew nuts, coffee and cocoa
in the east and north of the country. Despite the
commendable efforts of the Government, the smuggling
of diamonds, artisanal gold, coffee and cocoa in the
west of the country continues. In particular, the Group
expressed concern that illegal gold mining in northern
Cote d'Ivoire, along the border with Mali, could pose
a threat if used to finance terrorism. It is important
to underline that, although the diamond embargo was
lifted almost two years ago, at present large quantities
of Ivorian rough diamonds production are smuggled
outside the legal chain of commerce certified through
the Kimberley Process.

With regard to finances and individual sanctions,
the Group acknowledged the Government's efforts
to dismantle illegal taxation networks, reduce the
number of checkpoints and prevent incidents of
racketeering. Nevertheless, the Group ascertained that
illegal checkpoints continued to exist, particularly
on secondary roads and in border areas. The Group
expressed concern about the non-application of the
asset freeze and travel ban, by both Cote d'Ivoire and
the countries of the region since they were first put
into effect in February 2006. In the ensuing discussion,
some Committee members acknowledged the progress
made by Cote d'Ivoire and expressed their support for
the lifting the sanctions measures targeting the country,
while others expressed concern about the challenges
the country is continuing to face.

Finally, the recommendations contained in the
final report of the Group of Experts are still under
consideration by the members of the Committee.

