Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): The people and Government of Syria had
indeed expected that the Security Council, having
reached the age of reason - that is, being 67 years
old - would act positively and objectively to aid our
country. Any such positive contribution would stem
directly from the benefits of a rich culture and the
long experience that the Council has acquired over
decades in determining what must be done to help the
people and Government of Syria. That can be achieved
by respecting the provisions of the United Nations
Charter and the principles of international law, and has
nothing to do with projecting the national interest of
any member onto the agenda of the Security Council, an
agenda that is essentially focused on the maintenance of
international peace and security.

Before every Security Council meeting on the
situation in Syria, the concerns of the Syrian people
increase and their tensions heighten. As we have long
warned, this is due mainly to the suspicious timing of
those meetings and the treacherous terrorist acts that
have affected many innocent Syrians, their institutions,
their cadres and their human and material resources.
Members no doubt remember that the attacks and
massacres that have terrorized many people throughout
Syria have coincided with Security Council debates on
the situation in my country. Regrettably, all Syrians have
just seen a recurrence of that phenomenon. Yesterday
morning, terrorist devastation reached ministers and
leaders of security institutions while they were meeting
in the Syrian capital, Damascus. Equally regrettably,
the Council has again failed to condemn that act.
However, we do thank the Secretary-General and the
Joint Special Envoy, Mr. Kofi Arman, for condemning
that terrorist act.

If such a terrorist act can fail to incur the immediate,
strong condemnation of the Security Council, that means
that all the consensus the international community has
built on combating terrorism has been mere talk. That
failure sends the wrong message to terrorists all around
the world, which is that they are beyond accountability.
That failure also means that any talk of support for
a peaceful political solution in Syria and an end to
violence is mere sloganeering to gain time, delude
international and Syrian public opinion, and avoid
implementing the Kofi Annan plan.

Syria has officially welcomed the final communique
of the 30 June meeting in Geneva (S/2012/523, annex),
especially its basic points about commitment to the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
Syria, putting an end to violence and human rights
violations, disarming armed groups, the need to avoid
militarizing the situation, protecting civilians and
launching a Syrian-led political process. All of that
underscores that it is the Syrian people alone who can
come to the table to make decisions about their future,
in dialogue without foreign intervention.

Is there anyone in this Chamber who disagrees that
that is a reasonable statement? If there is no opposition
to the outcome of the Geneva meeting, based on the
Arman plan of action, why can the Council not agree
on a simple, purely procedural matter, which is the
extension of the mandate of the United Nations
Supervision Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic
(UNSMIS), in keeping with the basic principles that
I just listed and that have been agreed to by all who
participated in the Geneva meeting?

Our endorsement of the outcome of that meeting was
an example of our open approach to seeking a peaceful
solution to the crisis in Syria and in keeping with our
positive response to the efforts ofthe Joint Special Envoy
and UNSMIS. In this context, we note that, on his visit
to Damascus, Mr. Arman held constructive and positive
talks, as he himself has emphasized and reiterated. A
number of mechanisms have been agreed for putting an
end to violence, restoring peace and security throughout
my country, and preparing conditions conducive to a
comprehensive Syrian-led national dialogue among all
Syrians, in accordance with the Arman plan.

It has become clear to all that the success of the
Annan plan and of UNSMIS - which of course have the
full support of the Syrian Government, which has more
interest than any other in seeing the plan succeed - will
require sincere international commitment and political
will on the part of all parties, especially those that have
influence on the armed opposition groups. What is
needed is the political will to encourage dialogue, reject
violence and militarization, stop arming and financing
terrorist groups, and lift the illegitimate unilateral
sanctions against the Syrian people.

I must draw attention to the fact that some countries
are still bent on undermining any serious effort to
solve the problem in Syria peacefully. That has been
made very clear by their efforts to ensure that the
Arman plan fails by twisting their interpretations of
the communique and rushing to hold parallel meetings
under the so-called Group of Friends of the Syrian
people. In their objectives and purposes, those meetings
run contrary to the Annan plan, which Syria and the
international community accept, and to the outcome of
the Geneva meeting.

Some parties with a direct interest in farming the
flames of the crisis in Syria make a habit of giving
erroneous information and distorting the facts about
Syria and the response of the Syrian Government to
the crisis. They summarize the situation by drawing
a misleading picture that seeks to advance the idea
that there is a tyrannical regime killing its unarmed
citizens, whereas the crisis in Syria is a complex,
multidimensional problem with internal and external
ramifications.
At the internal level, there are some who have
peacefully called for reform and dialogue and expressed
their legitimate concerns through a political process.
The Government has not denied those concerns, but
rather considers them a priority. On the other hand,
there are those misguided others who have taken up
arms and destroyed public and private property. They
have made mistakes, but the road for them to return to
their senses is still open, as manifest in the amnesty
declared for all who turn in their weapons. About
4,302 people have benefited from the amnesty through
17 July 2012. Some of these various people belonged to
terrorist and non-terrorist groups that receive external
support and carry out maimings and killings of civilians
and military personnel. They have also committed the
massacres that have been brought to the attention of
the meetings of the Security Council devoted to the
situation in Syria.

Those groups include elements from Al-Qaida,
Arab and non-Arab jihadists and extremist terrorist
groups. Some at the United Nations would be only
too happy to call them third-party groups. The Syrian
State, however, as a responsible Government that is
supposed to protect its people like all other responsible
Governments in the world, cannot accept their acts.

In that respect, the majority of the Syrian people,
including sectors of the responsible nationalist
opposition, rejects external intervention and rejects
violence. They also reject arms and reject the blowing up
of electricity plants. During this very hot summer, they
rejected assassinations. They rejected the destruction
of television stations and gas and oil pipelines as a
means to attain the desired reforms in Syria.

Indeed, I am sure that some members ofthe Council
that have decided to close their embassies in Damascus
and to withdraw their ambassadors do not know that the
armed groups have three times attacked electric power
plants in Syria - the latest attack was on the day before
yesterday.

There are some countries that from the start
adopted a balanced and constructive position towards
the Syrian problem and emphasized the need to solve
the problem peacefully through dialogue and political
means, basing their positions on the principles of
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.

There are others, however, that seek to interfere in
the Syrian situation in a flagrant manner. They beat the
drums of war and made themselves part of the crisis by
providing arms and funds, political and media support
and logistical support to the armed groups in Syria
that incite violence and terrorism. Imposing sanctions
is illegitimate and harms the Syrian people. Such
sanctions have negatively impacted their daily lives,
ignoring all the principles of good-neighbourliness
and the international norms and instruments that
criminalize such actions. Those States have severed
their diplomatic relations with Syria, which has closed
dialogue and all channels of direct communications.
To those countries, we say, in the name of our people,
that if they want to impose the law of the jungle on
others and if they find that that is the logical course of
action, then they should allow that course in their own
countries as well.

Those who sympathize with the armed groups
and the terrorists in Syria should host them in their
own countries and provide them with what they want,
namely, the freedom to carry weapons and destroy the
social fabric and the structures of the State under the
slogans of realizing democracy and calling for reforms.

What has been said repeatedly of late in the media
about chemical weapons and Syria's intention to use
them has no basis in fact whatsoever. The media is
trying to plant some insidious intentions, and if those
insinuations reflect anything at all, they reflect the
intentions of some who would want to use chemical
materials against our people in order to find a pretext to
accuse the Syrian Government and garner the support
of the Security Council and international public opinion
against Syria.

All Syrians are concerned and seek to participate on
the basis of reconciliation, joint action and tolerance in
order to reconstruct what has been destroyed by the war
and anarchy and to proceed to re-establishing the rule
of law and reshaping peace and stability. They do not
seek to invoke Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations or seek external military intervention, of which
the Security Council's memory is full of examples. One
need only look at the disasters that it has imposed on the
peoples of States Members of the Organization against
which such interventions were applied.

It is up to us Syrians, including the national
opposition, to realize that those countries that claim to
be eager to support the Syrian people and their interests
are not in any way looking for a peaceful solution that
would maintain the unity, stability and independence
of the country and achieve the common aspirations of
the Syrian peoples. Those so-called friends of Syria
are targeting the Syrian State and people and the roles
played by Syria at the Arab, Islamic and regional levels
by using the political contradictions that have surfaced
in the Syrian arena during the crisis.

Who can believe those who deceived the Arabs by
imposing the Sykes-Picot Agreement and the Balfour
Declaration on us, assassinated the first Syrian Minister
of War and bombarded the Syrian Parliament in 1945.
They opened a wound that is still bleeding in Palestine,
invaded Afghanistan, Iraq and Libya and provided all
forms of political, military and diplomatic support to
Israel so that it could occupy the Syrian Golan and the
Palestinian territories and what remains ofthe Lebanese
territory. Anyone who believes that those people are
today willing to provide Syria with anything that would
serve its real interests is deluded.

Consequently, it is incumbent upon all of us to
realize that the only solution must be a Syrian solution
through a comprehensive and inclusive Syrian political
process that satisfies the aspirations ofthe Syrian people
in a national dialogue in which all participate under
the umbrella of the homeland in order to establish a
democratic, pluralistic country where all enjoy equality
before the law, far from any political or ideological
tendencies, a State where political and economic
opportunities are available to each and everyone
without discrimination, where there are democratic,
transparent and free elections in which all compete, as
is the case in other countries.

The Syrians alone are capable of defending their
country and preserving its invincibility against any
geopolitical interest that seeks to attack its existence
and dignity. Let us heal our wounds. Let us recall our
common history. Let us understand what is being plotted
against us. Let us build our homeland, a country that is
strong enough to withstand any heinous aggression.

I would like to conclude by quoting the wisdom of a
Sufi philosopher who lived in Syria in the tenth century
and who advised his students and followers:

"My children, the rational individual person must
not lose his perspicacity when he participates in
writing history. Those who have had a problem
with the Devil should not seek to find a solution by
consulting Satan."

