Ms. Yanez Loza (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank the Permanent Mission of
Sweden for convening this open debate. We believe
it is essential that all States be able to express in the
Security Council their concern about the situation of
children in armed conflict.

Ecuador welcomes the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2018/465) and this morning's briefings, as
well as the concept note (S/2018/625, annex) that you,
Mr. President, provided us with to guide this meeting.

The situation of children is becoming increasingly
worrisome owing to the number and seriousness of
violations in countries in conflict. We see this in the
reports submitted, which show that children are victims
of State and non-State actors and that there is no
collective and comprehensive response to protect them.

Ecuador expresses its concern at the continuing
recruitment and use of children throughout the
world. Despite the formal release of more than 10,000
children associated with armed forces or groups in
2017 and the arrangements that have been taken for
their reintegration, 56 armed groups and state State
forces continued to recruit and use children in conflicts
around the world.

We believe that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, in particular Sustainable Development
Goals 5 and 16, related to gender equality and the
empowerment of women and girls, as well as the
promotion ofjust, peaceful and inclusive societies, can
be achieved only when all States fully protect children.

In its Constitution, Ecuador recognizes children
as a group deserving of special attention, and indicates
that it is the State's responsibility to protect and care for
them against all forms of violence, ill-treatment, sexual
exploitation or exploitation of any other kind, as well
as to eradicate all forms of violence to which they may
be subjected. That is why we supported resolution 2427
(2018) this morning.

As we celebrate 18 years since the signing
of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child on the involvement of
children in armed conflict, we call for universal
ratification of the Protocol and encourage States
that have not yet done so to ratify it without delay.
Similarly, we call for the cessation and prevention of
the recruitment and use of children in armed conflict,
and stress the importance of adequate funding for
gender-sensitive reintegration programmes, taking
into account the particular needs of girls who have
not been well served through traditional disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes.

The Secretary-General's report also underscores
how schools are used for military purposes and points to
the destruction of educational infrastructure. Ecuador
expresses its full support for the need to protect students,
teachers and educational infrastructure in situations
of armed conflict, and stresses the importance of
continuing education during armed conflict, as well
as the implementation of the Guidelines for Protecting
Schools and Universities from Military Use during
Armed Conflict.

Our Constitution also stipulates that military
service for citizens over 18 years of age is voluntary,
and prohibits all forms of forced recruitment. Our
Constitution also establishes that children and
adolescents shall receive priority attention in the event
of disasters, armed conflicts and any type ofemergency.
We therefore reiterate that the statistics provided to us
must call for a comprehensive response from all States
by not allowing impunity and providing appropriate
political support and funding.

We believe that it is important to build and sustain
peace, as peace is directly linked to the achievement of
the 2030 Agenda. We reaffirm Ecuador's commitment
to leaving no one behind on the path to sustainable
development, and we want to use this forum to pool
efforts aimed at a productive and successful dialogue
that highlights the situation of children and armed
conflict and its importance for the global agenda.

Finally, we call for stronger support for the
management ofthe Office ofthe Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict so that it may receive sufficient political
support and funding.

