Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Like others, I wish
to thank Ambassador Nestor Osorio for his briefing and
to commend him for the excellent work accomplished
under his leadership by the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), on Iran. I fully share
in the views expressed in his proposals and conclusions.

Concerning the final report of the Panel of Experts
(S/2012/395), let me underline in particular its useful
recommendations. We also welcome the report's
publication as a measure of transparency and of support
for the implementation of the Security Council's
resolutions.

We commend the Committee for its designation of
two additional individuals and one entity involved in
non-compliance activities. We share the view that new
designations should be considered on a regular basis
and that the lists referred to in resolution 1929 (2010)
should be updated when appropriate. We also support
the intention of intensifying outreach activities to
encourage Member States to effectively implement the
measures and provisions of the sanctions regime.

The sanctions regime is having an undeniable effect
in slowing Iran's capability to advance its nuclear and
ballistic missile programmes. It is largely serving its
purpose as a stimulus for the resumption of serious and
credible talks. In that context, we are encouraged by
the intense and detailed discussions that took place in
Baghdad in May, as well as by the prospect of continued
negotiations in Moscow. Significant differences remain,
however, and it is imperative that discussions be pursued
further and common ground expanded as swiftly as
possible. Likewise, we hope that meaningful cooperation
with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
can be resumed following Director General Amano's
recent trip to Tehran, notwithstanding the disappointing
results of the meeting held in Vienna last Friday.

We call on Iran to sign and implement the structured
approach document between the IAEA and Iran, in order
to ensure that cooperation will be provided in full, thus
enabling the Agency to clarify outstanding issues and
draw conclusions on the nature of the Iranian nuclear
programme. Although we agree with the principle that
sanctions are not an end in themselves, they clearly
remain a crucial element of the dual-track approach
that Portugal has supported since the beginning of this
process. Iran has still to show willingness to comply
fully with Security Council resolutions, meaning that it
must suspend all enrichment-related and reprocessing
activities and heavy-water related projects, as well as
grant the IAEA unrestricted access to all its nuclear sites.

Portugal again reaffirms its longstanding commitment
to a diplomatic solution to the Iranian nuclear issue,
in accordance with the dual-track strategy, bearing in
mind the urgency of fully addressing the international
community's concerns about the nature of Iran's
nuclear programme. Let me conclude by reiterating our
appreciation and full support for Ambassador Osorio
and for the work of the Committee he so ably chairs.

