Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, Madam President, my delegation congratulates
you and expresses its commitment to supporting you in
your presidency of the Security Council. I also thank
Ambassador Matthew Rycroft and the entire United
Kingdom delegation for their outstanding presidency
last month.

I also join others in expressing our condolences to
our colleagues from the Russian delegation and to the
Government and the people of the Russian Federation
in conneciton with the cowardly attack that took place
yesterday in Saint Petersburg. We convey to them our
full solidarity.

We thank Mr. Jeremiah Nyamane Kingsley
Mamabolo, Joint Special Representative for the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), for presenting the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2017/250).
Uruguay would like to highlight the report's
observations that there have been no significant armed
clashes reported in Darfur for several months now and
that, as compared with previous years, there have been
fewer clashes between communities. It is important that
the current calm in the armed conflict be maintained
in order to halt Violence against civilians and allow for
conditions to emerge that are conducive to encouraging
a secure environment for the voluntary return of
internally displaced persons and communities.

We welcome the fact that the Government of the
Sudan and the non-signatory movements to the Doha
Document for Peace have maintained the unilateral
ceasefire. We encourage them to resume direct talks,
with a view to forging a formal agreement on the
cessation of hostilities and humanitarian access, as
well as to move swiftly towards political negotiations
that can pave the way towards a lasting solution to
the conflict.

I would like once again to underscore the key role
played by UNAMID, in an operational environment that
is far from free of difficulties. With regard to the issue
of protecting civilians, we urge the mission to continue
focusing on protecting internally displaced persons,
who still number more than 2.6 million. We also urge
it to concentrate on preventing and mediating local
conflicts, including supporting reconciliation efforts
and peace processes among the various communities.

With regard to the operational environment - from
a systemic perspective - my colleagues on the Security
Council will not be surprised to know that Uruguay
is concerned any time that one State undertakes
unilateral actions that interfere with the normal and
proper functioning of a peacekeeping operation. In
the specific case of UNAMID, we take note of the
improvement in terms of issuing Visas for staff and
with regard to dispatching containers holding rations
intended for UNAMID troops. Nevertheless, those are
in fact obligations incumbent upon the State in order to
facilitate the operation ofthe mission. We reiterate that,
in line with the obligations assumed under the status-
of-forces agreement, the Government of the Sudan
must take the measures necessary to eliminate all
bureaucratic impediments and to ensure that UNAMID
has appropriate conditions in order to be able to fully
comply with its mandate. That includes the points raised
by the Ambassador of the United Kingdom: sustained,
ununimpeded access to Darfur and all areas where the
mission should be present.

In conclusion, allow me to convey Uruguay's
gratitude to all UNAMID personnel, the United Nations
country team on the ground and all humanitarian staff,
who continue to work tirelessly, in often very difficult
circumstances, in order to achieve lasting peace
in Darfur.

