Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): At the outset, allow me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, and the Republic of
Rwanda on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I thank you, Sir, for
convening this emergency meeting of the Council on
Ukraine. I also wish to thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his
briefing earlier. For my delegation, the convening of
this meeting is indeed timely given the tragic incident
involving Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-l7.

Malaysia is deeply touched by the expressions of
condolences, sympathy and support from across the
world. At this difficult time, we also wish to express
our profound sorrow and convey our deepest sympathy
and condolences to the families and friends of those
who were aboard Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-l7.

Malaysia is shocked and distraught by the downing
of Flight MH-17. The scheduled flight, which departed
Amsterdam yesterday afternoon Amsterdam local time,
was expected to arrive at Kuala Lumpur International
Airport this morning. Unfortunately, it crashed near the
town of Torez in the Donetsk region of eastern Ukraine.

Two hundred and ninety-eight people perished in
the incident. One hundred and eighty-nine of those
who perished were from the Netherlands, 44 from
Malaysia, 27 from Australia, 12 from Indonesia, 9 from
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, 4 from Germany, 4 from Belgium, 3 from the
Philippines, 1 from Canada and 1 from New Zealand.
The nationalities of four passengers have not yet been
verified.

The Amsterdam-Kuala Lumpur route, which
regularly crosses Ukrainian airspace, was one of
Malaysia Airlines most popular routes. According to
the International Air Transport Association, at the time
that contact with Flight MH-l7 was lost, the aircraft
was flying over non-restricted air space. Furthermore,
the International Civil Aviation Organization had
declared the flight path to be safe. Malaysia Airlines
also confirmed that the aircraft had not made any
distress calls.

The Government of Malaysia has taken immediate
action to dispatch a special Malaysia disaster assistance
and rescue team to Kyiv. The team includes personnel
from the Royal Malaysian Air Force, Malaysia Airlines,
the Department of Civil Aviation as well as medical
staff. In addition, 40 Malaysia Airlines staff have
been despatched to Amsterdam to support the victims'
families and next of kin. In that regard, Malaysia
welcomes the pledges of support and assistance made
by other countries to aid in the search, rescue, recovery
and investigation efforts.

Yesterday, Prime Minister Razak spoke to President
Poroshenko of Ukraine, Prime Minister Rutte of the
Netherlands, President Obama of the United States of
America and President Putin of the Russian Federation.
In those conversations, Prime Minister Razak stressed
that, if indeed Flight MH-17 had been shot down,
the perpetrators must be swiftly brought to justice.
Malaysia condemns in the strongest possible terms any
such action as a flagrant violation of international law
and an outrage against human decency.

Malaysia demands a full, independent and transparent
international investigation into the incident, involving
the relevant international authorities, including the
International Civil Aviation Organization. I wish to
inform the Security Council that Malaysia has been
formally invited by the Ukrainian authorities to take
part in the investigation and that we will be sending two
representatives to Kyiv as soon as possible.

We urge the parties in conflict in the area of the
crash site to provide the fullest cooperation. Such
cooperation also entails facilitating safe and unhindered
access for the investigators and humanitarian personnel
to carry out their missions, including collecting the
relevant data, evidence, remains and personal effects
of the victims.

We wish to underscore that there must be no
interference at the crash site or any movement of debris
from the area, including the flight data recorders, or
black boxes. The integrity of the crash site must be
preserved. Malaysia also urges the Security Council
to undertake the necessary measures to ensure the
safety and security of humanitarian and investigative
personnel at the crash site in order for them to discharge
their duties and responsibilities.

No further facts have been established at this
point, but the fact that the plane might have been shot
down has made the matter even more painful for us.
Again, this is a grave reminder of how the escalation of
disputes and threats to international peace and security
can claim innocent lives in a most tragic and senseless
manner. In that regard, we urge the Security Council to
step up its role in facilitating a peaceful resolution to
the conflict between Russia and Ukraine with a view
to preventing the recurrence of such a tragic incident.

In conclusion, on behalf of the Government and
the people of Malaysia, I wish to reiterate our deep
appreciation for all the expressions of support, sympathy
and solidarity in this difficult and trying time.

