Mr. Hosseinian (Islamic Republic of Iran): I am
pleased to see you, Sir, presiding over our debate as the
Foreign Minister of a country friendly to the Islamic
Republic of Iran. Allow me also to express my appreciation
and thanks to Mr. Chowdhury and his colleagues for
organizing this open debate on the very important issue of
humanitarian aspects of issues before the Security Council.

Several humanitarian crises in 1999, especially those
in Kosovo and East Timor, helped intensify the discussion
of how the international community should deal with
humanitarian catastrophes. In the face of most such crises,
there is a consensus on the need for immediate action to
stop grave crimes, such as ethnic cleansing. We also
believe that the international community cannot stand by
and let thousands of people suffer gross and systematic
violations of their fundamental rights.

Having already pronounced ourselves in favour of
resolute action against the perpetrators of crimes in
humanitarian crises, we believe that any international
action, especially the use of force, must emanate from the
Security Council as the organ primarily responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security, provided
that it acts strictly in accordance with the letter and spirit of
the United Nations Charter.

Undoubtedly, the international community has no
other universally accepted legal basis for responding to
unjustifiable acts of violence threatening international
peace and security than the United Nations. It is within
this Organization that we must overcome political
limitations to be able to take action within the framework
of the Charter. A key factor in this regard is prompt and
early preventive action to ensure that most potential or
actual crises are dealt with by peaceful means. The
United Nations should opt for resolving conflicts before
the necessity arises to resort to forceful actions.

It is clear that violations of international
humanitarian law can be stopped only by taking action
that is in accordance with the Charter. Lawlessness can be
suppressed only by lawful methods. If we accept
interventions outside the United Nations framework, we
may be opening a Pandora's box, for there will always be
some tendencies to cover the sinister designs for
expansion through the use of force under the pretext of
humanitarianism and the protection of minorities and
ethnic groups.

Here, I would like to emphasize that we should not
be driven to destroy the legal basis of what we know of
as the state in the process of furthering humanitarian
causes. Hence, we must remain vigilant against a growing
trend towards undermining the principle of national
sovereignty - one of the principles on which the United
Nations itself was founded.

The Charter of the United Nations provides the basic
criteria and mechanisms for responding to threats to
international peace and security. As a last resort, the
international community may employ coercive measures,
including the use of military force, but this can be done
only in strict conformity with the Charter and pursuant to
a decision by the Security Council. We believe that
enforcement actions without Security Council
authorization and in contempt of the Charter tend to
undermine the current international security system. The
experience of Kosovo - where the Council failed to
agree on the necessary course of action and stood by
watching the unsanctioned action by a regional
organization - was detrimental to very basic principles
of international relations, and the international community
should strive to prevent a recurrence.

On the basis of this perspective, we note the
readiness of the Security Council to consider, within the
parameters of the Charter and given its own obligations,
situations in which civilians are targeted or in which

 

access to humanitarian assistance is deliberately impeded.
Yet we must keep in mind that the Council must perform
its tasks within the framework of its Charter obligations;
that is to say, it must intervene in cases where international
peace and security are threatened.

In this connection, I would like to reaffirm the need to
rid ourselves of double standards in upholding international
humanitarian law. The international community must give
equal attention to all conflict situations that lead to loss of
life or humanitarian catastrophes, regardless of where they
take place or the political considerations of one country or
another. It is disturbing that the Security Council has at
times been too slow in responding to the conflicts in Africa
and some other areas and too inadequate in committing
itself in terms of the measures and resources it has
authorized to address these problems. The threat of
allowing financial considerations to influence
decision-making on whether and how to respond to clear
threats to international peace and security is a matter of
great and growing concern. Such a

practice can weaken the Council's authority and that of
the Secretary-General in the planning and implementation
of peacekeeping operations. There is a general perception
that a uniform standard for responding to the outbreak of
conflicts in all parts of the world is lacking.

A more credible and representative Security Council
will be better equipped to fulfil its tremendous
responsibility. The Council should be more transparent,
more democratic and more accountable to the broader
membership. The current situation - in which developing
countries do not have an adequate and appropriate level
of representation on the body charged by United Nations
Members with the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security - should
not be allowed to continue. In this context, more efforts
are needed to streamline the decision-making process in
the Council, so as to avoid the paralysis that often results
from differences among the permanent members.

