Mr. Li Yongsheng (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks President Agius, President Meron and
Prosecutor Brammertz for their briefings on the work
of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals.

Over the past six months, the ICTY has continued
to make it progress in all aspects of its work. Under the
leadership of President Agius, it has overcome many
difficulties, including staff attrition, and implemented
in earnest the relevant Security Council resolutions in
a tireless effort to wrap up its judicial work before the
end of November. China commends the ICTY on its
work and hopes that it can redouble its efforts during
the remaining months to ensure the timely completion
of its judicial work and its closure before the end of
the year. The Tribunal has begun to plan closure-related
events. China will consider sending people to attend
these events.

Over the same period, the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, under the leadership
of President Meron, has made continued progress with
the beginning ofthe Stanisie and Simatovic' trial case in
June and the ongoing Karadeie and Seselj appeal cases.
The Residual Mechanism has issued 152 decisions and
orders and conducted its judicial activities in an orderly
fashion. It has adopted measures such as remotejudging,
double hatting and single judge adjudication to meet the
requirement of being small, temporary and efficient. It
has also successfully reintegrated one person who was
acquitted and one person who was released.

China commends the Residual Mechanism for
its progress over the past six months. We expect the
Mechanism to continue its strict implementation of
resolution 1966 (2010) and other relevant resolutions
of the Security Council, as well as the statute of the
Mechanism, and to diligently discharge its duty so as to
ensure steady, orderly and efficient progress in its work
on all fronts.

The ICTY will close before the end of the year.
China expects it to wind up its work in a smooth
and efficient manner. We hope that the ICTY will
collaborate closely with the Residual Mechanism in
order to effect a smooth transfer of the remaining work
from the former to the latter. China will continue to
support both institutions.

Finally, China would like to express its appreciation
to Uruguay, as Chairman of the Working Group on
International Tribunals, and the Office ofLegal Affairs
for the excellent work they have done.

