Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): Let me at the outset
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this timely
debate on security and development.

We endorse the statement made my Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

These deliberations will no doubt further inform
our thinking on this crucial area and in our view are
key to addressing security issues. Today's discussions
will help us to expand our focus beyond the Security
4s
Council's primary responsibility of maintaining
international peace and security.

Sri Lanka's Government recognized very early
that security and development went together. As the
Secretary-General has said, without development,
security will soon become untenable, and security is an
essential element of development. In fact, successive
Governments acknowledged that development was a
key element in countering the security threat posed to
my country by the terrorist group, the LTTE.
Accordingly, over the years significant attention was
given to a complex range of economic development
initiatives.

Recognizing the importance of education in this
approach, successive Governments, while maintaining
funding for education elsewhere in the country, never
reduced the funding and support provided to schools in
areas then dominated by the LTTE, despite the
consistent threat of children being recruited as child
combatants by the terrorist group. As we know,
UNICEF records indicate that over 5,700 children were
recruited as child combatants by the LTTE. The
number may have been much higher.

Similarly, conscious of the need to maintain
health standards throughout the country, the
Government continued to pump significant resources
into areas dominated by the LTTE to maintain
hospitals, clinics and medical staff.

Once the conflict ended, the Government became
even more conscious of the need to expedite
development and paid special attention to rehabilitation
and reconstruction. Hundreds of miles of paved roads
linking villages to towns were constructed. The
national electricity grid was extended to many remote
areas of the country, and bridges were built. Foreign
direct investors were encouraged to locate their
businesses away from the capital. Special attention is
being paid to reviving agriculture, fisheries and
tourism in the formerly conflict-affected areas. These
efforts are bearing significant results.

The economic policies of the Government have
borne fruit. Despite the fact that the 27 years of
conflict cost the country $200 billion in lost
opportunities, the per capita income doubled between
2005 and 2010 as Sri Lanka became a middle income
country. Ninety-seven per cent of our children attend
primary schools. Maternal mortality and child
mortality have dropped to an all-time low level.
Inflation and unemployment are at a record low, and
absolute poverty has decreased to 8.7 per cent.

Those indicators are clear evidence of
Government policies that recognize economic
development as a vital precondition to achieving
security and normalcy. In fact, stability and economic
development were used as incentives to encourage the
Tamil civilians to leave the grip of the LTTE during the
conflict. In 2007 and 2008, over 60,000 Tamil civilians
fled the LTTE-dominated areas to live in the south of
the country.

The same economic focus has been maintained by
the Government since the end of the conflict in May
2009. Since then, despite dire predictions of the long-
term concentration of internally displaced persons
(IDPs) in camps and of hunger, malnutrition and
disease, the Government, convinced of the need to
restore economic activity in the formerly conflict-
affected areas, has successfully returned 95 per cent of
the IDPs to their own villages and towns within a very
short period. The Government recognized early that
keeping the IDPs in camps was a costly proposition,
both in dollars and public relations, and that it would
be much better to make them economically active in
their own villages as early as possible. The
Government will continue to provide assistance to
those people so that they may resume normal economic
activities.

There have been no instances of diseases.
Malnutrition is no higher among the people who
returned to their villages from the IDP camps than in
certain other areas of the country, and it is currently the
subject of a broad study.

The Government recognizes that problems still
remain. While many irrigation canals have been
repaired, hundreds of miles of roads have been
reconstructed and electricity supplies have been
restored or connected, much more needs to be done to
restore the lives and livelihoods of the displaced to a
reasonable level, including by clearing mines from
villages. The unprecedented floods that have inundated
the lands of the same unfortunate people have put the
clock back on our targets. But Sri Lanka has clearly
recognized that economic development is a key to
ensuring security, restoring stability and rekindling
hope for the future among the conflict-affected people.

My delegation is of the view that better
education, social advancement and economic
development are key to addressing the root causes of
violence. Our focus on those areas needs to be
maintained. The multilateral system, led by the United
Nations, must enhance coordination, cooperation and
effective action with the goal of supporting
development as a key element of ensuring security.

