Mr. Belinga-Eboutou (Cameroon) (spoke in French): Allow me at the outset to congratulate you,
Madam, upon your presidency of the Security Council,
which you and your country are successfully
accomplishing during this month of January, and for
holding this public debate on peace, security and
development in the Great Lakes region.

My delegation would like to take this opportunity
to thank the Secretary-General for the quality, density
and exhaustive nature of his report.

Mr. Ibrahima Fall, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region, has
just made his presentation with the eloquence and
brilliance with which we are familiar. We thank him for
being able, with commitment but also in a very tactful
and discreet way, to support the States of the region in
preparing for and following up the first International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region. We
congratulate and thank him for his support for the
emergence of a climate of confidence among States of
the region, a climate propitious for holding the Second
Summit.

Cameroon strongly condemns the attack of
23 January on a detachment of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC), which caused the death of eight
soldiers of the Guatemalan contingent. Cameroon
sends its sincere condolences to Guatemala in this
painful hour.

The Great Lakes region is strongly committed to
seeking peace. Of course, serious efforts are still
needed to consolidate the peace and stability that are
the prerequisites for sustainable economic and social
development. The countries of the region, supported by
the international community, must redouble their
efforts to achieve the hopes for peace. My delegation
welcomes the fact that the Dar es-Salaam statement of
principle set out the road map to be followed. Since
then a process has been launched that allows us to
move towards that objective.

The challenges to be overcome at all costs
involve peace and security, democracy and good
governance, economic development and regional
integration, as well as humanitarian and social issues.
The interrelationship among those challenges and the
interdependence of the countries of the Great Lakes
region call for an integrated approach and for enhanced
cooperation in various forms. A framework is in place.
It must be strengthened, and we must continue the
negotiations within that framework.

The regional dynamic of peace, integration and
economic development depends on the stability of the
States in the region. My delegation would like to
welcome the generally positive political developments
taking place in those countries.

In Burundi we welcome all the efforts carried out
to achieve successful transition in line with the spirit of
Arusha, and we encourage the new authorities to
follow the process of reconstruction and to do so
through dialogue. The international community,
through the forum of partners of Burundi, must
continue to support them in their efforts. There is no
doubt whatsoever that the future Peacebuilding
Commission will also contribute with the means at its
disposal.

The return to peace and stability in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo will, we are sure,
allow a qualitative step towards the definitive
stabilization of the Great Lakes region. The recent
developments, with the success of the referendum on
the constitution and the good preparations for the
general elections on 30 June, are cause for real
optimism.

Here I wish to point out the symbolic value of the
date chosen for the elections. The thirtieth of June is
the day on which the Congolese people, as one man
and led by Patrice Emery Lumumba, made the solemn
promise to Africa and to the whole world to build a
Congo that was free, united and prosperous. Our wish
is that on that day that speech of 30 June will resonate
with the same force and energy in the hearts and minds
of all Congolese people.

Cameroon strongly favours a political process in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo that is
consensual, transparent and inclusive. However, there
are several pitfalls in the road ahead. There is still the
matter of armed groups. To end that problem the
countries of the region must, individually and
collectively, take resolute and concerted action. The
disbanding of armed groups and the disarmament,
repatriation and reintegration of former combatants,
including foreign combatants, is the other important
element of those needed efforts.

My country also welcomes in that connection the
fact that the Security Council adopted resolution 1649
(2005), which strengthens the action being taken
against those armed groups, who continue to threaten
civilians, especially women and children. They also
threaten the electoral process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and stability in the region.
Furthermore, the countries of the region and the
international community must increase their efforts in
the fight against the illegal exploitation of and illicit
trade in natural resources and the proliferation of and
trafficking in weapons that fuel the conflicts.

Finally - and this is our heartfelt conviction -
there can be no lasting peace in that region if women
and children continue to be marginalized and exploited
and subjected to violence of all forms, including sexual
violence. In that regard we welcome the quality of the
discussions in the Executive Board of the United
Nations Development Programme on 25 January.

It can never be said often enough that the success
of the upcoming International Conference on Peace,
Security, Stability and Development of the Great Lakes
Region will open new horizons for peace and
development. The international community must
support those countries in their efforts for the success
of that meeting. It should also support their efforts to
achieve peace and development.

Cameroon, for its part, is contributing to those
efforts in many ways. The Council will recall that in
1996, when it was holding the presidency of the pan-
African organization, President Paul Biya formally
proposed to the United Nations the idea of an
international conference on the Great Lakes. We
welcome the fact that that idea is now a reality.

By contributing a military observer and civilian
police personnel in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and in Burundi, Cameroon is working towards
peace and stability in the Great Lakes region. As
Mr. Ibrahima Fall said earlier today, the region lies at
the heart of the geopolitical space of Central Africa,
Southern Africa and East Africa.

I conclude by paying tribute to the memory of all
peacekeepers who have lost their lives on the field of
honour as they strove to build a world of peace and
progress.

