Ms. Rubio (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation expresses its gratitude to the Government
of Chile for the manner in which it has been
participating in the work of the Security Council, and
we wish to congratulate you, Madam President, for the
extraordinary initiative of holding this debate on a very
important issue: that of inclusive development for the
maintenance of international peace and security.

This debate is not only necessary but also timely.
The process of intergovernmental negotiations that is
beginning today in the General Assembly, which is
aimed at defining the objectives and goals of the post-
2015 development agenda, is without a doubt a key
opportunity to strengthen inclusive development as a
factor in ensuring international peace and security.

The international community has long sought to
reflect in its practices an unquestionable and complex
equation: the interdependence between peace and
security, sustainable development and human rights.
We have made progress in recognizing this threefold
reality and in working in a consistent manner, but
much remains to be done. It is important to stress from
the very outset the importance of the cross-cutting
work that the United Nations system as a whole must
carry out so as to ensure peaceful, just, inclusive and
democratic societies.

Mexico believes that the new parameters for global
development must be guided by principles such as social
and economic inclusion, so that we can ensure equal
opportunities for all persons, with special emphasis on
the marginalized, excluded and vulnerable. Our position
in this respect coincides fully with what was expressed
by President Bachelet, who has our full support.

It is a fact that we are facing increasingly complex
challenges to which our societies are, quite rightly,
demanding responses from their Governments and the
international institutions. Conflicts each have their
own particular features and dimensions, and there is
no one-size-fits-all solution. However, there is one
constant: the world still requires a renewed commitment
on our part to devise fresh approaches and solutions
aimed at reweaving the social fabric and ensuring, not
just promising to ensure, the conditions necessary for
inclusive development for our citizens.

Individuals and their welfare must be at the centre
of the efforts made at the national and international
level. In a genuine international community, there
should be no place for exclusion or lack of opportunity.
The effective prevention of conflict requires the
strengthening of the rule of law at the national and
international levels. I should like to stress that conflict
prevention is a bounden duty that is not limited to the
15 members of the Council. What we are dealing with
here is an unconditional responsibility of all States that
are permanent members of this universal Organization.
This requires a collective effort and political will
within the various bodies and agencies of the United
Nations system.

The processes of parallel review being carried out
in 2015 on the structure ofa peacebuilding architecture,
peacekeeping operations and the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security, in conjunction with the negotiations on
the post-2015 development agenda, must effectively
contribute to the promotion of inclusive development
and reaffirm the inextricable link among peace and
security, sustainable development and human rights.
We in Mexico are sure that the way ahead towards
a better future - a future of peace, prosperity and
greater opportunities - must begin with respect for
human rights law, the strengthening of transparency and
accountability, the creation of key infrastructure that
promotes development, the effective implementation
of reforms, and, of course, a combat against poverty
that features new ways to achieve inclusion and social
participation.

We reiterate our gratitude to the brotherly country
of Chile for having brought this important nexus of
issues to the table for debate today.

