Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): I would like to thank
you, Sir, for holding this important meeting and
congratulate you on a successful presidency. We
broadly share the priorities for today's debate arising
from the concept paper (S/2010/165), namely,
transparency, interaction with members at large and the
efficiency of the Council. Japan's valuable contribution
to reinforcing these three pillars is well known and
much appreciated.

The effectiveness and efficiency of the Council,
coupled with its openness and transparency, were the
guidelines of Ukraine's first and so far only Council
tenure as an independent State in 2000 and 2001. One
of the main lessons we learned was that greater
transparency and interaction with the general
membership are essential to the support of the
Council's decisions and their implementation in the
most critical areas, such as peacekeeping, counter-
terrorism, sanctions and others.

We welcome the number of new positive
developments thereafter, including the 2006
presidential note under discussion today (S/2006/507).
One of these relates to the strengthening of the
thematic edge of the Council's agenda. It bodes well
for the United Nations relevance that such pressing
issues as maritime piracy, the protection of civilians,
post-conflict peacebuilding, drug and arms trafficking
and other challenges have been featured more and
more prominently among the Council's activities.

Against this backdrop and with due consideration
for the primary responsibility of the Council in the
maintenance of interventional peace and security, we
would like such major topics as conflict prevention to
be more visible on the Council's radar. The sheer
complexity of this issue should not discourage the
Council from digging deeper into the richness of
preventive diplomacy. There are far too many crises in
which no timely alarm goes off before their eruption.

The way the Council interacts with the troop- and
police-contributing countries is of great importance to
Ukraine. We take positive note of some welcome
changes in this area thanks to collective and individual
efforts within the Council. The collective input,
channelled through the Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations established in 2001 with the
active support of Ukraine, proved to be particularly
instrumental. Private consultations with troop-
contributing countries well in advance of Council
meetings on relevant missions, such as those held this
month, are among the features that have to become
customary.

Yet there is room for further progress in the
Council's techniques in the area of peacekeeping,

especially in giving troop-contributing countries a
stronger voice in the decision-making process. In our
view, more regular consultations between the Working
Group and the General Assembly's Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations would serve that purpose.
The choice of the Working Group to close capability
gaps as one of its priorities for this year is quite fitting
for such cooperation.

Ukraine welcomes improvements in the Council's
handling of sanctions regimes by ensuring their
targeted and, where possible, time-bound character,
spelling out concrete conditions for lifting, improving
listing and de-listing, and providing for periodic
assessment. We encourage the Council's members to
further refine its methodology in this sphere.

We know, including from our own experience in
the Council, that much of what has been achieved by
this body can be attributed to the contribution of its
rotating members. They enter the Council with
innovative ideas, creative energy and an appetite for
making a mark on its work. That is why we believe that
the Council should look further into the most effective
ways of channelling and maximizing the profit from
this contribution. The need for more insight into the
Council's affairs is widely recognized by non-
members. In this regard, one could make a practical
suggestion for formalizing the currently ad hoc yet
valuable practice of holding regular briefings for the
regional groups by the non-permanent members they
delegated to the Council. In the same vein, we see
merit in giving due consideration to the idea of
revisiting the practice of interactive end-of-presidency
wrap-up meetings. In our view, members and non-
members of the Council alike would equally benefit
from this.

Ukraine encourages the Council to maintain and
build on the positive dynamic in streamlining its
modus operandi, while becoming more open and
transparent. In this regard, we believe that some recent
changes in terms of access to the Council are of a
technical and temporary nature.

We look forward to the revised version of the
2006 presidential note and to continuing today's
discussion in a more systematic manner. Ukraine
remains fully committed to a strong, effective, efficient
and transparent Security Council.

