Mr. Davide (Philippines): Because of time
limitations, I shall read out only a number of very
important portions of the statement of the Philippines.
My delegation respectfully requests that the full text be
circulated to delegations.

Calls for changes and reforms in the Security
Council are becoming louder and stronger. The focus
of this open debate is on changes and reforms in the
Council's working methods. Many Member States,
including the Philippines, believe that this area of
Council reform is the least controversial and that it is
immediately achievable. Proposals to that end could
have been successfully pursued much earlier had they
not, unfortunately, been mingled with, or tied to the
apron strings of, other Council reform proposals, such
as those regarding the question of equitable
representation on and increase in the membership of
the Security Council or even the issue of the veto
power.

Today's open debate sends a clear message that
reform of the Security Council's working methods can
and should be addressed separately from the other
areas of Council reform, which are more complex and
complicated. This open debate attests to the Council's
acknowledgement that it must come openly into the
picture and demonstrate its political will and moral
courage to reform its own working methods.

Thus, the Philippines commends and expresses
gratitude to the Belgian presidency of the Security
Council for holding this open debate during the last
week of its mandate, thereby happily ending its
stewardship with a historic event. For their special
contributions towards reform in this area, which are
detailed in the full text of this statement, the
Philippines also commends the Security Council and
its members, the group of five small countries, Japan,
Viet Nam and the Austrian Mission.

There are strong, valid, just and equitable reasons
why the Security Council should now decide upon and
adopt the needed changes and reforms in its working
methods. We must bear in mind and never forget that,
pursuant to Article 24 of the Charter, in order to ensure
prompt and effective action, Member States have
conferred on the Security Council primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security.

The majority view holds that that conferment is a
surrender of the sovereignty of Member States; a
8

minority view holds that it is but a delegation of
powers by Member States. It follows that, as of today,
177 Member States have, according to the majority
view, surrendered a part of their sovereignty or,
according to the minority view, delegated some of their
powers to the Security Council for this purpose only:
ensuring prompt and effective action in the
maintenance of international peace and security. In
carrying out its duties in relation to that responsibility,
the Security Council is vested with tremendous specific
powers under Chapters VI, VII, VIII and XII of the
Charter. The enumeration of specific powers does not
preclude the exercise of general powers.

All told, and in the light of the decisions,
resolutions and actions that it has taken so far in the
exercise of its powers, express or implied, the Security
Council is described as a legislator, judge and
executive in the final report and recommendations
from the Austrian Initiative 2004-2008 (S/2008/270, annex). It need not be stressed that, because of those
tremendous powers as legislator, judge and executive,
the Security Council, either as holder - or, better yet,
trustee - of the surrendered part of the sovereignty of
Member States or as their delegate and agent for the
exercise of that surrendered part, must, in its working
methods - now principally condensed into its
provisional rules of procedure - strictly adhere to
democratic practices and procedures, observe due
process and guarantee fairness, justice and equity to all
concerned. In other words, as recommended in the final
report and recommendations from the Austrian
Initiative, it must observe the rule of law in all its
proceedings. Among the essential elements of those
guiding principles are accountability, fidelity to trust,
predictability and transparency.

Thus, in general, the Philippines strongly
recommends that those portions of the note by the
President of the Security Council (S/2006/507) that
relate to those guiding principles and essential
elements now be reduced or transformed into concrete
and specific rules to be embodied in the Council's
provisional rules of procedure. In particular, the
Philippines recommends the following specific reform
proposals, which necessarily involve changes in or
amendments to the provisional rules of procedure.

First, the rules of procedure of the Security
Council, which have remained provisional for 62 years,
must now cease to be provisional. The word
"provisional" in the body of those rules, known as the
08-49242
provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council,
should be deleted. In 62 years, there have been only six
revisions to the rules - proof that the rules of
procedure have gained a very high degree of
permanency. And, if account is taken of the fact that,
among the principal United Nations organs, only the
Security Council has retained or maintained
provisional rules of procedure, one sees that something
indeed is amiss. Many may find the provisional
character of the 62-year-old rules of procedure of the
Security Council to be a conundrum in judicial
practice; they cannot divine its logic. In that regard, I
concur with the recommendation from the Austrian
Initiative that it be part of the Security Council's
commitment to the rule of law that it adopt formal
rules of procedure, rather than continuing to rely on
provisional rules.

Secondly, due process and the rule of law demand
that Member States that are not members of the
Security Council but are the subjects of the Council's
scrutiny should have the right to appear before the
Council at all stages of the proceedings concerning
them to state or defend their positions on the issues
that are the subjects of or are related to that scrutiny. At
present, such participation is unfairly limited by rules
37 and 38 of the provisional rules of procedure. Under
rule 37, a State Member of the United Nations that is
not a member of the Security Council may be invited to
participate only as a result of a decision of the Council
and only when the Council considers that the interests
of that non-member are specially affected or when that
non-member brings a matter to the attention of the
Council in accordance with Article 35(1) of the
Charter. That is a denial of due process, which is a
violation of the basic principle of the rule of law. Due
process and the rule of law require that a party must be
heard before it is condemned.

Then, under rule 38, while any State Member of
the United Nations that is invited to participate under
rule 37 or in application of Article 32 of the Charter
may submit proposals and draft resolutions, these
proposals or draft resolutions can be put to a vote only
at the request of a representative on the Security
Council. If the proponent State has no friends in the
Council, the right to make proposals is rendered
meaningless, making the proposal or draft resolution
an exercise in futility.

Thus, the Philippines recommends that rule 37 be
amended to provide that a State Member of the United
08-49242
Nations that is not a member of the Security Council
but which is under its scrutiny has the right to be
present and to be heard during all proceedings related
to such scrutiny and in any subsequent action that may
arise therefrom. Further, the Philippines also
recommends that rule 38 be amended to provide that
proposals or draft resolutions submitted by such a State
be discussed, acted upon and subject to a vote by the
Security Council without a prior request from a
Council member.

Thirdly, in view of the great increase in the
general membership of the United Nations, there is a
need for the Security Council to hear the views of that
general membership. Hence the Council should
increase the number of meetings, including informal
meetings, that are open to the general membership at
various stages of its consideration of a particular
matter. Such an approach will further promote
accountability and transparency and tend to invite the
general membership's more active cooperation with the
Council on the implementation of decisions taken on
that matter. Necessary changes resulting from this
approach could be set forth in chapter I of the rules of
procedure.

Fourthly, in compliance with the requirements
stemming from the principles of accountability and
transparency, the Security Council should consider the
wisdom and propriety of granting the wish of Member
States, particularly non-Council members, to receive
full information on issues discussed by the Council.
Non-Council members expect output documents to
faithfully and truly reflect discussions and
deliberations in the Council. It has been observed that,
as presented now, the annual report is not actually a
report in the true meaning of the word. The repertoire
of the practice of the Security Council, issued as
requested in paragraph l(b) of General Assembly
resolution 686 (VII) (5 December 1952), is useful and
a veritable constitutional guide to the proceedings of
the Security Council. The Council should look into the
way the repertoire is crafted in order to see how
information could be presented beyond mere simple
documentation.

The Security Council should also consider
releasing periodic reports or substantive summaries to
the General Assembly on matters the Council is seized
with during the course of each year. Periodic reporting
would enable the General Assembly and the general
9

membership to gain a more current appreciation of the
status of matters before the Council.

We hope to see the light at the end of the tunnel
on the issue of reform of the Security Council's
working methods within a reasonable time frame.

