Mr. Guterres (Timor-Leste): We thank you, Sir, for
convening this meeting on Timor-Leste during India's
presidency of the Security Council.

Since December 1975, the issue of Timor-Leste
has been on the agenda of the Security Council.
Many Security Council resolutions have been adopted
on Timor-Leste and many United Nations missions
established by the Council. Looking back, we can say
that this United Nations organ has successfully fulfilled
its obligations and mandate under the United Nations
Charter.

The report of the Secretary-General before us
(S/2012/765) highlights developments in Timor-Leste,
and I am confident that the statement of the Acting
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
my dear friend Finn Reske-Nielsen, will enrich our
discussions today.

Just few days ago, a delegation from the Security
Council honoured our country and our people with an
historic visit. We deeply appreciate that visit and the
briefing that was just given.

Today, 12 November, we celebrate Timor-Leste's
National Youth Day. It was established to honour
the courage and the dedication to freedom and the
independence of Timor-Leste shown by the students
and young people who marched in 1991 in Dili from
Motael Church to the cemetery of Santa Cruz to protest
the assassination of one of their comrades, Sebastiao
Gomes. Many were killed that day by the security
forces.

In May, we celebrated in Timor-Leste the tenth
anniversary of the restoration of our independence,
which followed the popular consultation ofAugust 1999.
Ten years ago, the world witnessed the birth of a
new country. With hope, courage and a good dose of
optimism, we, together with the United Nations, started
the extraordinary work of building a new country.

We have learned from our problems. During the
2006 crisis, about 150,000 people were internally
displaced. We started a genuinely inclusive dialogue
among State institutions as well as with civil society. It
was important for us that our fragility be recognized,
a fragility due mainly to our inability to leave behind
our traumatized conflict-ridden past and to the fact
that our institutions were still being developed, as
peacebuilding and State-building had to go hand in
hand. In 2009, Timor-Leste's Government proclaimed
a national motto - "Goodbye conflict, welcome
development" - enshrining the national spirit that
sought to end the cyclical problems that had plagued
the country in the past. For that policy to be effective,
we had to have local ownership and leadership, so as
to ensure that everyone would be an agent of our peace
and development.

We instituted critical reforms in the security
and defence sectors and established new institutions,
including an independent civil service commission
and an anti-corruption commission, and strengthened
the justice sector with the aim of promoting good
governance and the rule of law. In 2011, the Prime
Minister of the Fourth Constitutional Government,
Xanana Gusmao, launched a strategic development
plan, aimed at turning a low-income country into a
medium-high-income country by 2030.

Today, life expectancy at birth in Timor-Leste has
increased by more than two years and now averages
62.1 years. The gross national product per capita
increased 228 per cent during the same period to
more than $5,000. Average annual growth has been
double-digit for the last four years, and real non-oil
gross domestic product growth remains strong.
According to the 2010 national census, primary school
enrolment in Timor-Leste jumped from a modest 63 per
cent in 2006 to 90 per cent today. In the past three years
close to 200,000 adults have graduated from illiteracy
to functional literacy, and Timor-Leste will be able to
proclaim full adult literacy by 2015.

The visit in August of Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, with Mr. Gordon Brown, the United Nations
Special Envoy for Global Education and former Prime
Minister of the United Kingdom, and Ms. Irina Bokova,
the Director-General of UNESCO, to launch the new
United Nations education initiative was a historic
moment for education in our country and around the
world. In that context, we would like to pay tribute today
to the courage and intelligence of Malala Yousafzai,
the brave young schoolgirl from Pakistan; she is an
inspiration to us and to the world, and may God help
her recover fully.

In the health sector, significant progress has also
been made. Mortality in infants and children under five
years old has been halved. The incidence of malaria
and dengue fever and the prevalence of poverty have
decreased significantly. The incidence ofleprosy is now
lower than one case per 10,000 people, and the World
Health Organization considers it to have been medically
eliminated in Timor-Leste. The poverty rate has
declined, from 49 per cent in 2007 to 41 per cent today,
but it is still high and remains a major challenge for our
country. Access to clean water, sanitation, public health
and education, and investment in infrastructure are key
priorities that the Fifth Constitutional Government will
work towards in the next five years.

The Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
rates Timor-Leste one of the best performers in Asia,
and third in the world, in terms of accountability and
transparency in the management of our petroleum
resources. We have a dynamic multi-party democracy,
with four parties represented in the national Parliament.
Thirty-three per cent of the elected members of
Parliament are women, and several women hold key
ministerial portfolios. We have ratified all major
international human rights treaties and complied with
our reporting obligations. In Timor-Leste we have one
of the freest media in our region.

We understand, of course, that that success is
not only ours; it is also a United Nations success and
a success for the international community. From the
beginning, the United Nations, through its various
missions and agencies, has provided important
assistance in the areas of the rule of law, governance,
justice and human rights.

We remain strongly committed to fighting
corruption. Education and prevention are on the agenda
of the Anti-Corruption Commission. Mr. Aderito de
Jesus, the Anti-Corruption Commissioner, announced
recently that next July Timor-Leste will host the
Asia-Pacific Anti-Corruption Initiative of the Asia
Development Bank and the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development.

In March 2011 the Government of Timor-Lcste
applied formally to the Chair of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) for membership
in ASEAN. In consideration of the importance of
becoming part of ASEAN, the Fifth Constitutional
Government has appointed a Secretary of State for
ASEAN Affairs responsible for the preparations for
joining ASEAN.

This year we held peaceful and credible presidential
and parliamentary elections. A new President was
elected, and we witnessed a peaceful transfer of
power from Nobel laureate Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta to
the former Commander of the armed forces, Mr. Taur
Matan Ruak. The new Parliament was inaugurated and
the new Government appointed, with Xanana Gusmao
as Prime Minister.

On behalf of the President of the Republic, Mr. Taur
Matan Ruak, the President of our National Parliament,
Vicente Guterres, Prime Minister Xanana Gusmao, and
of our people, we would like to express our profound
gratitude to the Security Council and all its members,
the General Assembly, the Secretary-General and the
Secretariat, the Special Representatives and Deputy
Special Representatives, the commanders of the United
Nations military and police forces and all the members
of the United Nations missions and the countries that
have contributed to peace and stability in Timor-Leste.
We thank our neighbouring countries of Indonesia,
Australia and New Zealand, the countries of ASEAN,
the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries and
the core group for their continuing support to Timor-
Leste.

As a token of our profound appreciation, in May
next year the State and the people of Timor-Leste will
decorate every country that has sent citizens to Timor-
Leste, as a way of honouring their contributions and as
a sign of our deep gratitude to the United Nations.

As a Member of the United Nations, we will
continue to do our best to guarantee peace and stability
in Timor-Leste, to share our experiences and lessons
learned, as we are doing now through the Group of
Seven Plus, and to continue to contribute in a modest
way to United Nations missions and the work of United
Nations agencies.

As an expression of our solidarity today, Prime
Minister Xanana Gusmao announced in Haiti that
Timor-Leste will contribute $1 million to peacebuilding
and development initiatives in Haiti.

The Fifth Constitutional Government will
continue to count on the invaluable contribution of
political parties, religious communities, the media,
non-governmental organizations and traditional leaders
in order to develop the country for the benefit of all of
its citizens, based on the rule of law, social justice and
inclusion, gender equality, peace and harmony.

