Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): I should like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Feltman for his
comprehensive briefing. We also welcome the timely and
relevant report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/467),
which underscores a number of the significant features
of the threat we face.

The attacks over the past weeks in Manchester,
Kabul, Baghdad, London and Tehran are a stark
reminder, if one were needed, of the continued and
shared threat that we all face from terrorist groups.
The aim of these acts is clear - to create fear and
mistrust within communities and between countries.
The attackers targeted women and children in Baghdad
who were breaking their Ramadan fast with a treat of
ice cream. In Manchester, they targeted young children
seeing their favourite singer perform.

However, in the response to these most recent
attacks, we have seen the opposite of fear and division.
In fact, rather than fear, there were acts of courage and
incredible bravery on the part of ordinary individuals.
Rather than division, all sections of society across
many countries came together in solidarity for vigils
and marches that sent a message of unity and peace.

Since our last briefing in February (see S/PV.7877),
our capital, Stockholm, was the target of an attack
that is being investigated as a terrorist attack. The
perpetrator is suspected of being a sympathizer or
member of Da'esh. In response, thousands of Swedes
gathered in Stockholm's central square to mourn the
dead, but also in a show of defiance - showing, as our
Prime Minister said, "that there is a strength in Sweden
that nobody can take away from us".

Responding to the threat of terrorism requires
solidarity not only within countries, but also between
countries. In March, Sweden hosted the first Nordic
Regional Meeting of Security Services, which included
the participation of the Monitoring Team. As noted in
the trip report, the terrorist threat posed by Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant in the Nordic countries
is rising, in particular with regard to foreign terrorist
fighters returning from conflict zones.

In order to counter and prevent the threat, we have
introduced legislation specifically targeting foreign
terrorist fighters and returnees. We have increased
national inter-agency cooperation and taken steps
to ensure that local actors are involved in the effort
to prevent terrorism and violent extremism. Sweden
now makes an assessment of each returnee, seeking to
identify individuals who are deemed to pose a risk or
suspected of crimes. If they are found to pose such a
risk, they are monitored, investigated and tried.

As part of our strong focus on prevention, we are
putting in place mechanisms aimed at safeguarding
vulnerable individuals, targeting in particular those at
risk of radicalization. In addition, rehabilitation and
support for defectors requires a broad spectrum of
interventions at all levels - municipal, regional and
national. We stress the importance of strengthening
the fight against impunity for terrorist acts, including
by holding the perpetrators, organizers and sponsors
of terrorist attacks responsible. All measures
against terrorism must be taken in compliance with
international law, including international human
rights law, international refugee law and international
humanitarian law.

We must all make every effort possible to cut
off the supply of financing to terrorist organizations.
Domestically, we have revised the offence of terrorist
financing in line with the updated international
standards mentioned in the report. Even though we
had successfully prosecuted and convicted individuals
for terrorist financing before these revisions, we
believe that the updated legislation will provide our
law enforcement authorities with new possibilities
for prosecuting terrorist financing, in line with
relevant Security Council resolutions and other
international obligations.

We agree that information-sharing on risks, as
stated in paragraphs 38 and 39 of the report, is an
essential tool in the fight against terrorist financing.
The more the authorities and the private sector know
about the means through which terrorists attempt to
finance their activities, the better our opportunities to
put an end to it. Our ultimate goal in this regard must be
to detect and stop attacks before they take place.

We encourage the Secretary-General to apply an
integrated gender perspective in future reports, as
mandated in resolution 2242 (2015). Among Swedish
foreign terrorist fighters, several have been women. We
want to reiterate the multiple roles played by women
in relation to terrorism, including those of perpetrator,
supporter, facilitator, victim and preventer. Each of
these roles requires different approaches and strategies
as part of our fight against terrorism.
The attacks we have witnessed over the last three
weeks will not be the last. However, with a common
will and collective action future attacks need not be
inevitable. The message from those who have stood up
with courage and dignity in the face of terrorist attacks
is this: the resilience of the human spirit means that
those who seek to sow terror will never truly succeed.

