Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I wish to
begin by thanking the High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin Inzko, for his briefing
and for his sincere, direct statements, which are those
of a true friend of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

I also associate myself with the statement to
be made later by the Head of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations.

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina continues
to be delayed in comparison to that of its neighbours
with respect to drawing closer to the European Union.
Mr. Inzko's report (S/2014/777, annex) notes a number
concerns and I will not dwell on them. I will focus on
three points in my statement.

First of all, after having clearly shown their
dissatisfaction last February, Bosnians went to the
polls in October in similar proportions to those that are
usually expected in other European countries, which
bears witness to their appropriation of the democratic
exercise. Even if the elections took place in a tense
environmnet, there was no deterioration of the security
situation, putting the February demonstrations in their
true place. Their excesses were a deplorable yet isolated
episode; they were, above all, a profound call of Bosnian
society to the elite that governs it.

The main victors of the elections are the nationalist
leaders of a long-standing political class that until
now has shown that it is unable to make the country's
institutions work, respond to the needs of the population
or even create prospects for the future. But we note with
satisfaction that the election campaign also dealt with
socioeconomic concerns of Bosnians, leaving room for
hope that ethnic dividing lines will disappear in time
from the political arena. A new political consciousness
is gradually emerging, which makes it possible to truly
respond to the aspirations of the people. We must work
collectively to give them a long-term perspective that
favours that emergence.

Secondly, the prospect of European integration is
the only Viable way forward for the future of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. That prospect must function as
it has in the rest of the Balkans as a catalyst for the
transformation of the country. It is a mistake to say
that this perspective is imposed from the outside world
against the will of the population. It is the will of the
Bosnians themselves, as recalled by their representative
here at the United Nations just seven weeks ago (see A/69/PV.12).

This hope bears witness to the attraction that the
European Union has never failed to exercise and is, inter
alia, the factor for cohesion and movement forward in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We affirm our commitment
to seeing Bosnia and Herzegovina join the European
Union as a united, sovereign country enjoying its full
territorial integrity. All of Europe sends that message
to Bosnians.

Denying that prospect to Bosnia and Herzegovina is
the expression ofa will to keep it in a fragile, precarious
situation, at the mercy of the national slippages that
lead to the tragedies we have seen elsewhere. Giving
ground to this discredited political class is what keeps
Bosnia and Herzegovina in a rut.

On the contrary, it is the responsibility of the
Security Council to celebrate the positive effect of
the European prospect for Bosnia and Herzegovina's
security, as we do through the resolution we have
just adopted (resolution 2183 (2014)). Denying it
would be neglecting the Council's responsibilities and
demonstrating ignorance with respect to the role that
European Union plays in the Balkans.

In that connection, we regret that the Russian
Federation abstained in the voting, when it could play a
positive role when it comes to the historic and cultural
links that join it to the Balkans. We regret that Russia
tried to expose an artificial disunity in the Security
Council on a subject on which there is in fact unanimity.
The European Union acts on all levels in Bosnia and
Herzegovina in response to the immediate needs of the
population, assisting the country's authorities so that
they can take the necessary reform measures to make
their country function properly.

In that context, the European Union-led peacekeeping
force in Bosnia and Herzegovina (EUFOR) Operation
Althea is intervening to support the authorities in a
residual fashion. EUFOR Althea plays decisive role
in permitting the Bosnian security forces to work
autonomously, and thus to participate in the emergence
of a peaceful society looking towards the future. Given
that we have just voted in favour of authorizing the
deployment of the mission, it is normal that we recall
the framework in which EUFOR Operation Althea
operates: the mission operates on the ground based on
the policy of integrateing Bosnia and Herzegovina into
the European context.

The last point I want to make is that the framework
inherited from Dayton continues to be the framework
of reference for action by the international community
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. High Representative
Inzko, guarantor of the Peace Accords, has our full
support. We recall that all parties have the obligation
to cooperate with him and his Office pursuant to the
Accords. We also call on all the constituent parties in
Bosnia and Herzegovina to stop all nationalist rhetoric
and put an end to any actions or intentions that could
divide country. Our message is clear: there can be
no calling into question of Bosnia and Herzegovina's
territorial integrity.

The process of reconfiguring the Office of the
High Representative remains ongoing. It is important
that it continue in order to bolster the consistency of
the international presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina
through an increasingly close cooperation with the
head of the European Union delegation in the country.

