The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and with the consent of the members of
the Council, I shall take it that the Council agrees to
extend an invitation to the representative of Greece to
participate in the meeting without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Magriotis
(Greece) took the seat reservedfor him at the side
ofthe Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of
the Council, I extend a warm welcome to His
Excellency Mr. Ioannis Magriotis, Deputy Minister for
Foreign Relations of Greece.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency Mr. Cesar Gaviria, Secretary General of the
Organization of American States.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to Mr. Cesar Gaviria, Secretary General of the
Organization of American States, and invite him to
take the seat reserved for him at the side of the Council
Chamber.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency Mr. Fholisani Sydney Mufamadi,
representative of the presidency of the African Union
and Minister for Provincial and Local Government of
South Africa.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to His Excellency Mr. Fholisani Sydney
Mufamadi, representative of the presidency of the
African Union and Minister for Provincial and Local
Government of South Africa, and invite him to take the
seat reserved for him at the side of the Council
Chamber.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency Mr. Amre Moussa, Secretary-General of the
League of Arab States.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to His Excellency Mr. Amre Moussa,
Secretary-General of the League of Arab States, and
invite him to take the seat reserved for him at the side
of the Council Chamber.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency Ambassador Jan Kubis, Secretary-General
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to His Excellency Ambassador Jan Kubis,
Secretary-General of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, and invite him to take the seat
reserved for him at the side of the Council Chamber.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, Executive
Secretary of the Economic Community of West African
States.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to His Excellency Mr. Mohamed Ibn
Chambas, Executive Secretary of the Economic
Community of West African States, and invite him to
take the seat reserved for him at the side of the Council
Chamber.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

I wish to draw to the attention of the
representatives of regional organizations, Security
Council members and other delegations attending this
meeting that present in this Chamber are a group of
Mexican parliamentarians who are members of the
various political parties that constitute the Mexican
legislative branch. They are representatives of the
National Action Party, the Institutional Revolutionary
Party, the Party of the Democratic Revolution, the
Green Ecological Party of Mexico and the Labour
Party. We have with us four members of the Senate of
the Mexican Republic: Ms. Silvia Hernandez, Mr.
Jorge Zermefio, Mr. Jesus Ortega and Ms. Isabel
Castellanos. We are also accompanied by seven
members of the Mexican Chamber of Deputies: Ms.
Elena Alvarez, Mr. Francisco Javier Senchez
Campuzano, Ms. Maria de los Angeles Senchez Lira,
Ms. Erika Elizabeth Spezia, Mr. Felix Castellanos, Mr.
Eddie Varon and Mr. Julio Castellanos.

I wish also to express my appreciation for the
presence of ministers and other high officials attending
this meeting on behalf of the Organization of American
States, the League of Arab States, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, the African
Union, the European Union and the Economic
Community of West African States. Those
organizations have distinguished themselves by virtue
of a high level of cooperation with the United Nations
in the field of international peace and security.
Together with the Association of South-East Asian
Nations, the Commonwealth of Independent States, the
Caribbean Community, the Southern African
Development Community, the Council of Europe, the
Pacific Islands Forum, the Organization of the Islamic
Conference, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization,
the International Organization of la Francophonie and
the Commonwealth Secretariat, they are working
actively with the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan,
to develop a framework of greater cooperation in those
areas. We are confident that, with their contributions
today, we shall take a new and important step on behalf
of international peace and security, perhaps marking
the beginning of a new stage in international relations.

The challenges that we currently face and the
firm resolve to act within the framework of
international law and within the multilateral system
that we have built with such effort oblige us to identify
courses of action that will strengthen the notion of
collective security as well as ways to achieve the
peaceful settlement of conflicts. That is a historic and
unavoidable responsibility for all of us who aspire to
build a secure, prosperous and democratic international
environment that is governed by the rule of law and
that promotes the common interest.

For that reason, I invite those participating in this
public meeting to consider, within an interactive format
and with our eyes focused on the future, the most
pressing issues, with a view to determining together
how the United Nations and the organizations
represented here can trace out a course of action
capable of meeting the demands of the circumstances.

In order to facilitate an interactive dialogue, the
Secretary-General and representatives of regional
organizations are invited to make brief statements of
seven to 10 minutes each. Three to five minutes will be
provided for them to respond to questions or comments
from members of the Security Council. Two members
of the Council will take the floor for three to five
minutes each to make comments or ask questions after
each statement made by representatives of regional
organizations.

I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kofi Annan, and invite him to take the floor.


