Mr. Adechi (Benin) (spoke in French): Benin
voted in favour of the resolution that the Council has
just adopted, marking a new turning point in the
international community's mobilization on behalf of
the Sudanese people and in the search for a speedy
resolution to the humanitarian tragedy in Darfur.
Throughout the negotiations, my delegation strove to
contribute to the forging of consensus and the follow-
up to the report of the Secretary-General, whose
presence we welcome.

The report describes the situation in Darfur and
the extent of the Sudanese Government's fulfilment of
its obligations to the international community. We
should therefore have preferred the Council's
unanimity on the matter. We should also have liked the
resolution to refer to Chapter VIII of the Charter in
order to highlight the cooperation and consultation
necessary between the United Nations and the regional
organizations. We felt that the reference in paragraph
14 to the petroleum sector, with respect to the threat of
sanctions, lessened the prospect of a consensus, which
might have been broader if the sponsors of the
resolution had agreed to drop the reference, given the
controversy and the controversial interpretations to
which it may be subject.

Having said that, Benin generally supports the
resolution, which expresses the Security Council's will
to remain committed to encouraging the Sudanese
authorities to act efficiently to improve the security
situation and, above all, to halt the attacks on civilians
in Darfur. We firmly support the appeal to donor
countries to increase humanitarian assistance for
displaced persons. We support the requirement that all
militias, in particular the Janjaweed, be disarmed. We
support the facilitation of the voluntary return of
millions of displaced persons. We support the extensive
promotion of the lead role of the African Union. We
support the disarmament of the militias and all of the
armed factions and the bringing to justice of those
responsible for atrocities. Finally, we support the
establishment of an international commission of
inquiry, under United Nations auspices.

We believe that the international community is
well equipped to play a role in finding a solution to the
humanitarian crisis. It is urgent that we halt the
hecatomb in Darfur. The situation there is totally
unacceptable as regards the renewed commitment of
the United Nations in favour of human dignity, which
is denied to millions of citizens of a country that is a
full Member of the United Nations and where the
principles enshrined in the Charter proclaim their faith
in the fundamental rights and the dignity and the worth
of the human being.

We would like to take this opportunity in our turn
to make an urgent appeal to all Sudanese parties to
cooperate actively with the African Union by accepting
the deployment of military observers and protection
forces in sufficient numbers to ensure security for
humanitarian assistance and to achieve progress in
negotiations under way in Abuja so that a political
solution to the conflict in Darfur can be achieved as
soon as possible.

We urge the international community to increase
its assistance to the endangered population to save as
many human lives as possible in Darfur and to provide
the African Union with the necessary assistance in
order to permit a peaceful solution to the conflict and
the subsequent management of the peace process.

