Mr. Siala (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, it gives me great pleasure to congratulate you,
Mr. President, my dear friend Angelino Alfano, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs ofItaly, on your assumption
ofthe presidency ofthe Security Council for this month.
I would also like to thank Mr. Ghassan Salame, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Libya, for
his valuable briefing. My thanks also go to Mr. Skoog,
Permanent Representative of Sweden, for his briefing,
in which he touched on the most recent developments
with regard to the sanctions on Libya in his capacity
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya.

I would like to reaffirm that the Government of
National Accord is eager to support all United Nations
efforts to assist the Libyan parties in reaching full
agreement on various contentious issues in order to put
an end to the crisis in Libya, stop the bloodshed and
alleviate the suffering of the Libyan people.

As the Council knows, the suffering of the Libyan
people increases daily on various fronts in the light of
the deteriorating security situation and the political
divide in the country. Despite the serious attempts
of some national parties to resolve the situation and
to overcome the ongoing impasse, differing political
interests among the actors have led to the continuing
instability and prevent the Government of National
Accord from discharging its duties, in particular those
relating to the provision of basic services to citizens.
In that regard, we hope that international and regional
efforts will continue until a political consensus among
all Libyan parties is reached in order to achieve peace
and stability in the country.
It would be remiss of me not to highly commend the
concerted efforts of Mr. Salame in recently organizing
the round of talks in the sisterly country of Tunisia,
where he brought together representatives of the House
of Representatives and the High State Council in
order to agree on a consensus text and to amend the
Libyan Political Agreement, signed on 15 December
2015. In that regard, we hope that the efforts of the
Special Representative will continue to bring an end
to that divide and to unite all Libyans, and that rapid
solutions are achieved in order to overcome the current
obstacles, in the light of the current standstill, to reach
an understanding between the House ofRepresentatives
and the High State Council, and to organize and hold
elections and the referendum on the Constitution as
soon as possible next year. We, in turn, have already
taken some steps to support the High National Electoral
Commission so as to hold elections in the near future.

Despite the great challenges in Libya, the
Government of National Accord has spared no effort
in addressing all those issues in a balanced and
transparent way by involving all Libyan actors, both
political and military, so as to bridge the gap and
to unite Libya on the basis of its national interests.
That is the national duty for which the Government
of National Accord was established - namely, to
achieve reconciliation, build civilian and democratic
State institutions, and provide services to the Libyan
people, who are exhausted by conflict and the political
divide. We underscore the fact that there is no military
solution to the crisis in Libya. There is a need to unite
the military and security institutions so that they come
under the civilian executive authority.

In that regard, we welcome the recent talks in
Cairo, hosted by Eygpt, which led to a meeting between
the military leaders of the Government of National
Accord and their counterparts in the eastern part of the
country. We hope that that will give rise to an effective
proposal on distancing the military institutions from
the political conflict so that we can focus on combating
terrorism and on protecting the State.

The Government of National Accord condemns
the recent events targeting representatives of the
Government of National Accord and the recent decisions
of parallel bodies, such as the detention and isolation of
mayors of certain provinces and other bodies that are
in contact with the Government of National Accord,
leading to the issue of an arrest warrant for the Mayor
of Tobruk. We strongly condemn such acts, which
counteract our efforts to provide services to all Libyan
cities and to shield citizens from the political conflict.
Such acts also violate the resolutions of the Security
Council, the League of Arab States, the African Union,
the European Union and the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, which call for an end to cooperation with
those parallel bodies.

The Government of National Accord also condemns
violence among Libyans and the policy of settling
accounts by force and detaining people on the basis of
identity, including abductions, torture, extrajudicial
killings and other acts that are tantamount to war
crimes and crimes against humanity. The perpetrators
must be handed over to the legitimate authorities so
that they can be held accountable.

The Government of National Accord condemns the
use of violence against any unarmed civilian or any
step to harm civilians in any Libyan city.

In that vein, we recall the bombing of civilians
in Wadi Nina on 20 September and the criminal air
strikes on Derna on 30 October, which killed many
innocent people, most ofthem women and children. We
categorically reject such criminal acts. We contacted
the Security Council at that time through the Permanent
Mission of Libya to the United Nations, expressing our
condemnation and rejection of those criminal acts. We
asked the Council for assistance to investigate this
terrorist act, determine the circumstances surrounding
it and identify the perpetrators. Once again, we call
on the Security Council to convene a special meeting
to consider that incident and take appropriate action.
We also call on the Council and the international
community to assist in lifting the two-year siege
imposed on Derna and open humanitarian corridors in
order to ensure access to humanitarian aid for civilians.

Due to the deteriorating security situation, my
country is suffering from many challenges that have
undermined the capacities of the Libyan people,
including the smuggling of oil and its derivatives by
criminal armed gangs involved in numerous illicit
activities, such as human trafficking. Recently, my
Government requested that the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya
renew the listing of two vessels for attempting to
illicitly export Libyan oil derivatives.

In that regard, we hope that the flag countries will
provide assistance to determine the circumstances
of that incident, prevent such illicit acts and return
the smuggled shipments to the legitimate Libyan
authorities. We also note that lifting the ban on the
listed vessels, despite their failure to comply with the
law or return the smuggled shipments to the legitimate
Libyan authorities, would certainly encourage the
smugglers to pursue the same course. We also reaffirm
the right of the Libyan nationaljudiciary to investigate,
indict and prosecute the perpetrators of those acts and
to claim reparations from the countries concerned
through international justice.

Turning to the frozen Libyan assets - an issue
that we have addressed before the Council more than
once - everyone is already aware of the concerns of
the Government of National Accord. From the outset,
resolution 1970 (2011) has reflected the international
community's desire to protect the wealth of the Libyan
people. It was meant not to punish Libya, but to
preserve Libyan assets from being squandered during
the revolution and transitional period after the fall of
the previous regime. Thus, it was intended to last only
for a specific period of time that and did not foresee
that the protracted Libyan crisis would endure for more
than six years. The frozen assets regime therefore has
a negative impact on the interests of the Libyan people
and future generations.

I note that our Permanent Mission to the United
Nations has been communicating with the Security
Council since March 2016 and repeated its request in June
2017, in two Security Council documents - S/2016/275
and S/2017/543 - in addition to the letter by His
Excellency the President of the Presidential Council of
the Government of National Accord, Mr. Faiez Serraj,
addressed to the President of the Security Council and
contained in document S/20l7/629, on the regrettable
state of the frozen Libyan assets under the current
sanctions regime. The Libyan State is not asking for
the freeze on the assets to be lifted, but calling for a
particular formula that would assist it in managing
its wealth and investments, while frozen, so that they
are not gradually lost, as is the case year after year
in significant amounts. We therefore call upon the
Security Council once again to address that issue and
stop such losses as soon as possible so as to thereby
preserve the assets and wealth of the Libyan people.

To conclude, we note the high-level meeting held
by the Secretary-General on 20 September, at which the
vital role ofthe United Nations in resolving the Libyan
crisis was stressed. In that regard, the Government
of National Accord renews its commitment to and
cooperation with the United Nations through the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ghassan Salame, in order to put an end to the
political division and fragmentation in Libya and open
new horizons that will focus on finding a decisive

solution to address the suffering of the Libyan people
owing to the deteriorating services, or lack thereof, and
economic and financial distress.

