Mr. Diallo (Guinea) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes your presence here today with us.
We would like to thank you for organizing this
meeting, just at the time that your country is taking
over the presidency of our Council. I assure you of our
full cooperation. Allow me to take this opportunity to
extend our thanks to Mr. Adolfo Aguilar Zinser for the
able manner in which he guided the work of the
Council in February.

Mr. President, I would also like, through you, to
welcome Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch, High Representative
for the Implementation of the Peace Agreement on
Bosnia and Herzegovina; Mr. Jacques Paul Klein,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General; and
Mr. Javier Solana, Secretary-General of the Council
and High Representative for Common Foreign and
Security Policy of the European Union. Their
statements have certainly given us further information
about the processes under way in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. I would like to reiterate my delegation's
support for the efforts being made by all those involved
in the peace process in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Following consideration of the Secretary-
General's report on the United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) on
5 December 2001, the Council assessed the slow but
steady progress being made on the ground. It regretted
difficulties facing the Mission and expressed its resolve
to continue supporting it. Now would seem the right
time to reflect altogether on follow-on action for
UNMIBH. Here we have to think about the spirit of
Mr. Klein's words when he said that Bosnia is a test for
us and that to abandon a multi-ethnic Bosnia would
sound the death knell for all States in the Balkans.

It is undeniable that progress has been made by
UNMIBH after six years of major commitment on the
ground. Now comes the question of an exit strategy.
Here, the role of regional organizations, particularly
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) and the European Union, can offer
significant support. It would be desirable not just to
work on an exit strategy, but rather to develop a
genuine strategy to ensure that the country can fully
join the international community and European
institutions and structures.

The information given to us by Mr. Solana,
Mr. Klein and Mr. Petritsch show that the European
Union is indeed resolved to take over from UNMIBH.
My delegation welcomes the conclusions of the
General Affairs Council of the European Union on
18 February 2002 and those of the Steering Board of
the Peace Implementation Council of 28 February
2002. We welcome the Peace Implementation Council
Steering Board's acceptance of the European Union
offer to provide a police mission, beginning 1 January
2003, to take over and continue the work done by
UNMIBH. We welcome the appointment by the
Steering Board of Lord Paddy Ashdown as High
Representative to replace Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch, who
has done an outstanding job.

My delegation would like to pay tribute to the
electoral commission of Bosnia and Herzegovina for
the work done in preparing for the first general
elections, to be held on 5 October 2002. We appeal to
the leaders of the political parties to ensure that
citizens are able to do their civic duty and exercise all
their rights. The commitment of the political leaders,
the participation of the people and the support of the
international community are all essential in this regard.

The task force initiative referred to by the High
Representative merits our consideration.

My delegation has taken note of the information
contained in the twenty-first report of the High
Representative on the activities carried out from
26 August 2001 to 19 February 2002, within the
context of implementing the Peace Agreement in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Those activities are
extremely important.

In conclusion, I would like to stress the need to
prepare a coherent strategy based on the restoration and
consolidation of peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. My
delegation encourages coordination among the
activities of UNMIBH, the European Union and the
High Representative with a view to ensuring a seamless
transition from the International Police Task Force to
the European Union Police Mission. We believe that
those efforts can be supplemented by the
harmonization of the activities of the United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes, as well as of other
actors.

