Mr. Heusgen (Germany): At the outset, we would like to welcome the start of the Afghanistan peace negotiations in Doha last Saturday. It is a major achievement, which we have all been awaiting for many years. We would like to thank and congratulate allsides involved, especially our Qatari friends for their facilitation of the first round of negotiations. Now that the peace negotiations have started, it is indeed in Afghan hands to define the future path of the country, just as it should be. The United Nations and regional and international partners will do their part to support and facilitate this process. At the same time, it is essential to send a signal of international unity and support to the negotiating parties and to all Afghanistan. In this respect, we welcome today's unanimity - all 15 countries voting in favour of resolution 2543 (2020). Germany, as the co-penholder in the Security Council, is the second-largest donor and the second- largest troop-contributor but, as a close friend of Afghanistan's for many decades, also remains firmly committed to finally achieving peace. The economic, social, political and development gains made in the past two decades, including in the field of human rights, especially the rights of women, children and marginalized groups, must be protected and built upon. Together with our friends from Qatar, Norway, Uzbekistan and our co-penholder, Indonesia, we will do our best to facilitate future rounds in the Afghanistan peace negotiations. I have said it many times, and I will say it again - the violence must stop now, in particular now that the peace negotiations have started. There has to be a sustainable ceasefire. The lives of innocent civilians, among them many women and children, must no longer be at risk. We particularly condemn the recent attack targeted at the Vice-President of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan, which claimed the lives of at least 10 people. This is an unacceptable assault against the constitutional bodies of the Republic. But, of course, any attack targeting civilians or hospital, medical and humanitarian personnel and facilities is unacceptable. Our thoughts and prayers are with those who lost family members and loved ones over the past month. As all members know, sustainable peace can be achieved only through an Afghan-led, Afghan-owned peace process that includes all relevant stakeholders, including women. Women must be equally and meaningfully represented at all levels and all stages of the peace process. In this respect, I must say that it is worrisome to see from the pictures of the peace negotiations that there is not a single woman participating in the process on the Taliban side. The text of today's resolution is balanced and strong and the result of very hard collective work by all of us. It welcomes the start of inclusive Afghanistan peace negotiations. It includes strengthened references to the rights of women, youth and minorities, as agreed upon in last year's resolution 2489 (2019). It underlines the importance of international and regional cooperation. It lays out the threat posed by the coronavirus disease and that the international community must assist Afghanistan in tackling the pandemic. It makes us aware of the terrorist threats and of the important goal of going after the narcotics trade. Finally, and most important, the resolution gives the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan a strong mandate for another crucial year. As co-penholders, Indonesia and Germany invested a lot into this resolution. I would like to take this opportunity to thank my neighbour, Mr. Dian Triansyah Djani, and the Indonesian delegation for the wonderful and very good, close cooperation during the past 20 months. We have invested a great deal in previous resolutions, press statements and other Council products. We would like to take this opportunity to thank all present for the trust they have placed in us. We will have another meeting on the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan in December, but this is presumably the last time that we will be adopting a resolution together. It is really a joint effort, and we should be proud of it.
