Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): I should like to
begin by thanking the co-sponsors for their efforts in
consulting with the Council's member States on the
draft resolution before us today. Before I proceed,
permit me to reiterate Indonesia's principled position
with regard to the issue before the Council.

First, Indonesia underscores the imperative to
find a peaceful solution to any question related to
nuclear non-proliferation. Secondly, any solution must
be guided by the need to protect the integrity of
multilateral arrangements, particularly the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT),
which is fundamentally based upon three main pillars,
namely, non-proliferation, the peaceful uses of nuclear
energy and nuclear disarmament. Finally, it is a matter
of fact that a State's effort to exercise its inalienable
right to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy borders on
the proliferation aspect. In that regard, Indonesia has
full confidence in the credibility, independence and
efficiency of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) as the sole competent authority for the
verification of the respective safeguards obligations of
Member States.

In determining the right course of action with
regard to the issue under discussion, Indonesia has
been guided by the important information contained in
the latest report of the Director General of IAEA,
issued on 22 February 2008, which revealed several
key findings.

Indonesia appreciates Iran's efforts to show
greater cooperation and, at the same time, more
transparency to the Agency. The Agency has thus been
able to continue to verify the non-diversion of declared
nuclear material in Iran. In addition, the report stated
that the Agency's knowledge about Iran's current
declared nuclear programme has become clearer due to
Iran's provision of information similar to which it had
provided pursuant to the additional protocol.
Furthermore, Iran has provided the Agency with access
to declared nuclear material and has provided the
required nuclear material accountancy reports in
connection with declared nuclear material and
activities.

We have carefully considered both the report and
the draft resolution before the Council today. With
regard to the outstanding issues, we note that the
Agency considered that all remaining outstanding
issues contained in the work plan, with the exception
of one issue, have been resolved. The report stated that,
contrary to the decisions of the Security Council, Iran
has not suspended its enrichment-related activities and,
in addition, has started the development of new-
generation centrifuges and continued its construction
of the IR-40 reactor and its operation of the heavy
water production plant. For the remaining issue - that
is, the alleged weaponization studies - the report of
the IAEA clearly noted that the Agency has not
detected the use of nuclear material. However, the
report also stated that the Agency is not yet in a
position to determine the full nature of Iran's nuclear
programme. It implies, therefore, that some specific
demands stipulated in resolutions 1737 (2006) and
1747 (2007) have not been met. However, it is
important to note that notable progress has been made
in resolving the outstanding issues between Iran and
the IAEA, as demanded by those resolutions.

We have been keen to ensure that there is synergy
and complementarity between the report and the
IAEA's efforts generally, on the one hand, and the
letter and spirit of the draft resolution, on the other. We
cannot fail to note the well-calibrated nature of the
report - recognizing important progress in its
cooperation with the Agency as well as the facts of
Iran's lack of compliance with Security Council
resolutions. It depicts well the complexity and the
mixed picture of the issue. It had been our expectation
that the draft resolution would reflect those complex
dynamics and mixed findings and not succumb to an
overly one-dimensional characterization of where we
are today.

We note that the additional sanctions in the
present draft resolution have been described as being
incremental, targeted at non-proliferation areas and
reversible, and that the Council would suspend its
implementation should Iran curtail all
enrichment-related and reprocessing activities,
including research and development, as verified by the
IAEA.

However, Indonesia remains to be convinced of
the efficacy of adopting additional sanctions at this
juncture. Essentially, we are not convinced that more
sanctions - however incremental, well-targeted and
reversible - would move us forward in resolving the
question of Iran's nuclear programme. Will they
instead have a potential negative impact at a time when
progress is being made? We wonder, therefore, whether
imposing more sanctions at this juncture is the most
sensible approach. We need to pose the question
whether imposing more sanctions is the most sensible
course of action to instil confidence and trust and
engender cooperation between all the parties
concerned. It is our belief that, ultimately, lack of
confidence and trust lies at the heart of the matter. We
must avoid more of the same.

It is our expectation that Iran will continue to
engage actively with the Agency in order to build
confidence about the scope and nature of its nuclear
programme. Such a development is not without
relevance to our deliberations today. After all, the Iran
dossier was referred to the Council to encourage that
country to resolve outstanding verification issues with
the IAEA and to restore the international community's
confidence in its nuclear programme. While yet to be
completed, that has begun and is making progress.

The suspension of enrichment-related activities is
an instrument. It is a means to an end. It is not, as we
understand it, an end by itself, isolated from
developments in Iran's cooperation with the IAEA. The
IAEA-Iran work plan constitutes a platform to restore
the confidence of the international community. Any
interruption of that confidence-building process will
only threaten to unravel the important gains that have
been made.

The NPT guarantees the inalienable right of all
States parties to develop, research, produce and use
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without
discrimination and in accordance with the Treaty.
Nonetheless, we are often trapped in a vicious cycle, as
there is no guarantee given to non-nuclear States
regarding the security of supply of nuclear technology
and materials for peaceful purposes. They remain
prone to suspicion in their attempts to exercise their
rights.

In order to put an end to that cycle, it is
imperative for all of us to move forward and in a more
creative and constructive manner. We must revive and
renew the initiative to establish a multilateral
arrangement, as part and parcel of the NPT, to
guarantee the security of supply of nuclear technology
and materials, including highly enriched uranium. Such
an arrangement would provide certainty, as well as
assurances, to Iran, and eventually put an end to the
existing suspicions - thereby removing any reason for
anyone to question the peaceful nature of Iran's current
enrichment process.
As a faithful State party to the NPT, Indonesia is
always of the View that the three pillars of the NPT
should be pursued in a balanced and
non-discriminatory manner. We have consistently
expressed our view that we should not only emphasize
the non-proliferation obligations of non-nuclear-
weapon States, but that we must also require nuclear-
weapon States to comply fully with their nuclear
disarmament obligations under article VI of the NPT,
on which there has barely been any progress so far.

We are aware that resolution 1747 (2007)
provides for the possibility of further appropriate
measures in the event of Iranian non-compliance.
There is, however, nothing automatic about such
measures. Further decisions will be needed - hence
our deliberations today. Above all, it is important to
recognize that the conditions prevailing today are
different than those on the eve of the adoption of
resolution 1747 (2007). The strategic goals of
resolutions 1737 (2006) and 1747 (2007) are being
achieved. Iran is cooperating with the IAEA. At this
juncture, more sanctions are not the best course.

For those considerations and reasons, Indonesia
will abstain on the draft resolution before us today.

