Ms. Mogashoa (South Africa): At the outset, my
delegation wishes to extend its sincere condolences
to the families of the United Nations staff members
who lost their lives. South Africa also wishes a speedy
recovery to all those who were injured.

My delegation thanks Ms. Bintou Keita, the
Assistant Secretary-General, for her briefing on the
events surrounding today's incident. South Africa
echoes the Secretary-General's condemnation ofthe car-
bombing incident that took place outside the mall in the
Al-Hawari neighbourhood of Benghazi. We further call
on all parties to the conflict to respect the humanitarian
truce that they have committed themselves to during
the Eid Al-Adha holiday, and we urge them to turn this
truce into a permanent ceasefire.

My delegation remains deeply concerned with
the human cost of the battle for Tripoli. To date over
1,100 people have been killed, with more than 100,000
persons being displaced. Equally dire is the price paid
by the African migrants who endeavour to cross the
Mediterranean Sea seeking safety. We wish to remind
the Security Council that the humanitarian ship Open
Arms has remained stuck in the Mediterranean Sea
off Italy's southernmost island for nine days, having
received no offer for safe harbour for the 121 migrants
aboard. We therefore call on the Council to treat all
issues related to the Libyan conflict with the same sense
of urgency, which includes the plight of and attacks on
migrants. All human life matters equally.

South Africa calls on the Security Council to
support the agreement of both the Government of
National Accord and General Haftar to accede to calls
by the Secretary-General, Special Representative
Salame and the Security Council for a humanitarian
truce. This positive development, which all of us have
been working towards, requires nurturing by all. This
humanitarian truce opens a window of opportunity for
all of us to focus on encouraging all parties to return
to negotiations and towards finding a lasting political
solution to the situation in Libya. South Africa reiterates
her position and that of the African Union that there is
no military solution to the Libyan crisis.
Lastly, in conclusion, we urge the Council to
support the African Union in bolstering the political
process to find a settlement to the conflict in Libya.

