Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): We express our deep
appreciation for Under-Secretary-General O'Brien's
update and commend him for his commitment and
that of the staff of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs to mitigating the grave
humanitarian suffering in Syria, which has reached
unprecedented proportions. We are concerned about the
grave humanitarian catastrophe in the country, which
must be addressed on various fronts. We believe that
the solution of the military problems requires serious
progress on the following issues.

First, we must see further advancement of the
political process facilitated by the Geneva and Astana
processes. The ceasefire agreement is crucial for
humanitarian action to be possible and should be
preserved. Secondly, countering terrorist groups needs
unified actions that will significantly improve the
humanitarian situation. Thirdly, we need to strengthen
the commendable efforts of the International Committee
of the Red Cross, the Syrian Red Crescent Society and
the relevant United Nation agencies. We pay tribute
to the large number of United Nations personnel and
humanitarian workers who labour in such hazardous
conditions, some of whom have sacrificed a great deal
for the noble cause of peace.

Equally important are the efforts of the international
community to restore the damaged infrastructure
and develop an integrated programme to rebuild the
country's economic potential, by providing, inter alia,
electricity and water supplies and education for children
and by setting up schools and hospitals in areas liberated
from terrorists. These measures must commence
now and not wait until after reaching an agreement.
Undoubtedly the recovery process should serve as a
powerful impetus for the return of refugees and reduce
the social base of the armed and terrorist groups.

We welcome the humanitarian response plan
for Syria for 2017, with its budget of $3.4 billion for
comprehensive humanitarian assistance. We thank
the donors for their continued support and urge them
to honour their commitments and pledges so that the
United Nations can maintain operations on such a large
scale throughout the country.

We are concerned about the continuing indiscriminate
attacks that result in innocent civilians' death or long-
term injury and impairment. The parties to the conflict
should comply forthwith with their obligations under the
relevant international law and take all the appropriate
steps to protect those civilians who have ceased to take
part in the hostilities, including members of ethnic and
religious communities.

Political tensions that produce such a level of human
suffering can have no military solution. Kazakhstan
therefore calls on the members of the Security
Council and the parties to the conflict and those who
have influence on them to work to achieve a political
settlement of the conflict in Syria so as not to further
escalate those tensions and undo the progress that has
been made in Geneva and Astana.

