Mr. Eler (Turkey): The conditions in which
peacekeepers operate today have changed dramatically.
Unfortunately, the number of conflicts is on the rise
and they are increasingly of an intra-State nature.
Asymmetric threats are emerging more frequently.
Furthermore, United Nations peacekeeping has become
a multidimensional establishment, with significant
post-conflict peacebuilding activities in various areas.

No single organization can cope with the
requirements and challenges of a peacekeeping
initiative. Due to that fact, partnerships between
the United Nations and regional organizations, in
accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations, have become indispensable. We
believe that such partnerships should be established and
strengthened with a strategic, long-term and mutually
beneficial perspective.

As the majority of the Council's agenda is
occupied by peace and security challenges in Africa,
the partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union (AU) regarding peacekeeping issues
draws the most attention. A welcome observation is that
the partnership between the two organizations has been
strengthened, enhanced and deepened significantly,
especially in the past decade. We also welcome the
increasing coordination and coherence efforts between
the African Union and subregional organizations in
the continent which will further consolidate African
leadership and ownership in overcoming challenges
faced by the continent.

The United Nations-AU partnership can be further
intensified by strengthening the institutionalization of
their relations. In addition, despite the enormous efforts
and leadership of the AU in addressing threats to peace
and security in Africa, the organization still requires
logistical, financial and capacity-building support in
dealing with regional instabilities. Efforts to establish
the African Standby Force should be redoubled. Last
but not least, the United Nations and the AU can
jointly undertake an exercise to draw lessons from past
experiences.

Turkey fully supports the leading role of the United
Nations in peacekeeping missions and is committed to
expanding United Nations partnerships with regional
organizations in peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
peacemaking efforts. In line with that thinking, let
me on this occasion point out that Turkey, Finland and
the members of the Group of Friends of Mediation
have presented their third draft resolution focusing on
the role of regional and subregional organizations in
mediation.

We believe that, besides the African Union,
organizations including the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, the Conference on Interaction and
Confidence-building Measures in Asia, NATO, the
League of Arab States, the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations, the Organization of the Black Sea
Economic Cooperation, the Pacific Islands Forum, the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries, the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization, the Community
of Latin American and Caribbean States, the Union of
South American Nations, the Organization of American
States and many other regional and subregional
organizations have important roles to play in ensuring
peace and stability together with the United Nations.
Intraregional cooperation, such as that between the
European Union and the AU, can also significantly
contribute to common efforts to maintain peace and
security and to building on the lessons learned from
different cases.

In conclusion, we would like to seize this
opportunity to pay homage to the women and men
serving as peacekeepers, and express our condolences
for those who have sacrificed their lives in the line of
duty.

