Allow me to first congratulate the Niger on its presidency of the Security Council for the month of September and for convening this meeting to highlight the potential impact of environmental degradation on peace and security situations. We are delighted to see you, Mr. Minister, presiding over the Security Council as we address this important issue. We also thank Mr. Ibrahim Thiaw, Executive Secretary of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD), Mr. Peter Maurer, President of the International Committee of the Red Cross, and Ms. Inna Modja, Land Ambassador and climate activist, for their briefings. We also acknowledge the Ministers who are present today. There is certainly a need to better understand the impact of effective environmental governance and policy and whether this may influence the reduction of conflict and help bring about peace and security. South Africa recognizes that climate change represents an existential threat to humankind and all other species. In fact, all forms of environmental degradation require our urgent attention and a progressive, ambitious and collective multilateral response from all Member States. Sustainable Development Goal 13, on climate action, together with the other 16 Sustainable Development Goals, remains critical to the effective pursuit by all of humankind of the basic tenets of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development - namely, the alleviation of poverty - by leaving no one behind on the path to sustainable development and by assisting those furthest behind first. We also recognize that factors, such as drought, water scarcity, food insecurity and desertification, which are thought to be caused or exacerbated by climate change, increase the risk of violent conflicts. In Africa, there is evidence to suggest that this is the case in the Sahel, the Lake Chad basin, as well as the Horn of Africa. In these instances, as with elsewhere, climatic pressures associated with climate change are threats or risk multipliers, which escalate tensions and conflict, by placing additional strain on scarce resources like water and grazing lands. The impact of the ferocious deteriorating climate situation in the Sahel, the Lake Chad region and elsewhere in the world, desertification, floods, desert storms and locust invasions, over and above the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), has led to untold suffering for millions of people, as we heard from the briefers and Ministers today. People are on endless move. Migrants and internally displaced persons are running from terrorists attacks for survival and hoping the future will be bright as the world gathers next week to celebrate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations under the theme "The Future we want, the United Nations we need: reaffirming our collective commitment to multilateralism - confronting COVID-19 through effective multilateral action". There are different aspects of dealing with the challenge of environmental degradation. The first is to address the root of development issues that spark this initial conflict. The second aspect is to deal with the consequences of the outbreak of conflict, thought to be linked to climate change or environmental degradation, once it has taken place and, in this regard, the Security Council's experience in dealing with conflict may be useful. It is clear that a holistic approach is needed to deal with the ramifications of environmental degradation on peace and security. In this regard, we encourage the Security Council to support the lead United Nations organizations and processes, such as the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), the Convention on Biological Diversity and other multilateral environmental agreements, as well as the work of relevant regional organizations, such as the African Union (AU). These collaborations will ensure that the Security Council may obtain information on the potential impact of climate or environment-related security risks in conflict settings. The UNFCCC enjoys near universal membership among Member States, adheres to principles that seek to promote equity and recognizes the need for common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities, as well as the Convention's legal obligation for developed countries to provide the means of implementation support to all developing countries. The UNFCCC and its Paris Agreement on Climate Change, we believe, will also promote continued, multilateral negotiation of the sensitive changes that all Member States need to adopt to address climate change, while also providing mechanisms to safeguard the development policy space of all countries, especially developing countries. South Africa fully supports a multilateral approach to climate change, premised on the guiding principles of the UNFCCC, which include equity, the differentiation of actions required between developed and developing countries and the provision of support to all developing countries that require it. At the national level, we are prioritizing the just transition towards more equitable and sustainable patterns of production and consumption. At the continental level, the African Union is developing the African Green Stimulus programme as a contribution to the overall AU recovery effort from the COVID-19 pandemic, addressing all three pillars of sustainable development. We continue to look to the Security Council to fulfil its international peace and security mandate. In this regard, we are interested to hear the views of Council members on what value the Security Council might add to addressing the humanitarian effects of environmental degradation on peace and security. What is clearly needed, no doubt, is enhanced global solidarity with effective multilateralism and the United Nations at the helm.
