Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Mr. President, for having organized today's
thematic debate on prevention of conflicts in Africa. As
we know, Africa today hosts half of United Nations
peacekeeping operations and nearly 75 per cent of Blue
Helmets deployed: 73,645 out of 100,645, as of
30 June 2010.

In this context, the prevention of conflicts is a
major issue. It has decisive advantages over traditional
conflict management because it makes it possible to
avoid human casualties, which include belligerent
parties but Civilians above all, as well as the series of
population displacements and the economic devastation
that often accompany conflicts. Moreover, in the
context of the budgetary austerity that we are all
experiencing, the cost of deploying peacekeeping and
peacebuilding operations is increasingly difficult to
manage.

Preventing conflicts begins with information. To
obtain it, it is important that the Security Council can
receive regular briefings, and as soon as it considers
necessary, from the Secretariat on zones of fragility so
as to be in a position to use as soon as possible and in a
coordinated manner all of the tools available to it to
prevent the exacerbation of a tense situation, tools such
as mediation, good offices, condemnation and even
sanctions.

These tools have proven their effectiveness in
avoiding the outbreak of conflicts. Thus the mediation
on the border dispute between Nigeria and Cameroon
over the Bakassi peninsula, after the arbitration of the
International Court of Justice and the Greentree
Agreement, is now being implemented under the aegis
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for West Africa, Mr. Said Djinnit. The role of
coordination in the field of the regional offices of the
United Nations that can be called upon by the Security
Council to deal with situations should, in this respect,
be strengthened.

Moreover, as previous speakers have said,
African ownership of the prevention of conflicts and of
the issues of peace and security in Africa is gaining
ground. We can note, for example, the commitment of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) in Cote d'Ivoire in 2003 before the
establishment of the United Nations Operation in Cote
d'Ivoire and the ECOWAS success in Togo in 2005; the
many cases of mediation by the African Union, in
particular for Madagascar and the Sudan, the firm
positions taken by its Peace and Security Council
against coups d'etat, or recently in Guinea after the
massacre of 28 September; and the actions by African
peacekeeping forces, such as the African Union
Mission in the Sudan before the transfer of authority to
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur, and the African Union Mission in Somalia.

The international community's various targeted
initiatives also contribute to preventing conflicts in
Africa. France is particularly active today in combating
illicit transfers of small arms and light weapons, which
fuel the outbreak of crises in Africa and render them
more dangerous. United Nations sanctions regimes,
which can include arms embargoes, can also lead to
reducing the number of weapons. Disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes also
make it possible to reduce the number of combatants
and weapons and are an essential tool in combating
trafficking, which nourishes conflict, by targeting arms
trafficking.

Plans to reform the security sector aim to
establish a security system that is effective and
legitimate in the eyes of the population and controlled
by civilian authorities. Under its foreign security
policy, the European Union has led or supported at
least three civilian operations dedicated to the reform
of the security sector in Africa in recent years: in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Guinea-Bissau and
the Central African Republic. Moreover, at the
initiative of France, the European Union is providing
active support to strengthening African peace and
security capacities.

To combat the plundering of natural resources for
the purposes of conflict, France has also supported -
including within the General Assembly and this
Council - the establishment of the Kimberley Process,
which establishes a mechanism to certify the origin of
diamonds, and the Extractive Industries Transparency
Initiative to ensure that the exploitation of this wealth
contributes to the development of the countries
concerned and does not serve to fuel wars underway by
privatizing them for the benefit of armed groups, as we
are seeing today, namely in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In a
complementary way, development assistance also
contributes to the stability of States.

Finally, the fact that the majority of African
States have adhered to the Rome Statute also has a
preventive effect by sending a signal that crimes will
not go unpunished. The International Criminal Court is
an essential element in conflict prevention.

France's White Paper on Foreign and European
Policy for 2008 to 2020 places among its priorities the
prevention of crises and conflicts. The White Paper on
Defence and National Security, for its part, states that
Africa will be at the forefront of our conflict
prevention strategy for the next fifteen years,
considering the direct or indirect repercussions that
African conflicts can have on France and Europe, as
well as the increase in traffic toward our continent.
As we can see, the prevention of conflicts in
Africa is at the heart of international action. In parallel,
an African system of collective security is now being
established. Support for African initiatives remains
essential because the continent does not have the
material resources to face the demands of
peacekeeping on its own. This support should have an
essential place in the coordination and constancy of
actions.

