Mrs. Juul (Norway): Women and children,
innocent bystanders - civilians - who are caught up
in armed conflict too often lack the effective protection
to which they are entitled under humanitarian law. We
can and must restore respect for and adherence to
international humanitarian law. While the core
principles of international humanitarian law are as
valid as ever, the complexity of modern armed
conflicts demands renewed reflection on the
application of these principles in order to ensure
adequate protection for civilians. Important lessons
should be learned from relevant United Nations
experience in the field and from States that have made
their rules of engagement available to the public.

Resolution 1894 (2009), just adopted by the
Council, makes clear that peacekeeping constitutes one
of the most important means at the disposal of the
United Nations to protect civilians in armed conflict.
Indeed, we would add that protecting civilians is the
core objective of peacekeeping.

In order to achieve this objective, the newly
published study of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) on
protecting civilians in the context of United Nations
peacekeeping operations points the way forward. It
uncovers many of the existing gaps and provides clear
recommendations on what needs to be done to achieve
results on the ground. Overall, it is evident that
protection of civilians mandates have yet to be
matched by political resolve and resources, doctrine
and clear operational guidance for peacekeeping
personnel. Troop- and police-contributing-countries
must internalize this issue in their national policies.

I would like to focus on three specific areas of
concern: the lack of operational guidance and tailored
training, the need for political will and leadership, and
ensuring accountability and fighting impunity.

Clear guidance to peacekeeping personnel is
needed on how to operationalize protection of civilians
mandates. One area of particular concern is the
protection of women and children from sexual
violence. To our knowledge, not one national army has
developed operational guidance to combat sexual
violence in conflict. DPKO and national Governments
3
need to put in place such operational tools as a matter
of urgency.

The overall lack of tailored training for troops
required to address sexual violence is worrisome. It is a
mistake to assume that women's and children's
protection against sexual violence will come intuitively
to soldiers trained in war-fighting. When peacekeepers
confront a highly sensitive security problem they have
never encountered in training, they are likely to make
mistakes.

The international community also needs to deploy
more uniformed female personnel. I take this
opportunity to commend the efforts of the all-women
Indian police contingent working in Liberia. They
should be an inspiration to us all. A police force plays a
leading role in a State's ability to protect its citizens.
That is why Norway funds the development of a
strategic doctrinal framework for international police
peacekeeping, the purpose of which is to provide a
consistent model for policing. This will help United
Nations police as they seek to protect civilians and
assist in building local police capacity.

We need to see stronger political will and
leadership in demanding a response to sexual violence
in conflict - from the field commander to the special
representative of the Secretary-General and from the
Secretary-General to the Security Council. This must
be manifested in strong and specific mandates to
ensure timely delivery and the deployment of
resources. Some progress has been made. The
Comprehensive Strategy on Combating Sexual
Violence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is a
case in point. But such strategies will remain futile
unless there is a mission-wide and, indeed, a society-
wide commitment to implement them.

Fostering greater political will is one of the tasks
of the soon to be appointed special representative of
the Secretary-General on sexual violence in armed
conflict. Norway calls on the Secretary-General to
expedite the appointment of the special representative
and urges all Member States to give strong political
support to the new representative's work.

Where criminals in uniform are free to rape and
murder, civilian criminals are often free to do the same.
Impunity serves as an incentive for continued violence
to soldier and citizen alike. Members of parties to
conflict, from the lowest ranks to the commanding
officer, are accountable and must be held accountable

for their actions. The certainty of investigation,
prosecution and punishment is vital to preventing and
protecting civilians from abuse. Justice alone can show
would-be perpetrators that civilian lives matter.

In concluding, let me echo the DPKO/OCHA
report by adding a word of caution. Peacekeeping
operations cannot protect everyone from everything.
The protection of civilians requires not only a mission-
wide or a United Nations-wide strategy; it requires a
partnership between all those present in the field,
including the host Government. Ultimately, it requires
a culture of respect for human rights and the principles
of international humanitarian law.

