Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this debate and
Under-Secretary-General Feltman for his briefing this
morning.

Australia shares the world's frustration at the
standstill in the Middle East peace process. We share
the frustration of the Palestinians and their strong and
legitimate desire to have their own State. We also share
Israel's legitimate concerns to ensure its own security
and the security of its people. That security would, of
course, be best guaranteed through an effective and
genuine two-State solution. Those are the messages
we have consistently expressed to both Israeli and
Palestinian leaders, including over the past 12 months.

It has now been 19 years, as we know, since the
Oslo Accords, and a decade since the historic Arab
Peace Initiative, and yet ajust and lasting solution still
evades us. In a period of tremendous change in the Arab
world, the status quo in the Middle East peace process
is simply untenable. The status quo cannot provide the
lasting peace and security which Palestinians, Israelis
and all the peoples of the region deserve.

The prospects for a negotiated peace based on a
two-State solution are disappearing, and this genuinely
concerns us. It is therefore now more important than
ever that negotiations between the parties resume as a
matter of urgency. While the parties themselves must
resolve through negotiations the final shape of an
agreement, for meaningful progress to be made and for
negotiations to be credible in order to start, they should
take place on the basis of the 1967 boundaries, with
agreed land swaps.
The continuing settlement activity in the West
Bank remains a fundamental concern. A Palestinian
State must not just be independent; it must be viable
and contiguous. Settlement activity, which is illegal
under international law, must cease. Australia remains
opposed to any steps towards legalizing outposts.

It is also imperative that all violence against
civilians, including rocket attacks on Israel from
Gaza, end immediately. All people in the region need
to be able to pursue their lives free from the threat of
violence.

At a time when negotiations have stalled, one
important cause for optimism has been the success
which President Abbas and Prime Minister Fayyad
have had in building the institutions for a Palestinian
State. However, that decisive achievement is coming
under threat, as we know, due to the serious financial
crisis facing the Palestinian Authority. As a significant
donor, we participated in the meeting of the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee for the Coordination of International
Assistance to Palestinians held in New York on
23 September, which was a very depressing meeting. It
is essential that the international community continue
to support the Authority, whose effective functioning is
a vital source of stability in the region. We call on all
donors to live up to their commitments in that respect.

Turning now to the appalling human tragedy which
is taking place in Syria, we remain deeply concerned,
as is everyone else, that the Council has been unable to
adopt a Chapter VII resolution to ensure there are real
consequences for President Al-Assad's non-compliance
with Council resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012).

We support the efforts of the Joint Special
Representative of the United Nations and the League of
Arab States, Lakhdar Brahimi, to find a way through
the crisis. But it is well past the time for President
Al-Assad to reverse course and end the violence which
he has unleashed on his own people. President Al-Assad
has been given many opportunities by the international

community to take a different path, and he must do so
immediately.

The recent incidents across the Syrian-Turkish
border are of grave concern and underscore the serious
regional dimension to the Syrian crisis. We echo the
Council's condemnation of the Syrian attack and call on
Syria to respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of its neighbours. We also recognize the significant
burden being faced by Syria's neighbours, including
Turkey, Iraq, Jordan and Lebanon.
While the outlook in Syria is very bleak, it is
equally important - indeed, imperative - for us to
still focus on our need to help alleviate the suffering of
the Syrian people. As the third-largest national donor,
my own country is and will remain committed to
providing humanitarian assistance. We are especially
concerned about the need to protect medical facilities
and personnel. All parties to the conflict must
respect and adhere to the principles of international
humanitarian law and ensure the safe and unhindered
access of humanitarian personnel. We have been very
actively talking with others over the past few weeks to
see if we can find new ways to protect hospitals and
health workers in Syria, and we will continue to do so.

But while we take humanitarian steps to help those
affected by the conflict, the international community
must also continue to pursue whatever steps we can
towards a political solution. The Council's role in that
respect remains, obviously, essential.

