Mr. Rodriguez Parrilla (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, may I say how very pleased my
delegation is to see you, Mr. President, presiding over
the work of the Security Council. We wish you every
success. Likewise, I wish to congratulate Ambassador
Lavrov and his entire team for the excellent manner in
which he guided the work of this body during April.
Once again the Security Council is not fulfilling
its responsibilities and is showing its inability to act in
the face of the extremely grave situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories. It is beyond question
that the situation in Jenin and Israel's refusal to
cooperate with the fact-finding team demanded a
resolution such as that initially presented by Syria and
Tunisia in document S/2002/478, of 30 April. That
draft resolution correctly invoked Chapter VII of the
Charter. It described the situation as a grave threat to
international peace and security, demanded that Israel
cooperate without further delay with the fact-finding
team, and expressed the Council's intention to adopt
adequate measures if the resolution was not
implemented. Following long hours of consultations
behind closed doors, yesterday, in the early hours in the
morning, many of us came to this Chamber in order to
witness the formal adoption of a draft resolution that
was more moderate than the original draft, but which,
in the final analysis, represented the least that the
Council could do in the face of such grave
circumstances.

In the end, the draft resolution was not put to the
vote for reasons that are well known. We all knew in
advance, however, what would have happened if such a
vote had taken place. Even if a majority had voted in
favour of the text, the draft resolution could not have
been adopted because the United States had explicitly
indicated to Council members that it would once again
exercise its power of veto - for the twenty-fifth time
on the question of Palestine since 1973.

The position of the United States is absurd. It was
that country that introduced resolution 1405 (2002) to
the Council - which supported the sending of a fact-
finding team to Jenin - yet that same country was
prepared to veto and obstruct a text aimed precisely at
demanding the full implementation of that resolution.

What happened did not surprise us, however. The
United States was never truly interested in sending a
fact-finding team to J enin. It presented resolution 1405
(2002) solely in order to prevent the Council from
taking the measures that were really necessary in the
face of the killing and destruction caused by the Sharon
Government's troops in Jenin. That is why that
resolution was limited to support for an initiative of the
Secretary-General, thereby covering up the Council's
inaction. Other motives behind the introduction of that
resolution were the desires to obstruct the draft that had
been prepared on that occasion by the Arab Group and
to divert attention from the proposal of the Secretary-
General then under consideration to send a
multinational force to the occupied territories.

With or without an investigation, the truth cannot
be concealed. The actions committed in Jenin will go
down in history as another dark chapter in the terrible
saga of the illegal occupation of the Palestinian
territories. The events surrounding the fact-finding
team and the continuing siege of the Church of the
Nativity in Bethlehem - among many other
reprehensible actions - are the results of the fact that
the Government of Israel has for so long been allowed
to act with impunity, while the Council has been unable
to do anything to stop it. That is the result of the inertia
with which the Security Council has responded to the
flagrant violations of its own resolutions. It is the result
of Israel's certainty that nothing can happen here as
long as it has - as it does now - the full support of a
permanent member, which, with its threat or use of the
veto, prevents the Council from acting.

We reiterate our view that the United States must
immediately suspend its financial support for military
purposes - support that clearly demonstrates its
complicity - and its military supplies to Israel,
including aircraft, helicopters and missiles, that are
used against civilians. Furthermore, it must condemn
Israeli State terrorism if it truly wants a global war to
be waged on terrorism, wherever and however it
manifests itself.

The Security Council must seriously consider the
proposal to establish a multinational force in the
occupied territories, as proposed by the Secretary-
General, who, throughout this process, has displayed
great flexibility and perseverance. It is simply
unacceptable that this body should continue to turn its
back on the suffering of the Palestinian people, trying
to make us believe that nothing can be done and
resigning itself to the current situation or adopting
timid resolutions that say little and are complied with
even less.

Cuba also believes that, in the face of the
inaction, ineffectiveness and discredit of the Security
Council, the General Assembly must take action by
resuming its tenth emergency special session in order
to help the heroic Palestinian people, to stop the
criminal actions and to save the credibility of the
United Nations.

