Mr. Lowcock: I again want to start today with the
situation around Idlib, on which we have briefed the
Security Council many times over the past four months.
The Secretary-General issued another statement on
20 August expressing deep concerns about the continued
escalation. He strongly condemned the continued attacks
on civilians and civilian infrastructure, including on
health-care and educational facilities, and urged the
parties to fully respect international humanitarian law.

On 21 August, the Secretary-General issued his
latest report (S/2019/674), which you just referred
to, Madam President, on the implementation of the
Council's resolutions on Syria. The report covers the
period up to the end of July.

In summary, according to conservative estimates,
more than 500 civilians have been killed, and many
hundreds more injured, since the start of the escalation
in north-west Syria in late April. The World Health
Organization and UNICEF report that 43 health-care
facilities, 87 educational facilities, 29 water stations
and seven markets have been impacted by fighting
since April. The Secretary-General's report reminds us
that those attacks have been confirmed using tried and
tested systems, whereby the United Nations receives
reports from partners on the ground and reviews them
against at least two other independent sources.

I believe Geir Pedersen, in his statement, will touch
on recent military and political developments in the
area. I want to give the Council a few examples of the
humanitarian consequences that we have seen since my
deputy last updated Council members on 14 August.
Over the weekend from 16 to 18 August, an additional
44 civilians were reportedly killed owing to air strikes,
including 16 children and 12 women. Attacks also
reportedly impacted two schools in Hish, one in Ma'arat
Hurmah and one in Hazarin. On Monday, 15 civilians,
including women and children, were reportedly killed
in air strikes on seven communities in Idlib. And this
morning we received reports that yesterday 17 more
people, including three women and seven children,
were killed by air strikes and that a health-care facility
in Ghadqa town was damaged.

Over the past three weeks, since the collapse
of the conditional ceasefire on 5 August, dozens of
communities have emptied out in northern Hamah
and southern Idlib. Satellite imagery shows that entire
towns and villages have been razed to the ground. Most
of those who can are fleeing northwards, further into
Idlib governorate and closer to the Turkish border.
Those who stay behind are cowering in basements or in
what is left of their homes.

Approximately 576,000 individual displacement
movements have been recorded by United Nations-
supported systems since May. In order to give the
Council a sense of scale, that is three to four times
the number recorded during the Violence in eastern
Ghouta early last year, and almost 75 per cent more
than was seen during the offensive in southern Syria
in mid-2018. Many of those people are living in the
open air, frequently protected only by a plastic sheet.
Approximately 100 schools have been turned over for
displaced people, compromising their ability to provide
education for children.

On 22 August, following advances in many areas
of northern Hamah and southern Idlib, the Syrian
authorities announced once again the opening of the
Morek-Souran crossing point for civilians wishing
to leave the area. We understand that the Syrian
authorities have stationed buses in the area and that the
Syrian Arab Red Crescent has been asked to prepare for
possible population movements.

There are two shelters with a capacity of 150
families identified in Souran to receive people. The
United Nations and humanitarian partners have mobile
teams ready to respond in the area should civilians
decide to use the crossing point. From the information
available to us, however, it appears that relatively few
people are opting to move in that direction, compared
to the much larger number of people preferring to move
north and west further into Idlib.

One dimension of the Idlib conflict that we have
not covered much in our previous briefings, but is
covered by the Secretary-General's latest report, is the
impact on agricultural activities in northern Hamah
and southern Idlib governorates. Traditionally, large
parts of the agricultural area in Idlib, considered to
be among of the most fertile land in the country, are
cultivated for wheat. Shelling, air strikes and widely
reported fires have contributed to the destruction of
crops and damage to farming equipment. Much of the
harvest has been lost, and the capacity to prepare the
soil for the new planting season is compromised.

I and other United Nations officials have repeatedly
called on the parties and the Council to ensure respect
for international humanitarian law. The rules are clear.
The parties must at all times apply the principles of
distinction and precaution in the conduct of hostilities
and take all the necessary steps to protect civilians
and civilian infrastructure from attacks and the effects
of violence. People's homes, hospitals, schools, water
systems and markets must be protected. There can
be no reason, rationale, excuse or justification for
the destruction of civilian areas on the scale seen in
Idlib today.

In the months ahead, the board of inquiry, the
establishment of which was announced by the Secretary-
General, will investigate incidents in north-west Syria
that damaged or destroyed facilities that have either
been de-conflicted or received humanitarian support
from the United Nations.

Despite all the challenges, the humanitarian
community is doing everything it can to respond to the
needs of the estimated 3 million people in and around
Idlib. With some 15,000 aid workers on the ground,
humanitarians continue to provide shelter materials,
food assistance and health services to the population,
including newly displaced people. More than 1 million
people receive general food assistance every month.

The people of Idlib are reached exclusively through
the cross-border operation - because, as I have said
before, that is the only way they can be reached for as
long as access from within the country is impeded. It
is for that reason that the renewal of resolution 2165
(2014) later this year will be crucial.

Let me update the Council now on Rukban. Dire
conditions and the lack of assistance, coupled with the
hope for durable solutions, have led many people to
leave. Another joint United Nations-Syrian Arab Red
Crescent assessment mission took place last week. The
purpose was to determine the number of people wishing
to leave Rukban and those wishing to stay. The mission
informed everyone in the camp about plans for future
assisted voluntary departures and assessed the needs of
those wishing to stay.

As per our agreement with the Syrian authorities,
another mission is planned to Rukban within the next
couple of weeks to facilitate the transport of those who
said they wanted to leave Rukban for shelters in Horns.
All movement must be voluntary, safe, well-informed
and dignified, with humanitarian access assured
throughout. The agreement is that in the same mission
the United Nations and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent
will provide critical humanitarian assistance to those
who decide to remain in Rukban.

Let me turn now to Al-Hol. There are currently some
68,600 people in that camp. Approximately 40 per cent
of them are Syrians, 45 per cent are Iraqis and 15 per
cent are other foreign nationals. Some 94 per cent are
women and children, of whom 67 per cent are under
the age of 18. Most have been exposed to violence and
trauma under the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.
They are now living in extremely difficult conditions
and face an uncertain fate. That includes the risk of
being denied repatriation, rehabilitation, reintegration
or a fair trial, and the risk of becoming stateless despite
having citizenship or a claim to citizenship.

Solutions to those difficult issues need urgently
to be found. The United Nations has repeatedly called
on all Member States to take the measures necessary
to ensure that their nationals are repatriated for
the purposes of prosecution, rehabilitation and/or
reintegration, as appropriate, in line with international
law and standards. In that effort, it is important that all
children under 18 be considered primarily as victims
and be duly protected and assisted.

The United Nations has taken note of statements
released by the United States and Turkey with regard
to their plans to coordinate the establishment of a so-
called safe zone in north-eastern Syria. The United
Nations is not a party to, and has not been consulted
on, that agreement. I must emphasize that any measures
taken must ensure the safety and welfare of civilians,
including by protecting them from violence, forced
displacement or loss of livelihoods, and that sustained,
unimpeded and safe humanitarian access to civilians
in need must be guaranteed, including through the
cross-border programme for the United Nations and its
humanitarian partners.

The United Nations and humanitarian agencies
run a large relief operation all across Syria, reaching
6 million people in the period covered by the Secretary-
General's latest report. Humanitarian assistance
provided by United Nations agencies included food
for an average 3.6 million people per month and more
than 2.1 million health treatments to people around
the country. The response this year, however, is
significantly less well-funded than it was at this stage in
2018. I would therefore ask all those who made pledges
at the Brussels Conference in April to take early action
to implement them.

Finally, let me return to Idlib. Three weeks from now
it will be one year since the signing of the memorandum
of understanding on Idlib - an agreement that called
for restraint and aimed to prevent further escalation
in north-west Syria. Yet one year on, the bombing and
fighting go on in plain sight, day in and day out. Three
million people, two thirds of them women and children,
count on the Council's support to make the violence
stop. I told members last month (see S/PV.8589) what
some of them said to me. We cannot turn back the clock
on what has happened. But Council members can take
meaningful action now to protect civilians and ensure
full respect for international humanitarian law. It is
within the Council's power to do that.

