Ms. Rasi (Finland): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union. The Central and Eastern
European countries associated with the European Union -
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia,
Lithuania, Poland, Romania and Slovakia - and the
associated countries Cyprus and Malta, as well as the
European Free Trade Association countries members of the
European Economic Area, Iceland and Liechtenstein, align
themselves with this statement.

The European Union welcomes the initiative by the
United Kingdom and the possibility of participating in this
important debate. We hope this new format will generate
new approaches and visions of how to develop further the
United Nations partnership with Africa.

The report (A/52/871) of the Secretary-General,
"Causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa" and the progress report
(A/54/ 133) comprise important elements and strategies for
conflict prevention. The European Union has sought to
develop an active, comprehensive and integrated approach
towards the issue of violent conflicts in Africa, an approach
based, inter alia, on the 1997 Common Position and the
European Council conclusions on conflict prevention and
resolution in Africa.

The Security Council on a number of occasions, most
recently on 30 November, has affirmed its willingness to
act and to explore new means of advancing the objectives
of peace and security.

The Security Council should, at an early stage,
actively direct its attention to areas of potential conflict,
including the regular holding of forward-looking
discussions, and in this regard maintain a high degree of
readiness to take preventive action. The United Nations
Charter provides a number of tools which can and should
be used in conflict prevention. We need to build on that
and further develop them. Existing methods, such as those
enumerated in Article 33 of the Charter, should be
strengthened and complemented. Certain preventive
measures, such as the establishment of demilitarized zones
or preventive disarmament, belong also to the traditional
inventory of means at the disposal of the Council. Regional
and subregional organizations should be consulted and their
expertise used when actions are being considered by the
Council.

The European Union strongly believes that in the
search for a long-term solution to conflicts, especially in
Africa, high priority should be given to curbing arms
supplies and the illicit trafficking in small arms and light
weapons, as well as the use of trade in diamonds, gold
and other precious materials to provide illicit finance for
buying such armaments. The European Union encourages
the Security Council to consider using its powers in a
more decisive way to impose targeted sanctions, including
arms embargoes, at the early stages of emerging crises.
We also stress the importance of monitoring such
embargoes after they have been imposed. In this context,
the role of regional and subregional organizations,
countries and even individuals cannot be underestimated.

The European Union supports the central role of the
Secretary-General in preventive diplomacy, including fact-
finding missions, good offices and other activities. We
support the Secretary-General's efforts to improve the
United Nations early-warning system and to place
increased emphasis on preventive diplomacy. The
Security Council also has an important role to play, and
we encourage Council members to send fact-finding
missions whenever possible.

We believe that the possibilities of the Secretary-
General and his Secretariat are still not fully utilized. In
this context, we wish to recall Article 99 of the Charter,
which provides the Secretary-General with the possibility
of bringing to the attention of the Security Council any
matter which in his opinion may threaten the maintenance
of international peace and security. For that purpose, the
European Union considers that the Secretariat's capacity
needs to be enhanced to enable the Security Council to
conduct regular surveys of potential conflict areas. We
encourage Member States and regional organizations to
increasingly share early-waming information with the
United Nations.

The European Union encourages the Security
Council to decide, when the situation requires it, on the
timely establishment of United Nations peacekeeping
missions. In this regard, the European Union is concerned
by the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We support the Secretary-General' s recommendations and
resolution 1279 (1999) on the next steps to be taken for
a rapid deployment of United Nations observers in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The European Union
affirms its readiness to support, in due time, a
peacekeeping force to assist the parties in implementing
the Lusaka Agreement.

 

The restoration of security and order, as well as the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration into society
of former combatants, are vital. Since arms and combatants
move easily across borders in most conflict areas, the
Security Council should try to formulate mandates in such
a manner that disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes can take into consideration the
regional context whenever possible.

The European Union welcomes with appreciation the
increased role and contributions of civil society and non-
governmental organizations in conflict prevention. The
Security Council could also consider how these actors and
their potential might be further utilized.

Strengthening coordination and cooperation between
the Security Council and the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) and subregional organizations remains key. In order
to meet those goals, both organizations need to exchange
information on a regular basis. Furthermore, this should not
be restricted to pure information exchange. Organizations
need to share analyses about future developments in various
fields.

The speedy availability of trained personnel and
relevant equipment is the crucial factor in peacekeeping
operations. In this context, Member States should be
encouraged to conclude the United Nations standby
arrangements. The European Union is ready to assist in
building capacity for conflict prevention in Africa,
particularly through the OAU and the subregional
organizations. The Security Council could explore possible
ways of supporting the OAU's conflict-management centre.
The European Union looks forward to the next meeting
between the United Nations and regional organizations in
order to share views on changing roles and capacities in the
field of crisis management and conflict prevention.

One way to address conflict situations is to adopt clear
benchmarks for parties to follow, including for mandate
extensions of the phased deployment of peacekeeping
missions. When progress is being made, the Security
Council can act positively and consolidate achievements on
the ground. This kind of positive engagement would create
a climate conducive to further steps in the peace process.

I have tried to outline only a few points which, in our
View, deserve further deliberation. However, we must not
forget that the quest for peace and stability in Africa
requires a long-term, comprehensive, concerted and
determined approach encompassing various fields. The
European Union also underlines the importance of political
will in Africa and beyond. The primary responsibility for
the future of Africa rests with the African nations
themselves. However, through joint efforts and
cooperation between the United Nations, African
countries, regional and subregional organizations and
other parties, important progress can be made. The
European Union hopes that today's discussions and
action-oriented approach will help us to turn a new page
in the United Nations partnership with Africa.

