The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of Uganda.

I wish to join other Council members in thanking
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and head of the United Nations Mission in the Central
African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT), Mr. Victor
Angelo, for his briefing. I welcome the participation of
the representatives of Chad and the Central African
Republic in this meeting.

We are encouraged by the efforts of the
Government of Chad and the political opposition
towards the progress made in the implementation of the
13 August 2007 agreement and by the consensus
reached on the legislative framework for elections.
However, much more needs to be done in order to
consolidate the gains achieved so far. The launching of
an attack by Chadian armed opposition groups on
4 May this year illustrates the fragile political situation
in the country.

We commend the Government of the Central
African Republic for the inclusive political dialogue of
December 2008 and for measures undertaken to foster
dialogue, including the establishment of a broad-based
Government on 28 January 2009. Nevertheless, we are
concerned about the armed rebellion in the North-East
and its negative impact on the stability of the country.
We call upon both the Government and armed groups
to take concrete steps towards ending the rebellion by
addressing political disagreements through peaceful
means.

We commend the mediation efforts of the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya. The normalization of relations
between the Sudan and Chad is critical to a
comprehensive and lasting peace in the two countries
and the entire region. Durable peace and stability in the
region will require the resolution of the internal
conflicts prevailing in both countries.

Uganda commends the leadership and the staff of
MINURCAT for their work. In view of the valuable
contribution that the Mission is making, it is critical
that the deployment of MINURCAT to its full capacity
be expedited so that it can better implement its
mandate.
We welcome the development of the strategic
workplan, with benchmarks to measure progress on the
implementation of activities mandated by resolution
1861 (2009). We call upon MINURCAT to focus on
strengthening the capacities of national institutions as a
core part of its exit strategy.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I call on the representative of the Central African
Republic.

