Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the outset, I would like to thank Special
Envoy Geir Pedersen for his first briefing to the
Security Council and reassure him of our full support.

I will focus on two points - the political situation
and the situation on the ground.

First, with respect to the political situation, in
2015 - four years ago already - the Council mandated
the United Nations to facilitate the intra-Syrian
political process for the implementation of resolution
2254 (2015). In Belgium's view, the Syrian conflict can
be resolved only through a negotiated political process,
in accordance with that resolution and the 2012 Geneva
communique (S/20l2/522, annex). Resolution 2254
(2015) contains all the ingredients necessary for a
political solution - a political process, a revision of the
Constitution and free elections with the participation of
the Syrian diaspora in an environment that protects the
rights of Syrians.

A Syrian-owned, Syrian-led constitutional
committee, facilitated by the United Nations, has the
potential to serve as an entry point or a key that opens
the door to other aspects of the political process. We
support the important role that the Special Envoy must
play in its establishment. Nevertheless, if we want
that committee to be a real instrument that works
effectively, we must ensure that its composition is
credible, balanced, inclusive and representative of all
components of Syrian society and that each agreement
on its composition is accompanied by procedures and
working methods.

Significant work was done last year and extensive
consultations have taken place. Unfortunately, that work
hasnotyetbeencompleted,neitherintermsoftheformation
of the committee nor in terms of working procedures.
It is now up to the new Special Envoy to put in place
his own strategy and we encourage him to explore
the various possible avenues, within the framework
of resolution 2254 (2015), in order to achieve
concrete progress.

That peaceful, inclusive and sustainable transition
must take place in a safe, stable and calm environment.
On the one hand, lasting peace is not possible without a
reconciliation process and reconciliation is not possible
without justice. We attach particular importance to the
fight against impunity and, in that regard, we support the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian
Arab Republic since March 2011, the commission
of inquiry mandated by the Human Rights Council
and the accountability mechanism set up within the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.

On the other hand, the voluntary and sustainable
return of refugees will take place only if life in a safe
and dignified context is guaranteed. In order to ensure
a dignified return, there must be an end to looting,
expropriation and arbitrary enforcement of the rules.
Syrians aspire to a country based on the rule of law.
Security goes far beyond the absence of armed conflict;
it also includes the protection of fundamental rights and
the absence of repression and the forced recruitment
into the armed forces. Thousands of Syrians continue
to be illegally arrested and arbitrarily detained. We call
on all actors to continue their efforts to put an end to
those practices.

Secondly, with regard to the situation on the ground,
violence continues and is causing the displacement
of thousands of people, particularly in the north. In
Idlib, the agreement between Turkey and Russia, which
was signed in September 2018, has helped to avert the
prospect of a humanitarian disaster but the situation
remains particularly fragile. It is imperative that all
parties remain fully committed to the agreement.

In Deir ez-Zor, the last fights against Da'esh
are taking place. The end of Da'esh as a terrorist
organization with a territorial base does not mean
the end of the threat it poses. It is essential that the
international community continue its efforts to prevent
its resurgence and capacity to cause harm. While
neutralizing andjudging those responsible for Da'esh's
crimes, parallel work is needed to avoid reproducing
the causes that led to its creation and development. We
must do everything we can to ensure the protection of
civilians. In that regard, we call for a national cessation
of hostilities.

As this is my first statement to the Council on
the political situation in Syria, allow me to end with
this reflection.

In order to continue this difficult mission, the
Special Envoy will need the support of the international
community, the parties to the conflict and the countries
of the region, and he will also need the members of the
Security Council to work together. The success of his
mission will also depend largely on the political will
of the parties to the conflict and we urge all those
who have influence on the parties to use it to support
Mr. Pedersen's efforts. Ultimately, it is only if there is
a minimum of trust between the parties and if the sense
of urgency is shared by all of us that we can really make
progress towards the essential settlement ofthe conflict.

