Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): I thank
Ambassador Takasu for his report as Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006). First, let me reiterate that the
E3+3 countries have been seeking a meeting with Iran
to discuss the way forward on its nuclear programme,
but have not yet received a reply. The United States
will be a full participant in those discussions, and we
continue to urge Iran to accept this invitation.

Today's session is the first one since Iran held
elections on 12 June. We share the international
community's concern over events in the aftermath of
the elections. As Iran seeks to resolve disputes related
to the election results, it is important to respect the
rights of Iranian citizens to express themselves
peacefully.

Today's session is also our first session since the
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) released his latest report on the status
of Iran's compliance with its Nuclear Non-Proliferation
Treaty safeguards agreements and Security Council
obligations. While the IAEA Board of Governors is
starting its meetings today, we too should focus on the
report and its detailed findings as appropriate to the
work of our Committee.

The IAEA report on Iran, once again, contains
troubling findings that deserve the Council's serious
attention. The Director General underscored Iran's
continued defiance of its international obligations,
including its refusal to comply with the Council's
demand to suspend Iran's proliferation-sensitive
09-3692]
nuclear activities. The report finds that Iran continues
to make significant progress towards a nuclear
weapons capability, increasing its enrichment activities
and producing more than 1,300 kilograms of low-
enriched uranium hexafluoride, enough materiel for
one nuclear weapon, were Iran to enrich it further to
make it weapons-grade. Iran has also not accepted the
full implementation of safeguards, including access to
the Arak reactor, which, the Director General stresses,
could harm the Agency's ability to carry out effective
safeguards at that facility.

At the same time, Iran continues to refuse to
address the IAEA's remaining questions about its past
efforts to develop a nuclear warhead, or even to meet
to discuss those issues. Let me offer a few examples.
Iran refuses to addresses the IAEA'S request for
substantive explanations regarding Iran's past work to
develop nuclear weapons, and there has been no
progress on this issue since August 2008. Iran
continues to rebuff the IAEA's inquiries related to the
acquisition of the uranium metal document, which
contains instructions for casting enriched uranium
metal into hemispheres, which, the IAEA's January
2006 report noted, are related to the function of nuclear
weapons. Iran declines to clarify the procurement and
research and development activities of military-related
institutes and companies that could be nuclear-related.
And Iran rejects the IAEA's request for access to
information, documentation and individuals necessary
to support Iran's claims.

The Director General has once again asked Iran
to cooperate with the IAEA without further delay. In
the light of Iran's continued non-compliance with its
Security Council and IAEA obligations, we must
continue to strongly support the Iran Sanctions
Committee's efforts. In particular, the United States
welcomes the Committee's continued efforts to obtain
additional information from Iran and Syria about the
recent violation of resolution 1747 (2007) involving
the M/V Manchegorsk. We remain concerned that the
Committee's requests continue to go unanswered. The
United States thanks the Republic of Cyprus for its
recent letter informing the Committee that it has
completed inspecting the ship's cargo and placed it in
safe storage. We also appreciate Cyprus' providing the
Committee with the additional details of the cargo that
the Committee requested. We would take particular
note of the information suggesting that some of the
ship's cargo belong to an organization within Iran's
09-36921

defence industry, a designated entity under resolution
1737 (2006). We support the Committee's critically
important efforts to examine these additional details
and take appropriate action.

The United States remains committed to direct
diplomacy with Iran to resolve issues of concern to the
international community and will engage on the basis
of mutual respect. We want Iran to be a respected
member of the international community, but we
recognize that such status confers not only rights but
also responsibilities. Even as we offer Iran a new
opportunity to restore international confidence and
trust, this Committee continues to have an essential
role to play. We urge the Committee to redouble its
efforts to ensure fully and robust implementation of the
measures imposed by resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747
(2007) and 1803 (2008).

