Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): Belgium aligns itself with the statement
to be delivered on behalf of the members of the
European Union.

At the outset, I would like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing.

The situation on the ground is deteriorating day
by day with the continuing colonization policy as one
of its main catalysts. This policy, together with such
measures as forced displacements, expulsions and
demolitions, is illegal under international law.

We condemn the destruction on 4 July of the
facilities of an Oxfam humanitarian project funded by
Belgium in the village of Khirbet Ad-Duqaiqah, which
included three water tanks and at least 2,500 trees.
The project supported three communities and sought
to expand land use through the rehabilitation of water
supplies and pasture-management techniques. Some 35
families were affected by the destruction, 63 per cent of
whom were young people. This is not empty rhetoric or
sloganeering, but simple facts. Belgium notes that the
destruction of property and objects necessary for the
survival of civilians is contrary to international human
rights law.

In the same vein, we condemn the recent
demolitions and evictions in the Silwan neighbourhood
of East Jerusalem, as well as the massive demolitions
of buildings yesterday in the community of Sur Baher,
mostly located in Areas A and B of the West Bank,
but on the west side of the separation wall. These
demolitions illustrate once again the pressure brought
to bear on the Palestinian presence in and around East
Jerusalem. They contribute to a significant change in
the demographic character of the city of Jerusalem,
which is detrimental to negotiations on its final status
as the capital of the two States. The continued pursuit
of this policy calls into question the prospect of a two-
State solution.

Another immediate concern is the financial crisis
of the Palestinian Authority. We expect the economic
and budgetary agreements between Israel and the
Palestinian Authority to be fully implemented, including
Israel's obligations under the Protocol on Economic
Relations between the Government of the State of
Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization. In the
meanwhile, the Palestinian Authority must continue
to accept tax transfers on a provisional basis, which in
no way constitutes a legal or political endorsement of
Israeli deductions.

The security situation in Gaza continues to be
a source of concern for us. We call on the parties to
continue to exercise the utmost restraint and respect the
ceasefire reached thanks to the efforts of Egypt and the
United Nations Special Coordinator.

A political, comprehensive and lasting solution
must be found to the social, economic and humanitarian
crisis in Gaza. That implies a fundamental change
that includes, in particular, the lifting of the blockade
and the opening of crossing points, while taking into
account Israel's legitimate security concerns. A political
solution to the current crisis also requires the return of
control of this territory to the Palestinian Authority. We
call on the parties to resume constructive dialogue and
welcome the Egyptian and Russian efforts to that end.

Last month, the United States presented a series of
economic measures, entitled "Peace to Prosperity", at
a workshop hosted by Bahrain in Manama. During the
presentation of the plan, we took note of the recognition
of the need to incorporate the proposed measures in
a political plan. Indeed, as we have already stressed,
peace can be comprehensive, just and lasting only if it
meets the legitimate aspirations of each of the parties to
make its national destiny a reality in peace and security
within a stabilized region. The vision towards which
the international community must work is in fact the
coexistence oftwo States with Jerusalem as their future
respective capitals, in accordance with internationally
agreed parameters - and, yes, those parameters have
been internationally agreed. This approach can be
supported by economic measures, but these economic
measures cannot replace a political solution. An end
to the occupation, free access for Palestinians to their
lands and resources, freedom of movement and access
to the whole territory and the ability to integrate into the
regional market are essential to enable the Palestinian
economy to fully develop.

In conclusion, it is high time for the parties to
resume the path of dialogue and endeavour to build
peace. We are convinced that this is in the clear interest
of both the Israelis and the Palestinians. In this context,
Belgium reiterates the key role of the Security Council
as the guarantor for any comprehensive, just and lasting
solution, in line with its previous resolutions and
full respect for international law. As was eloquently
stated by the Permanent Representative of Germany,
we believe in international law and that it must be
respected. Belgium will continue to work to that end
in the Council and jointly with our Palestinian and
Israeli friends.

