Mr. Choat (South Sudan): The Republic of South
Sudan welcomes the report (S/2011/603) of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Abyei. We also
express our thanks to the Government of the Federal
Republic of Ethiopia for providing troops to the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei, as well as
for its continuous efforts in support of peace and
stability in the region.

As the Secretary-General notes in his report, the
Abyei Joint Oversight Committee, comprised of senior
representatives from the Republic of the Sudan and the
Republic of South Sudan, met for the first time on 7
and 8 September in Addis Ababa, in the presence of the
African Union High-level Implementation Panel and
the United Nations. At that meeting, the members of
the Committee agreed and signed a detailed timetable
for the withdrawal of all troops from the Abyei Area.

In compliance with the provisions of the Addis
Ababa agreement, Sudan People's Liberation Army
forces withdrew from the Abyei Area and redeployed
to Warrap State. Subsequent to the issuance of the
Secretary-General's report, the Force Commander
confirmed that SPLA forces had complied with the
agreed withdrawal plan. As of today, Sudanese Armed
Forces (SAF) troops have not withdrawn from the
Abyei Area, despite the clear timeline agreed at the
meeting of the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee,
which was signed by senior representatives of the
Government of the Republic of the Sudan.

The SAF must now withdraw immediately and
unconditionally from the Abyei Area. We respectfully
request the Council to set a deadline for that
withdrawal, and to hold whoever violates it
accountable. In that regard, we are also concerned that
the Republic of the Sudan has stated that the SAF
cannot withdraw from Abyei unless the Area
institutions are established. While establishing those
institutions is necessary, in no agreement between the
parties is the withdrawal of troops conditional upon
their establishment.

The Republic of South Sudan underlines that it is
ready to continue serious negotiations with the
Republic of the Sudan on all outstanding issues. My
Government seeks lasting peace in Abyei. We wish to
see the security situation on the ground stabilized in
order to enable the peaceful return of civilians.

We thank the Council for its continued support
for peace and stability in the region. We stand ready to
continue cooperation with the Council, the United
Nations peacekeeping missions, the African Union,
regional partners and the international community in
support of that purpose.

