Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): I
would like to join my colleagues in extending a warm
welcome to the Chairman of the Council of Ministers,
Mr. Terzic, and to his colleagues, and in thanking High
Representative Ashdown for the excellent briefing he
gave us today, and, indeed, for all of his efforts in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

As we have heard in the reports today, we can see
real progress in Bosnia and Herzegovina, with
important steps in defence reform; a single country-
wide value-added tax enacted along with a nationwide
customs service; progress in the strengthening of the
rule of law and in promoting the continued return of
refugees and displaced persons, which has placed
within reach the completion of the property law
implementation programme; and the High
Representative's decision to enact the new statute for
Mostar.

These are all significant accomplishments. They
reflect the desire of the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to move beyond the division and
destruction of war towards a more prosperous future as
a fully contributing member of the international
community. The United States welcomes that and will
continue to encourage and support that endeavour.

In guiding this transition, High Representative
Ashdown has proved to be an effective leader, and I
would like to thank him for the excellent job he and his
team are doing on behalf of the international
community and the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
He can continue to count on the United States as he
addresses remaining challenges. Regarding the issue
with the police that he raised, we agree fully that
United Nations decisions regarding police force
members must be respected and maintained, and we
call on the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities
immediately to take the steps required to that end.

I want also to commend the High Representative
for taking action against those who provide financial
and logistical support to persons indicted for war
crimes by the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). The move to block the
assets of 10 individuals implicated in supporting
fugitive war criminals and the removal of Mirko
Sarovic from his position as Vice-President of the Serb
Democratic Party send a clear message. The
international community is determined to see indicted
war criminals - especially Radovan Karadzic and
Ratko Mladic - face justice before the ICTY.

The failure of local authorities, particularly those
in Republika Srpska, to fulfil commitments they made
at Dayton to hand over persons indicted by the ICTY is
retarding Bosnia and Herzegovina's progress towards
normalcy and prosperity. International pressure and
demands for accountability from those individuals and
organizations that support fugitive war-crimes indictees
will only increase. Those who shelter indictees hold
back all the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina, but
mostly those in Republika Srpska, from achieving
greater security and prosperity through integration into
Euro-Atlantic institutions. It is long past time to
resolve this issue.

While the ICTY will try Karadzic, Mladic and
other senior officials most responsible for crimes
within the ICTY's jurisdiction, it is important that
justice for other cases be transferred to a competent
national jurisdiction. Establishing a domestic War
Crimes Chamber is a key element in the ICTY's
completion strategy and for strengthening the rule of
law in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We note the High
Representative's comments about re-energizing that
effort and hope that we will see results soon.

The leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina have
numerous challenges still before them. To continue to
be full a partner in the international war on terrorism,
Bosnia and Herzegovina should act quickly to
complete the reforms of the intelligence sector,
including passage of the draft law creating a single
intelligence agency under State control. Authorities
need to pass amendments to the State Information and
Protection Agency law, providing that Agency with full
State-level investigative and enforcement authority.

We commend entity and State legislatures for
acting courageously to adopt legislation establishing
State-level command and control of the armed forces.
However, slow implementation of the Defence Law
jeopardizes Bosnia and Herzegovina's desire to be
invited by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) to join the Partnership for Peace at the end of
June. A capable and authoritative defence minister
should be appointed as soon as possible to oversee the
creation of the State Ministry of Defence, which is a
condition for Partnership for Peace membership.
NATO-endorsed defence reform benchmarks also must
be fulfilled.

We applaud the many heartening developments
reported by the High Representative. Nonetheless, we
echo Lord Ashdown's call for faster progress on
critical issues and reform and I welcome the words of
commitment of the Chairman of the Council of
Ministers. In concert with the High Representative and
many other supportive nations, the United States stands
ready to assist those in Bosnia and Herzegovina who
want to move their country towards a stable future as a
modern democracy and a strong Euro-Atlantic partner.

