Mr. Miiftiioglu (Turkey): Let me begin by
thanking the three Chairmen of the Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373
(2001) and 1540 (2004) for their comprehensive and
informative briefings. We highly appreciate their
leadership and the valuable work undertaken by the
Committees they respectively chair.

Earlier this month, the Security Council voiced
the sentiments of the larger international community
when it welcomed the news that Osama bin Laden
would never again be able to perpetrate acts of
terrorism, and reaffirmed that terrorism could not and
should not be associated with any religion, nationality,
civilization or group (see S/PRST/2011/9).

Despite that development, which certainly marks
as an important milestone in global efforts to eradicate
terrorism, there is no room for complacency. Indeed,
today, terrorism in all its forms and manifestations and
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
continue to pose serious threats to international peace
and security. No country is immune to those cross-
border threats. We should thus act in an even more
steadfast manner and strive to increase the
effectiveness of our endeavours.

I would like to thank to Mr. Peter Wittig,
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), for his
valuable efforts. Over the past decade, the sanctions
regime has proven to be an effective tool in countering
Al-Qaida and Taliban terrorists and other individuals
and entities affiliated with those groups. We believe
that it has been instrumental in preventing many
possible terrorist attacks by imposing sanctions against
individuals and entities on its consolidated list.

At this stage, we need to concentrate our efforts
on further strengthening the sanctions regime. In that
regard, the rulings of national and regional courts
concerning some of the names on the list prove to be a
priority area that requires further and careful attention.
In that context, Turkey will pursue a constructive and
flexible approach so that the principles of due process
and fair procedures are taken into consideration, as
called for in some court decisions, without prejudging
the final decisions of the 1267 Committee.
We are also following the review process of the
consolidated list. With the active contribution of the
Monitoring Team, the Committee has already reviewed
a significant number of names. We hope that, with the
finalization of the review process, the consolidated list
will better reflect current threats, and thus become a
more credible instrument in coping with the
challenges.

We welcome the prolongation and refinement of
the mandate of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate through resolution 1963 (2010).
In particular, we appreciate the resolution's focus on
countering incitement to terrorist acts motivated by
extremism and on ensuring respect for human rights
and the rule of law. Both aspects are crucial for
combating international terrorism in an effective and
legitimate manner.

We also would like to thank the members of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, and especially the
Chairman of the Committee, Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri,
Permanent Representative of India, for his seamless
efforts. We also would like to recognize Mr. Mike
Smith, Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, and his professional
and hardworking team for their support and
contributions to the work of the Committee.

That said, there are still deficiencies in the
implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624
(2005), deriving from the lack of either political will or
capacity. In our view, one of the main challenges of the
Committee is to ensure that Member States fully
understand their obligations as listed in those
resolutions and take the necessary measures to
implement them. In that regard, the dialogue between
the Committee and Member States should be
intensified so that the Committee can more effectively
fulfil its monitoring and assistance tasks. For its part,
Turkey will effectively and actively strive to achieve
further progress in that direction. It is important that
the focus be on the practical measures for either
expanding the scope of some of the already-existing
arrangements or filling in the gaps identified in
implementation.

Since its adoption, resolution 1540 (2004) has
emerged as an important component of the global
non-proliferation and counter-terrorism regimes. We
are pleased that the level of implementation of the
resolution has improved remarkably. We thank the

11-3390]
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), under the able Chairmanship of
Mr. Baso Sangqu, and the Group of Experts for their
diligent work. Turkey continues to support the
comprehensive review of the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), which in our opinion is a
continuous process. Our efforts should therefore
continue unabated.

We believe that the country visits and outreach
events, such as conferences, seminars and workshops,
organized at the regional and subregional levels, are
also highly beneficial. We therefore support the
continuation of such activities within the framework of
all three Committees.

Before I conclude, let me emphasize again that
effectively countering terrorism and the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction can only be ensured
through close cooperation among all Member States as
part of an integrated approach. I would like to reiterate
the determination of my country to continue to actively
support the work of all three Committees.

