The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation.

We thank Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Yemen, and Under-Secretary-
General Mark Lowcock for their detailed briefings on
the political, military and humanitarian situation in the
Republic of Yemen. It is now clear that Yemen and its
people are experiencing a very serious political and
humanitarian catastrophe.

As we have heard from our briefers today, the
situation in the country remains dire. Despite the fragile
ceasefire prevailing in Al-Hudaydah, intense fighting in
the south of the country is cause for serious concern. We
call on the parties to the military confrontation in Aden
to resolve their disagreements through negotiations.
Increased tensions make it difficult to establish a
balanced dialogue with all political stakeholders in the
country, while taking into account all their concerns,
and only help terrorist groups.

We support Mr. Griffiths' mediation efforts
to make the parties to the conflict understand that
there is no military solution to the conflict and that
a comprehensive ceasefire and confidence-building
measures are needed. In that connection, we welcome
the meeting on 9 September of the Redeployment
Coordination Committee. We expect that negotiations
and the quest for compromise will help move us forward
in implementing the Stockholm Agreement.

The further deployment of the United Nations
Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement and
the withdrawal of military forces from the ports of
Al-Hudaydah, Saleef and Ras Isa will not only facilitate
de-escalation throughout the country but also help to
unlock other aspects of the Stockholm Agreement,
including the exchange of prisoners and de-escalation
in Taiz, and to move towards a discussion of the
parameters of a settlement.

As we heard from Mr. Lowcock, the humanitarian
situation in Yemen continues to deteriorate and
increasingly resembles a full-fledged humanitarian
disaster. Humanitarian assistance to Yemen needs to be
a priority of our work. Let me again underscore that the
humanitarian assistance which Yemen receives from
outside its borders needs to be provided to the entire

population of the country, regardless of who controls a
given area.

We are seriously concerned about the 14 September
drone strikes on major oil facilities in Saudi Arabia.
We strongly condemn strikes on non-military targets
and the destruction of socioeconomic infrastructure.
Armed escalation threatens to complicate the search
for a political solution to the conflict and could also
become a large-scale regional confrontation. We call
on all parties to show restraint and ensure that such
dangerous incidents do not recur. At the same time, we
recommend that no hasty conclusions be made about
who carried out the attacks, as that could destabilize
the already tense situation in Yemen and the Middle
East as a whole.

In conclusion, I recall resolution 598 (1987),
which requests the Secretary-General, in cooperation
with States of the region, to develop a security and
confidence-building architecture in the region. In
that context, the well-known Russian concept of
collective security in the Persian Gulf, which is aimed
at unblocking conflict situations and developing
confidence-building and control measures, is becoming
increasingly relevant. We again call on all parties
concerned to study that document and engage in
collective work to find mutually acceptable solutions to
regional problems.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Yemen.

