Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we welcome you,
Mr. President, to New York. We also thank Poland for
having included the Israeli-Palestinian issue on this
month's agenda.

I would also like to thank the team of the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Mr. Mladenov, for the detailed and informative
briefing he just gave us. His ongoing dedication and
commitment to his sensitive mission in the Middle East
are commendable.

On Friday, 23 August, the response of Israeli
forces to the protests in the Gaza Strip resulted in
hundreds of injuries. Rockets launched at Israel from
Palestinian territories by radical groups and Israeli air
strikes on Gaza cause significant damage on both sides.
That is compounded by improper exchanges between
Israeli settlers in the occupied Palestinian territories
and local Palestinians. Israel must respond with
proportionate force and the terrorist attacks must stop.
The environment is quite hostile, which is worrisome
for Equatorial Guinea.

That is the sad state of coexistence between
Israelis and Palestinians. The conflict between the two
peoples has gone through different scenarios in the
almost 70 years of its existence, sometimes reaching
the highest alert levels. And that, which is no small
thing, has happened in the full view of all the members
of the Council, the United Nations and the entire
international community.

The lack of a sustainable and definitive political
solution to this conflict, over such a long period - in
addition to being an unending source of destabilization
for the entire region - could raise questions about the
prestige and leadership of this Organization in general,
and of the Council in particular. That is what we all
absolutely must avoid. Instead, we should surprise
those who doubt the effectiveness and ability to achieve
results of the United Nations. We have sufficient tools
to do so, but we sometimes lack consensus and unity
among all Council members.

We held a debate recently on international
peace and security that focused on the Middle East
(see S/PV.8600), in which, among other things, we
underlined the importance of a political process
based on inclusive dialogue between the parties to the
conflict. Almost all of us agreed that a lasting peace
between Israelis and Palestinians would be possible
only through a two-State solution. To that end, we
stressed the essential role of the United Nations in all
the conflicts in the region - a critical responsibility
that falls to the Security Council as the principal organ
for the promotion and maintenance of international
peace and security.

With regard to the Gaza Strip, we welcome the efforts
of the United Nations, which is working closely with
Egypt to mediate and reduce tensions in that enclave.
According to Ms. DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General
for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, last month
those efforts led to an Israeli-authorized extension of
the Gaza fishing zone from 10 to 15 nautical miles, the
return to the Gaza Strip of 44 confiscated fishing boats
and certain flexibility in some of the conditions for the
travel of businessmen based in Gaza.

We also welcome the United Nations efforts to
generate employment through the United Nations
Development Programme and the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, which recently created about 9,000 employment
opportunities, including 3,000 for women. In any case,
the humanitarian situation in Gaza remains troubling,
and the Council must continue to be seized ofthis issue.

Our delegation hopes that all efforts continue in this
positive direction so that we can resolve all the political,
economic and humanitarian concerns that threaten the
stability of this population enclave, which has always
created a volatile atmosphere that does not favour
either of the parties. In that regard, we urge Israelis
and Palestinians to refrain from unilateral actions that
could exacerbate an already complex environment. We
must alleviate the suffering of the people of Gaza.

Finally, on the Palestinian question in general,
the delegation of Equatorial Guinea reaffirms its
commitment to supporting all initiatives that take into
consideration existing instruments of international law,
such as the resolutions of the Council and the General
Assembly, as well as those of other internationally
recognized entities. For Equatorial Guinea, it is
paramount to find a solution resulting from negotiations
between Israelis and Palestinians that is applauded by
the international community. That solution must be a
two-State solution, with independent States living in
peace, with security guarantees for both and for the
other States of the region.

