Archbishop Auza: The Holy See commends
China's presidency for bringing the topic of the Middle
East to the attention of the international community
through today's Security Council open debate.

The Holy See shares the grave concern of the
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Mr. Nikolay Mladenov, that the two-State solution
between Israel and Palestine is in danger of failing,
as peace talks stall and inflammatory rhetoric, acts of
terror and unilateral actions scupper efforts to restore a
process ofmeaningful dialogue and compromise. In the
face of such a frustrating scenario, Pope Francis pleads
with both the Israeli and the Palestinian authorities
to consider their own peoples' need for peace and
courageously pursue the path of dialogue, reconciliation
and peace, because there is simply no other way.

During his May 2014 visit to Jordan, Palestine
and Israel, Pope Francis expressed special concern
for the Holy City of Jerusalem, the patrimony of
the world's monotheistic religions and a city of
universal importance:

"Jerusalem means, of course, 'city of peace'. This
is what God wills it to be, and such is the desire of
all people of goodwill."
Yet sadly, Jerusalem remains deeply troubled because
of long-standing conflicts.

The Holy See firmly believes that the two-State

solution provides the best possibility for a peaceful
settlement. Pope Francis reiterated that position at Tel
Aviv Airport, when he pleaded both for a universal
recognition of the right ofthe State of Israel to exist and
to flourish in peace and security within internationally
recognized borders, and for the creation of a viable
State of Palestine, a sovereign homeland in which the
Palestinians can live in peace, dignity and freedom.
The two-State solution must become a reality and not
remain merely a dream.

My delegation wishes to reiterate the appeal that
Pope Francis made to the Palestinian authorities on
25 May 2014 in Bethlehem:

"The time has come for everyone to find the
courage to be generous and creative in the service
of the common good, and to find the courage to
forge a peace which rests on the acknowledgment
by all of the right of two States to exist and live
in peace and security within internationally
recognized borders."

The Holy See hopes that the comprehensive
agreement between the Holy See and the State of
Palestine, which came into full force on 2 January 2016,
will encourage all parties to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict to engage sincerely in a negotiated and peaceful
solution. In the complex reality of the Middle East,
the Holy See hopes that the agreement may serve as
an example of dialogue and cooperation, in particular
for other Arab- and Muslim-majority countries in
the region.

The Holy See reiterates its appeal that special
attention must be given to Lebanon, where refugees
from neighbouring conflicts constitute nearly a quarter
of the population. The Parliament of Lebanon must
act to elect a President. Soon Lebanon will have been
without a President for two years, at a time of regional
instability and the growth of vicious non-State actors.
The international community must assist the leaders
of Lebanon to constitutionally stabilize their own
Government and deal with the immense burden of the
refugee population.

My delegation also calls on the international
community to take collective political action to stem
the spread of the fundamentalism and extremism,
which have sown terror in so many countries in the
region, in North Africa and in many parts of the world.
The internationalization of terror can be countered
only by a collective international response. Ideological
terror cannot be effectively defeated by military action
alone; it must be tackled by also addressing the root
causes upon which international terrorism feeds. The
lie and blasphemy of terrorist groups that claim to kill
and oppress in the name of religion must be openly
denounced in the strongest possible terms. Religious
leaders in particular have a grave responsibility to
condemn fellow believers who use their religion as a
justification for violence.

Finally, the Holy See appeals once again to
the international community to hear the cries of
the beleaguered communities of Christians and
other ethnic and religious minority groups in the
Middle East, which are being discriminated against,
persecuted, slaughtered, set afire or drowned because
they do not share the ideological or religious views of
their persecutors. Their very peaceful enculturation
as minorities into the majority culture has made them
particular targets for the extremist violence that has
forced them to flee their homes and abandon their
properties and homeland, risking everything as they
cross inhospitable deserts and perilous seas in search
of calmer shores and welcoming communities, which,
unfortunately, they do not always find. My delegation
therefore hopes that Pope Francis's visit two days ago to
the migrants and refugees stranded on the Greek island
of Lesbos has touched many hearts.

