The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of the Central African Republic, in
which he requests to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ponkre-
Kono (Central African Republic) took a seat at
the Council table.

The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Ms. Sahle-Work
Zwede, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and head of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Ms. Zwede to take a seat at the Council
table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Jan
Grauls, Chair of the Central African Republic
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission and
Permanent Representative of Belgium.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
2
I invite Mr. Grauls to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of members of
the Council to document S/2010/295, which contains
the report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
the Central African Republic and on the activities of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
that country.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Ms. Sable-Work Zwede and Ambassador
Jan Grauls. I now give the floor to Ms. Zwede.


