Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): My delegation would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for your participation
in today's open debate and for the important statement
of your Foreign Minister. We would also like to
express our appreciation for your usual and very able
stewardship of the Security Council.

In our view, conflict prevention and
peacebuilding remain the greatest challenges facing the
United Nations today. While peacebuilding is an
essential component of conflict management that
entails parallel and coordinated efforts on the security,
political, humanitarian and development fronts, time
has shown that it remains a complex undertaking,
requiring further and closer review of ground realities
and expectations, as well as continued extensive
consultations. The inputs thus gathered needs to be
factored into our collective action to forge a coherent,
efficient and predictable response to the peacebuilding
needs of countries emerging from conflict.
As pointed out by some speakers, the task of
peacebuilding is further complicated by the proven
risks of relapse into conflict. It is therefore very
important for the international community to pay
special attention to the stresses and strains on the
system, particularly in the immediate aftermath of

conflict - a period normally marked by challenges
and opportunities alike. The challenges of a relapse
into conflict can be tackled by undertaking more
coordinated assessment and planning for peacebuilding
and peacekeeping activities, in which both processes
must be explicitly defined and clearly identified to
ensure a coherent approach to a sustainable peace.

We must learn to recognize that peacekeeping and
peacebuilding are each specialized disciplines, though
with cross-cutting themes. These disciplines can work
together by exploring pragmatic avenues of partnership
through a dynamic interplay between the General
Assembly, the Security Council, the Economic and
Social Council, the international financial institutions,
the troop-contributing countries and the relevant
departments of the Secretariat. As experience has
shown, regrettably, this does not necessarily happen.

Early conflict management also offers some
unique opportunities. There are the aspirations of the
people affected by the conflict, who are determined to
seize the opportunity of peace and to turn a new page
for a better future. We must learn to build upon these
aspirations by giving them full ownership of the
process through active engagement in decision-making
and investment in national capacity-building. At the
same time, the international community rightly expects
the local actors to inculcate the required sense of
responsibility and values of governance that
correspond to the ownership, and to infuse confidence
among the partners.

We understand that there is no silver bullet that
can precipitate conditions conducive to implementing
peacebuilding strategies. Such conditions - security
and political stability - can be attained only if the aim
of the collective peacebuilding endeavour is to win
peace and not to earn or impose it. Building such peace
would require the right prioritization of the targeted
areas of development, while tapping and harnessing the
civilian capacities available locally before resorting to
regional or international expertise. Similarly, some
level of understanding of local sensitivities and a
degree of flexibility in imposing conditionalities are
also essential. Further progress on democracy, gender
issues and human rights can only be incremental.
Undue emphasis on these issues, especially in the early
recovery phase, would remain counterproductive.

Sustained peacebuilding efforts also require
predictable and sustained funding and the allocation of
adequate resources. This requires the cooperation and
support of Member States, particularly the donors, as
well as enhanced collaboration with the international
financial institutions, which need to show more
operational ingenuity in their assistance programmes.
From the point of view of enhancing national
ownership and capacity, it is also important that most
of the funding be provided through Government
channels. In the context of resource allocations, the
steady portfolio growth in the Peacebuilding Fund is
indeed gratifying, and the efficiency of the Fund will
only increase with more transparency.

Pakistan is committed to the objectives of United
Nations peacebuilding. As the largest troop-
contributing country, we are cognizant of the
importance of this endeavour. We were among the
pioneers of the concept of a dedicated United Nations
institutional mechanism for peacebuilding. The
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) is an embodiment of
that idea.

The PBC, with its unique composition and
specific mandate, holds a pivotal role in the
peacebuilding architecture. We are happy to note that
the PBC has made steady progress in the first five
years of its existence. For this, the role of the Chair,
previous Chairs, and the Chairs of the various country-
specific configurations, is definitely commendable. As
Member States review the peacebuilding architecture
this year, it is important to note that the objectives of
peacebuilding will be advanced by utilizing the full
potential of the PBC, as outlined in General Assembly
resolution 60/180, and also by aligning its functions
with lessons we should have learned thus far.

For effective response in the immediate aftermath
of conflict, it would make more sense if the PBC were
engaged from the outset of United Nations
involvement, particularly where integrated
peacekeeping missions are deployed. This would only
facilitate more cohesion between the objectives of
peacebuilding and peacekeeping.

I will conclude by urging a more sustained focus
of the Member States on peacebuilding. In this regard,
our delegation greatly values your presence in the
Council, Sir, as well as Japan's active engagement over
time in peacekeeping and peacebuilding processes.

