Mr. Kubis: September 2015 marked one year in
office of the Government led by Prime Minister Haider
Al Abadi. The Prime Minister continues to actively lead
efforts to fulfil the Government's programme and his
reform agenda, even as the scope and complexity of Iraq's
security, political, social, budgetary and humanitarian
challenges increase. At the same time, the Prime
Minister faces immense challenges to implementing
his planned reforms, primarily due to disagreements
and political polarization among political forces. Last
week, the Council of Representatives unanimously
voted to bar the Government from enacting key reforms
that would infringe on the separation of powers between
the three branches of Government and the Constitution.
Since taking office, the Prime Minister has been
struggling to exercise his authority while his opponents
grow bolder. Meanwhile, the scope and impact of the
reforms have not met public expectations.
Despite hopes that he would be able to move
national reconciliation forward and bring the broader
Sunni community into the political process, the Prime
Minister's efforts have been obstructed by elements
within all Iraqi components, the main reasons being
lack of trust and vested interests. Yet, the majority of
Iraqis believe that Prime Minister Al Abadi remains
their best hope for a better, united, less sectarian and
prosperous Iraq, and they support him. The Prime
Minister has so far retained sustained political backing
from the highly influential Grand Ayatollah Al-Sistani
and the Marja'iya. I have stressed to the Prime Minister
and other political forces the need for openness,
partnership, inclusiveness and broad consultations
in decision-making to work in unity and to promote
effective governance. Intensified political confrontation
is the last thing the country needs at this point of time.

In the wake of the steep drop in global oil prices,
Iraq's fiscal crisis and growing budget deficit are of
increasing concern and highlight the need for urgent
economic reform in the country. I urge the Government,
as well as its foreign partners, including international
and regional financial institutions, to undertake
urgent measures to address the pressing economic and
budgetary challenges.

The United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI) has continued its efforts to promote inclusive
national reconciliation among the leaders of all Iraqi
components and political groups, civil society and local
communities, and neighbouring countries, in support
of and coordination with the Government of Iraq.
UNAMI stands ready to assist all efforts to promote
an inclusive reconciliation process that upholds respect
for Iraq's unity, sovereignty and constitutional order.
There is a vital need to show political will, ownership
and a commitment to historic compromise and national
reconciliation, regardless of opposite views and
political risk, to capitalize on signals from some Sunni
leaders and groups outside of the political process that
they are ready to join it.

The Government, the Council of Representatives
and the political forces should not lose sight ofthe need to
proceed with the Government's national reconciliation
programme, including priority legislation to promote
a genuine, inclusive Iraqi political system based on
equal rights for all Iraqis and to counter sectarianism
and the radical ideology of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL). Progress on the Syrian file towards
a political solution would also have a critical positive
impact on national reconciliation in Iraq.
The stabilization efforts led by the central
and local authorities and supported by the United
Nations Development Programme Funding Facility
for Immediate Stabilization are progressing. The
stabilization of Tikrit has been a success, as nearly its
entire displaced population-some 155,000 peopl-has
returned home. Now, four governorates - Anbar,
Diyala, Salah al-Din and Ninewa - have asked for
additional assistance from the Funding Facility. The
United Nations family in Iraq is ready to respond
positively. As often is the case, funding is the problem.

In areas reclaimed from ISIL, the Government
must continue to make every effort to ensure that good
governance and the rule of law are restored as quickly
as possible. UNAMI is actively engaging with the
respective authorities on that issue, as well as with the
leadership of the popular mobilization forces.

The Kurdistan Region of Iraq has long been a
source of stability and development in Iraq. Deep
disagreements between the major political parties of the
region, however, threaten that. I have engaged Kurdish
interlocutors extensively, encouraging them to swiftly
reach a compromise solution, based on an inclusive
political dialogue and democratic principles, to remain
united for the critical task of fighting ISIL.

Concerning Baghdad-Erbil relations, it is imperative
that differences over the December 2014 oil- and
revenue-sharing agreement be quickly resolved
through dialogue. UNAMI is ready to support this.

Furthermore, the current impasse - at a time when
the 2016 budget is being discussed in the Council of
Representatives - hurts the relationship between

the central Government and the Kurdistan Regional
Government, which is critical to Iraq's stability and
unity, the fight against ISIL, and to addressing the
growing economic, budgetary and social challenges
through reforms.

During the reporting period, ISIL was successfully
pushed back. In Central Iraq, the Iraqi security forces,
the popular mobilization forces and tribal volunteers
have retaken key areas, including Baiji, which is now
under Government control. The pro-Government forces
have proven their ability to conduct military operations
in several areas simultaneously. The Global Coalition to
Counter ISIL has become more effective in supporting

the Iraqi security forces and the Peshmerga, both in
direct military activities and training and in providing
supplies of materiel. In addition, the Government
of Iraq has recently begun to cooperate with Russia,
Iran and Syria in intelligence-sharing through a cell in
Baghdad.
Yet, ISIL continues to possess the funding and
military capacities to prolong its reign ofterror over large
swathes of Iraq. Notwithstanding ISIL's sophisticated
and massive use of improvised explosive devices,
suicide attacks and ability to conduct operations in
complex urban environments, the Iraqi security forces
continue to make slow progress, while at the same
time doing their utmost to avoid civilian casualties. In
addition, the reported use of chemical weapons by ISIL
against the Peshmerga is currently under investigation.
Representatives of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons recently visited Baghdad to
discuss this matter with Iraqi officials.

During his visit to Iraq last week, the Secretary-
General's Special Adviser on the Prevention of
Genocide, Mr. Adama Dieng, made a strong plea
for strengthened mechanisms for the protection of
minorities, stressing the need for crime perpetrators
to be held accountable and the importance of national
reconciliation at the community level. The protection
of minorities remains one of the critical tasks of the
United Nations family.

The humanitarian situation remains of the gravest
concern. The scale of the crisis is outstripping our
collective capacity to respond. With limited funding,
the United Nations humanitarian community has had to
cut and reorganise its programmes in support of Iraqi
internally displaced persons (IDPs). Since the vast
majority of IDPs want to remain in Iraq, the best way
to encourage this is to provide humanitarian support at
the point of origin. They will be less inclined to flee
the country and migrate to third countries, primarily
in Europe.

Allow me now to turn to the eighth report of the
Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 4 of resolution
2107 (2013), on the issue of missing Kuwaiti and third-
country nationals and missing Kuwaiti property,
including the national archives.

In spite of all the instability plaguing the region,
good relations, a positive atmosphere and closer
dialogue and cooperation are prevalent in the relations
between Iraq and Kuwait. Good will between the two
countries was further evidenced when, on 28 October,
the payment of the remaining $4.6 billion in reparations
owed to the Government of Kuwait was extended until

1 January 2017. While the challenging security and
political situation in Iraq and the burden placed on
State finances are fully recognized, the Government of
Iraq is nonetheless expected to demonstrate complete
commitment to this international obligation and to
make efforts to move the file forward. The steps it has
taken so far and the results to date are insufficient.

I would like to touch upon the issue of the residents
of Camp Hurriya and the need to alleviate Iraq of
this burden. On 30 October, the Camp was again the
target of a rocket attack that claimed the lives of 24
residents and wounded many others. The only solution
guaranteeing the security of the residents is their
speedy relocation to third countries. While strongly
reminding the Government of Iraq of its obligation to
ensure the safety of the residents, I equally strongly
urge all countries to work with the Secretary-General's
Special Adviser to consider hosting these residents in
their territories or to use their influence to assist in
their relocation in the shortest possible time.

I will also continue to remind the Council of our
United Nations national staff member who was taken
hostage earlier this year. I urged the Iraqi authorities to
redouble their efforts to secure his release. It has now
been more than six months that we have had no credible
information about our colleague or a positive solution
to this case.

UNAMI, in close consultation with the Iraqi
authorities, has embarked on implementing the
Secretary-General's recommendations, as outlined in
his last report (S/2015/518) and endorsed through the
adoption of our new mandate in July. The new mandate
gives the Mission the flexibility it needs to respond to
the evolving challenges in Iraq and enables UNAMI,
together with the United Nations country team, to
prioritize its activities. With the continued support of
the Council, we will continue working hand in hand
with the Government of Iraq, political forces and civil
society to achieve results in all critical areas, while
increasingly mobilizing regional and international
support and cooperation.

