Mr. Wenaweser (Liecthenstein): We commend
Portugal and Ambassador Moraes Cabral for their
work as Chair of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions. They
have shown outstanding leadership, and we are grateful
to them for the work that they have done.

The past years have seen some modest but important
improvements in the practice of the Council. The
annex to the presidential note contained in document
S/2010/507 is a set of measures that the Council itself
has agreed to take in order to better serve the interests
of the wider membership, as well as its own. More
than two years since it was issued, however, the full
and consistent implementation of these measures
remains elusive. The Working Group has continued
its commendable efforts. At the same time, progress
remains limited and slow.

A key issue for discussion at this time of year
is the more equal distribution of work between the
permanent and non-permanent members of the Council
as it prepares for a new year in a new composition. We
hope that genuine consultations will lead to a good
distribution of work in the subsidiary bodies, and we
certainly believe that the work of the Council would
benefit if non-permanent members were given a more
active role in the drafting of draft resolutions and
decisions.

We also look forward to improvements in the
format of the open debates of the Council. This could
perhaps be a topic for the Working Group to take up
early next year.

We value the work of the Working Group, but are
also realistic about its scope and potential, which are
focused mostly on the implementation of note 507. But
we must also advance discussions beyond that.

The point of reference for this discussion is, to
our mind, draft resolution A/66/L.42/Rev.2, which
was submitted to the General Assembly this spring
by Costa Rica, Jordan, Singapore, Switzerland and
ourselves - a group known as the group of five small
nations. That draft resolution dealt with enhancing the
accountability, transparency and effectiveness of the
Security Council, the goals on which the Council needs
to make tangible progress, as we all agreed in 2005.

The draft resolution received, as is well known,
considerable support among the membership of the
United Nations, to the point that we are asked to this
day why it was withdrawn instead of being put to a
vote. While this is certainly not the place to discuss
the reasons, we would like to recall the annex to the
draft resolution, which should serve as a yardstick in
our discussions on the Council's working methods. It
continues to reflect the agenda that the Security Council
should deal with, according to the membership that
it represents. This is true even for most of those who
were not willing to support the draft resolution, as they
advanced reasons of procedure rather than substance
to explain their reluctance. If the Security Council is
serious in its resolve to advance its working methods, it
has now been given a detailed menu for doing so.

Of particular relevance in the work of the Council
is the area of accountability. Two decades after the
establishment ofthe first ad hoc tribunal, it often seems
that the Council finds itself in uncharted territory in
this respect. At the same time, the accountability needs
and the relevant pressure on the Council are increasing,
as is illustrated in connection with the widespread
and systematic crimes committed against the civilian
population in Syria. There is a clear need for the Council
to engage with the rest of the membership in an in-depth
and comprehensive discussion of the role that it can
play in this respect. The open debate that Guatemala
organized on this topic in October (S/PV.6849) was a
significant step, while just a first one. We organized
a workshop with the International Peace Institute on
the same topic earlier this month, and hope that other
States, members of the Council or otherwise, will show
an active interest in this important subject.

A substantial part ofthis discussion, while by far not
all of it, will naturally revolve around the International
Criminal Court, given the competencies assigned to
the Council under the Rome Statute. As a first small
step in this direction, we believe that a subsidiary
body - preferably an existing one - should be
designated as the place where relevant topics, including
notifications from the Court on non-cooperation, can
be discussed. To this end, my delegation, together with
the delegations of Costa Rica and Jordan, has submitted
a letter (S/2012/860) to you, Sir, asking that the Council
take such a step as a concrete follow-up to the open
debate held in October.

The use of the veto is a central aspect of the way
in which the Council carries out its work or, more
frequently, fails to do so. The past year has given ample
evidence to this effect. The veto as such is part and
parcel of the Charter of the United Nations, which
we all have ratified. But it is essential that it not be
used contrary to the very purposes and principles of
the Organization and that a minimum of accountability
be provided in this respect. We believe that a code of
conduct regarding the use of the veto would be useful,
with a clear emphasis on its use in situations involving
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes.
We encourage the Council, in particular its permanent
members, to commence this discussion.

