Mr. ngowe (Botswana): I would like to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of September. I
wish to assure you of the cooperation of the delegation of
Botswana. I also wish to thank Ambassador Wisnumurti
of Indonesia for his excellent stewardship of the Council
last month.

The draft resolution contained in document
S/ 1995/771 is before the Council today mainly because of
reported violations of Security Council resolution 918
(1994) of 17 May 1994, which imposed the arms
embargo on Rwanda. The flow of arms and related
materiel to elements of the former Rwandese government

 

forces gravely undermines stability and national
reconciliation in Rwanda and constitutes a serious threat to
peace and security in the Great Lakes region.

This is not the first time that the Council has
considered the question of the flow of arms to the former
Rwandese government forces. The possibility of deploying
military observers in airfields and other transportation
points in and around border crossing points in the
neighbouring States has been explored. The outcome of that
proposal is now a matter of public record. The
establishment of an International Commission of Inquiry
perhaps represents the Council's last hope in its efforts to
end this flow of arms. The significance and urgency of the
work of the Commission and its contribution to peace and
security in the Great Lakes region cannot therefore be
overemphasized in this regard.

The success of the Commission hinges on the
cooperation that it can receive from all concerned in the
subregion and beyond, as reflected in operative paragraph
5 of the draft resolution. The cooperation of all States is
equally important. Operative paragraph 3 calls upon States
to collate relevant information and make it available to the
Commission. Operative paragraph 7 calls upon all States to
cooperate with the Commission in facilitating its
investigations. It is clear that the international community
has a role to play in the success of the work of the
Commission.

