Mr. Korhonen (Finland): It is my pleasure to thank
the Republic of Korea for organizing such a timely
and important event. Promoting the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) is a priority in managing
all kinds of threats that result from the existence and
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
Finland fully aligns itself with the statement of
the European Union and would like to add a couple of
remarks from a national perspective.

I will introduce the multi-benefit model used in
our non-proliferation work and extend to all countries
present an invitation to the next plenary of the Global
Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism.

International cooperation to implement common
decisions starts at home. Finland is one of the seven
regularly reporting Member States that has submitted
five voluntary reports on the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) since 2004.
In addition, Finland contributes to non-proliferation
projects and cooperative activities in various regions,
ranging from Latin America to East Asia. That effort is
mainly based on a multi-benefit principle in allocating
and using scarce resources.

I will give just two examples, the first of which
is that measures that facilitate the detection of and
response to biological weapons will also improve
disease surveillance and other national public health
capacities. In that context, earlier this week Finland
hosted the Helsinki Commitment Development Meeting
as a part of the Global Health Security Agenda. Nearly
200 health security experts from over 30 countries
gathered in Finland to discuss that initiative, which is
relevant to the topic being discussed today. The aim is
to strengthen our ability to prevent, detect and respond
to emerging infectious diseases, whatever the cost.

As a second example, we would mention that
resources to detect the movement of terrorists across
borders can also help in combating human trafficking,
and vice-versa.

Improving non-proliferation capacities in that way
will also address other needs in a given country. On the
basis of such a strategy with multiple benefits, we can
promote both goals - security and development - with
our partners.

I want to recognize here the role of the Stimson
Center, which is based in Washington, DC, in designing
that innovative model and applying it to projects
that serve non-proliferation objectives. Finland has
supported the work of the Stimson Center in advancing
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).

The Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism
(GICNT) is one of the efforts that serve the goals of
resolution 1540 (2004). Finland is pleased that the
GICNT takes place in good cooperation with permanent
international organizations. The United Nations, the
International Atomic Energy Agency and INTERPOL
are actively involved in the GICNT as official observers.
Finland has agreed to host its next plenary meeting in
Helsinki in June 2015. The previous plenary was hosted
with success by the Government of Mexico in 2013, and
we strive to reach the same high standard as Mexico did
in organizing our meeting.

The priorities of the GICNT include nuclear
detection, nuclear forensics and response and mitigation
work. Our own national experience shows that sharing
best practices and participating in exercises in the
framework of the GICNT is useful and in our interest. I
want to extend our thanks to the Republic of Korea for
taking over the demanding task of coordinating the work
of the GICNT in its Implementation and Assessment
Group. Currently, 85 partner nations are involved in
GICNT cooperation. We very warmly welcome those
States who have not yet joined the Initiative to Helsinki
next year.

To conclude, let me once again thank you, Madam
President, and your Government for your leadership
in promoting resolution 1540 (2004). Finland looks
forward to the comprehensive report that the 1540
Committee will submit to the Security Council in 2016.
We hope that we will be able to offer some of our ideas
and experiences and that they will be useful to the
Committee in its preparatory work.

