Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): Once again, we
thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Yemen, Mr. Martin Griffiths, and the Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, Mr. Mark Lowcock, as well as
their teams, for all their work and dedication. We have
heard what Mr. Griffiths and Mr. Lowcock said about
the involvement of the International Committee of the
Red Cross and the World Food Programme in some of
the things that have been happening on the ground. I
would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to
those organizations and everything they are doing to
try and make the lives of ordinary people in Yemen
easier. We also welcome Lieutenant General Michael
Lollesgaard to his new post and thank Major General
Patrick Cammaert for his contribution. I will be brief,
Mr. President, because we will have closed consultations
later with Mr. Griffiths and General Lollesgaard.

We very much welcome the progress that has
been made very recently over the weekend. There was
particularly good news about the ports of Saleef and Ras
Isa. We look forward to what will happen in the next
phase involving Hudaydah port and parts of the city. As.
Mr. Lowcock's briefing emphasized, access to the Red
Sea Mills is vital - we are running out of superlatives
for the word critical - but it is obvious that we have
to be able to have the humanitarian agencies obtain
access to the food supplies there. Therefore, these steps
towards ensuring that access are extremely welcome.

As Mr. Griffith's briefing emphasized, we need
meaningful implementation to begin. It is extremely
welcome that the parties have been able to work closely
with the Special Envoy, and the commitments they
have given him are extremely necessary. But I think
what both briefings emphasized is how important it is
that those commitments get translated into meaningful
practice on the ground.

I want to say a word, ifI may, about standing up
the United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah
Agreement. It is obvious that the Mission has an
important role to play in getting implementation under
way and making sure that it is comprehensive. I know
there have been some teething problems with some of
the logistical arrangements for the Mission. I would
therefore like to use this opportunity to call on the all
the parties to do their utmost to ensure that Mission
personnel can get into place and do their work.

Mr. Griffiths said some encouraging things
about tackling the prisoner exchanges - we need to
finalize those. I think we all know that that is a crucial
confidence-building measure, as is a commitment to
the next round of talks. But I would particularly like to
echo what Mr. Griffiths said about the need - regarding
Taiz - for taking small steps now, not big steps later.
I think that is absolutely important. There is often in
peace processes a feeling that one should always go
for the biggest outcome possible. And, of course, in
principle that is right. But the people of Yemen, as we
heard very eloquently today from our briefers, need to
see tangible results, and they need to see them fast. I
therefore think that taking small steps now is absolutely
the right approach.

Regarding the political process overall, taking
careful, incremental steps forward is probably the way
to go. Mr. Griffiths set out the difficulties, and we
recognize that the peace and momentum that have been
achieved so far remain fragile; nevertheless, if we are
to try to bring peace and help to the people of Yemen,
who have suffered for so long, we need to keep going no
matter what the difficulty is.

Mr. Lowcock very eloquently described how the
challenges on the humanitarian side remain dire. And I
was very worried by what he had to say about operations
grinding to a halt. The urgency of making progress
cannot be overestimated. We hope that the pledging
conference to be held in Geneva on 26 February will be
able to give a boost to these important efforts.

In conclusion, I would like to underscore that longer-
term progress towards a political settlement - towards
a more representative settlement in Yemen - is
absolutely vital for the peace, security and stability
of the country and the health and well-being of the
Yemeni people.

