Mr. Della Vedova (Italy): I would first like to thank
the presidency for convening this timely meeting on
such a key and pressing issue for the Security Council.
I believe that the Council should make every possible
effort to resolve the worsening crisis created by the
persistent ambitions of the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea to pursue a military nuclear programme.

Italy condemns in the strongest terms all the
nuclear tests and ballistic-missile launches that the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea has carried
out. Its nuclear and ballistic-missile programmes pose
a grave and increasing threat not only to regional and
international peace and security but also to the global
non-proliferation regime. We all share a common
sense of urgency about the issue, since we assume,
rightly in my view, that with its tests and launches the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea is advancing
its military nuclear technology and capability. Such
progress represents an exceptionally high threat to
the international community. For that reason, Italy
will continue to fully support the implementation
of an effective sanctions regime as a tool aimed at
producing a change of behaviour in the leadership of
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. We are also
ready to strengthen the sanctions regime if there should
be additional nuclear tests or it should prove necessary
in order to enable us reach the objective of a peaceful
and comprehensive solution to the issue.

We firmly believe that the consistent and full
implementation of the sanctions is the only way to make
them effective in the framework of a comprehensive
strategy for long-term peace and security. In that regard,
I would like to recall the words of the Panel of Experts
in February when they stated that the implementation
of the sanctions regime is still insufficient and highly
inconsistent, while "[a]ll Member States should
reaffirm their commitment to rigorous enforcement of
United Nations sanctions" (S/2017/I50, annex). But the
sanctions must continue to be part ofa broader strategy,
not an end in themselves. Such a regime requires
Member States' good-faith awareness and dedication.
As Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1718 (2006), Italy is committed to helping all
States Members of the United Nations fully implement
the relevant Security Council resolutions, particularly
resolutions 2270 (2016) and 2321 (2016). To that end,
we held an open briefing in February, and beginning
in March, in cooperation with the Panel of Experts,
we have been holding a set of outreach meetings with
United Nations regional groups, two of which - with
the Groups of Latin American and Caribbean and
Eastern European States - have already taken place.
The meeting with the Group of African States will be
held on 1 May, while those with the Groups of Western
European and other and Asia-Pacific States will take
place by the end of May.

As Secretary Tillerson said, our collective actions
are not aimed at the people of North Korea but rather at
a regime that should put the interests and well-being of
its people above any considerations of military power.
The Council's resolutions are clear in that regard, and
as Chair ofthe Sanctions Committee, we take great care
to avoid any unintended consequences for the civilian
population of the country.

Italy reaffirms the goal of achieving a diplomatic
solution to North Korea's threats involving weapons
of mass destruction. We firmly believe that while
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea blatantly
disregards its international obligations with its nuclear
and missile programmes, they do not serve its own
security goals. On the contrary, we believe it could meet
its security needs much more effectively by abiding by
its international obligations under the relevant Security
Council resolutions and its commitments under the
Joint Statement of the Six-Party Talks of September
2005. Furthermore, at this time, a few weeks from
the commencement of the next review cycle of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT), Italy reiterates its demand that the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea return to compliance
with the NPT and the International Atomic Energy
Agency safeguards.

Lastly, I would like to underline that the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea's illegal nuclear and missile
programmes represent a deplorable diversion of crucial
resources that should be devoted to the primary needs
of its people. By immediately ending its nuclear and
ballistic-missile programmes, we believe that the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea would create
the conditions for its reintegration into the international
community and opportunities to improve its economy
and its people's standard of living.

