Mr. Solen (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, the Plurinational State of
Bolivia would like to associate itself with the statement
delivered on behalf of the countries of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

The Plurinational State of Bolivia condemns
Israel's continuing military occupation of Palestinian
territory, perpetrated through systematic violations of
international law and United Nations resolutions. In
that regard, we call on the international community to
show solidarity with the Palestinian people in the
tragedy they are experiencing. With courage and
dignity, they are continuing to cope with persecution,
closed areas, shortages of food and drinking water and
edicts by Israel that violate human rights and the
Geneva Conventions. Israel is also continuing to
impose widespread displacements that affect thousands
of Palestinian families.

Since the last open debate on the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question (see S/PV.6363), the international community has continued
to make various efforts to put a stop to violence,
terrorism and the loss of innocent Palestinian lives in
the region. Nevertheless, we continue to witness the
perverse consequences of the occupation by a foreign
Power. The serious economic effects of that occupation
have deprived the Palestinian State and its inhabitants
of their legitimate right to exist.

Along with the blockade and war in the Gaza
Strip, we also cannot remain indifferent to the alarming
direct and indirect costs of Israeli's closure policy in the
West Bank. According to a report (TD/B/57/4) by the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
(UNCTAD), that has led to a loss of $3.1 billion over
the past three years. The same UNCTAD report
highlights the fact that in 2009 the trade deficit with
Israel reached $2.6 billion. That figure exceeds the
value of all the assistance that the donor community
provides to Palestine.

These and other serious constraints in Gaza and
many areas of the West Bank, which serve to increase
disparities and fragmentation in the occupied
Palestinian territories, only highlight the unjust
practices of the occupying Power, Israel.

The Plurinational State of Bolivia would like to
express its strong solidarity with the pain of the
Palestinian people. We vehemently reject Israel's
unnecessary destruction of thousands of Palestinian
homes, businesses and vital civilian infrastructure,
including water and sanitation facilities that are
essential for ensuring the fundamental right to water
and sanitation, which has been recognized by the
General Assembly as a human right.

We condemn Israel's use of access to water as a
way to evict the Palestinian population from its
territories. The Plurinational State of Bolivia urges
Israel to end all its illegal settlement activities. We
demand that Israel halt its illegal practices against the
Palestinian people, put a definitive end to its illegal
blockade of Gaza and immediately allow the
permanent opening of all crossing points for the
movement of people and goods into and out of the
territory, which is necessary to alleviate the
humanitarian crisis and allow for immediate
reconstruction and the economic recovery of the
Palestinian people.

The international community has a responsibility
to ensure that the most reliable possible investigation is
carried out on all the violations and crimes committed
by Israel in the Gaza Strip. It is in precisely this
important framework that the Committee of
Independent Experts appointed in accordance with the
Human Rights Council resolution of March of this year
on the follow-up to the Goldstone Report can pursue its
work.

The negotiations that need to take place in the
framework of the peace process are often disrupted by
illegal settlement activity, which is obviously aimed at
the illegal acquisition and de facto annexation of more
Palestinian territory, thereby imposing a unilateral
solution, which has clearly been shown in the last few
days by Israel by refusing to extend a moratorium
settlement.

Bolivia considers that the conduct of the peace
process between the parties should be based on the
fulfilment of agreements and the cessation of
settlements in occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem, which is essential to establishing an
atmosphere of trust in the region.

In this context, the Plurinational State of Bolivia
would like to make an appeal for the international
community to take urgent measures to make sure that
Israel as an occupying Power comply with all of its
obligations under international law, including the
Fourth Geneva Convention and United Nations
resolutions, as well as the advisory opinion and its
obligations under the Road Map.

Bolivia would like to place its hope in the
continued international efforts of the international
community to fulfil the just aspirations of the
Palestinian people for whom we would like to
resolutely express our support and solidarity.

