Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): As the
Permanent Representative of Russia has suggested
that some European Union (EU) member States were
somehow involved in making the crisis in Ukraine
worse, I should like to set out clearly my Government's
position.

The United Kingdom is deeply concerned by the
escalation of tensions in the Crimea peninsula and by
the fact that the Russian Parliament has authorized
Russian military action on Ukrainian soil against the
wishes of the Ukrainian Government. That action is
a grave threat to the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Ukraine. We condemn any act of
aggression against Ukraine. We have therefore sought
an immediate and full explanation from the Russian
Federation for the decision to authorize military action
on sovereign Ukrainian soil, and of the basis for it
under international law.

Earlier today, my Prime Minister called on all
parties to think carefully about their actions and to
work to lower, not escalate, tensions. Yesterday, my
Foreign Secretary spoke to Ukrainian acting President
Turchynov, and made clear the United Kingdom's
support for Ukraine's new Government. He urged him
to ensure that the Government take measures that unify
the country and that it protect the rights of Ukraine's
citizens, including those from minority groups, in
a spirit of inclusiveness. And he assured him of the
United Kingdom's commitment to Ukraine's territorial
integrity, unity and sovereignty.

The United Kingdom Government support
the Ukrainian Government's request for urgent
consultations, in accordance with the 1994 Budapest
Memorandum, signed by the United Kingdom,
the United States, Russia and Ukraine. We see no
reason why these consultations should not take place
immediately.

Yesterday, the Council expressed support for
Ukraine's unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity,
and agreed that all political actors should show
restraint. It is critical that the Russian Federation
respect the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of Ukraine, and take immediate steps to calm
this dangerous situation.

