Mr. Patriota (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I congratulate the brotherly Republic of Chile
on having organized this meeting, chaired by Minister
for Foreign Affairs Heraldo Munoz.

(spoke in English)

I thank Assistant Secretary-General ad interim Jens
Toyberg-Frandzen for his briefing. Brazil also wishes
to acknowledge the interventions of the Permanent
Representative of Israel and the Permanent Observer of
the Observer State of Palestine.

Brazil regrets that 2014, the year proclaimed by
the General Assembly as the International Year of
Solidarity with the Palestinian People, was marked by
the impossibility of realizing the self-determination
of the Palestinian people and by further suffering
and distrust among Israelis and Palestinians. We
witnessed the repetition of acts that reinforced a long
and deplorable cycle of violence. Peace talks collapsed
after months of dialogue with few commitments.
Israeli settlements and other illegal unilateral activities
continued in occupied Palestine. Rockets were
launched from the Gaza Strip against Israel. Another
round of disproportional use of military force ensued,
resulting in a deeply shocking number of Palestinian
civilian fatalities in Gaza. Tensions in Jerusalem and
the West Bank escalated sharply and violence erupted.
In particular, Brazil was concerned with the religious
provocations in the old city of Jerusalem, with attempts
to violate the status quo of the area around the Dome
of the Rock.

While it has been unanimously claimed that the
status quo is unsustainable - and it is indeed - we
have failed so far to deal with the fundamental aspects
of the Palestinian question. Brazil reiterates its appeal
for a change in the way we approach the conflict,
especially in the Council. The Security Council not
only fell short of engaging in promoting a durable
peaceful solution to the crisis, but it also failed to act
when a draft resolution (S/2014/916) with that goal,
broadly based on previous resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Council, was brought to a vote. It was
another missed opportunity for the Council to discharge
its responsibilities, weakening the Organization and
continuously shrinking its relevance to the Palestinian
question.

Surely, no resolution will, on its own, resolve
this lasting issue. Good faith, political will and direct
negotiations are essential elements in moving a credible
process forward, but an active and constructive role
played by the Council is also instrumental in order to
achieve peace and stability. We were heartened by the
statement made by the representative of New Zealand
that subscribed to the same View, and we encourage the
Council to consider the suggestions that were made in
that regard by Ambassador McLay.

Brazil welcomes the decision of the State of
Palestine to join a new batch of international treaties
and to accede to the Rome Statute. As a strong supporter
of the International Criminal Court's universality as a
means ofpromoting peace andjustice, we commend the
Palestinian initiative and encourage States that have not
yet done so to become parties to the Statute. The resort
to multilateral mechanisms, especially those that can
provide a measure of justice, redress indignities and
overcome double standards, should not be met with
reprisals and sanctions. We urge Israel to immediately
release all financial resources due to Palestine.

The unrelenting spiral of violence and destruction
in Syria continues after almost four years of conflict.
The violations of human rights committed by all
sides, as consistently denounced by the Human Rights
Council's Independent Commission of Inquiry, deserve
our strongest condemnation. Brazil firmly believes that
the State has a duty to protect its citizens and in no
circumstances should violate their rights, mainly using
violent measures.

In recent months, the humanitarian situation
further deteriorated and now more than half of Syria's
population is either internally displaced or seeking
refuge abroad. In that sense, we welcome the extension
of the measures determined by resolution 2165 (2014)
and all the ongoing international efforts to cope with
the increasingly dire humanitarian situation.

The insistence in the benefits of militarization and
the use of force to purportedly resolve the Syrian crisis
have resulted, among other regrettable consequences, in
the displacement of millions of people who were forced
to leave their homes in order to escape brutality from
all sides, especially the heinous attacks and executions
perpetrated by the so-called Islamic State of Iraq and
Syria (ISIS). We reiterate our strongest condemnation
of such atrocities.

Brazil supports the work and innovative efforts
brought by Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura, with a
view to reduce violence, alleviate the people's suffering
and build trust for the resumption of negotiations. We
reiterate the urgent need to resume the political process
and to immediately cease the flow of weapons to all
parties in the conflict as a crucial preliminary step in
that direction. We associate ourselves with Minister
Heraldo Mufioz's expression of support for the efforts
of the Government of the Russian Federation to convene
a peace dialogue, to which various opposition groups
have been invited.

Once again, we commend the outstanding generosity
of many countries in the region, including Lebanon,
Jordan, Turkey and Egypt, to receive thousands, and
even millions, of Syrian refugees. Brazil praises the
hard work done in that regard by Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator Valerie Amos and by the High
Commissioner for Refugees, Mr. Antonio Guterres.
While encouraging the international community to
support that honorable effort, Brazil has received more
than 1,500 refugees from the Syrian conflict and has
donated over 4,000 tons of grain to feed people in Syria.

Brazil is concerned about the security and stability
in Lebanon. Recent episodes of violence, such as the
twin suicide bombing at a crowded cafe in Tripoli
last Saturday, reinforce the need to fully support the
Lebanese policy of disassociation from regional crises
agreed in the Baabda Declaration of June 2012.

Brazil will always support Lebanon in its fight
against terrorism and in its pursuit of stability and
development. Our participation in the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon, whose Maritime Task Force
has been led by a Brazilian official since 2011, therefore
plays a prominent role in translating our commitment
into practical action.

Brazil remains concerned about the security and
humanitarian situation in Iraq. Unfortunately, 2014 was
the deadliest year in the country since 2007. Tens of
thousands innocent civilians were killed and wounded
and millions of people were displaced. The barbaric
acts committed by ISIS shocked the world and were the
subject of our strongest condemnation.

Brazil commends the steps taken by the new
Government in Baghdad and the Kurdish Regional
Government in order to solve their disputes concerning
oil revenue and budget payments. To succeed in its fight
against terrorism and the extremist groups, Iraq has to
remain united. The international community should
also support Iraq in combating terrorism in a way that
is fully and strictly compatible with the Charter of the
United Nations.

