Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to welcome the presence of the Secretary-
General, which shows his interest in the well-being and
the strengthening of the entire Organization.

I wish to thank the Belgian delegation and you in
particular, Mr. President, for having granted the request
made two months ago by the delegations of Jordan,
Liechtenstein, Singapore and Switzerland, and my own
delegation, that an open debate be held on the
implementation of the note by the President of the
Security Council (S/2006/507), submitted in 2006.

As Council members are well aware, agreement
to hold this debate was not easy to reach. The idea that
the working methods of the Security Council are the
exclusive domain of its members is a stumbling block
that has always been difficult to overcome.
Costa Rica speaks today, unsurprisingly, as a
member of the General Assembly. This is our only
permanent status, which guides our perspective and our
interests and which cannot be different from the
interests of the Organization when considered as a
whole.

The premise established in Article 24 of the
Charter, according to which Member States
acknowledge that the Security Council acts on
Members' behalf, seems to be a one-way street.
Member States must recognize that the Council acts on
their behalf, but the Council does not often recognize
that it acts on behalf of the member States. This
perception, according to which the Council is an
autonomous organ independent of the membership of
the United Nations, must yield to the unshakeable
realities of our time. We live in an age in which the
transparency of decision-making processes and the
accountability of representatives to the represented
have been established as solid principles in all
organizations, independent of their nature.

Let's be clear: no one is attempting to take
decisions that, because of their nature, fall under the
purview of the Council and no one is expecting a
revolution in the working methods of the Council. An
important group of Member States, as reflected in the
requests received by the President, aspires simply to
have the Council listen to their assessments of the way
it carries out its duties and to some suggestions, which
may very well improve the efficacy and the legitimacy
of the Council's decisions.

The attitude of some members of the Council,
who seem hesitant to examine the Council's working
methods in an open debate, seems to indicate that more
than simply a change in the norms of the Council is
necessary - there needs to be a change in the
Council's attitude. That is what these last few months
have shown us since we became members of the
Council. It seems that the culture that has become
entrenched here in the last few years has fostered the
unity of this body as an end in itself, which was not
always the case. The diversity of interests among the
permanent members and the elected members should
not be mentioned, even less so the possibility of
clarifying procedural matters or deciding the format of
a meeting through a vote. Of all the cultural norms of
the Council, however, the most detrimental is the
attitude of exclusion in relation to the great majority of
Member States, whose presence in the Council is very
rare, if even having taken place at all.

The 2006 note by the President marks an
important milestone in the history of the Security

Council. This is an opportune moment to recognize the
work of the former representative of Japan,
Ambassador Kenzo Oshima, as well as Ambassadors
Peter Burian of Slovakia and Ricardo Arias of Panama,
who succeeded Mr. Oshima in the chair of the Informal
Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions. Certainly, the note represents the
crystallization of a process that had been going on for
the fifteen years prior. It analysed and resolved, at least
in theory, many of the concerns of the membership of
this Organization. Nevertheless, the periodic
examination of the Council's practices makes it
possible to conclude that the challenge of consistently
implementing adopted agreements and rules still
remains.

Notwithstanding the decisions that have been
made, Costa Rica believes this Council should be
interested even more in the input that can be given by
those who have a legitimate interest or are going to be
directly affected by the Council's decisions. Despite
the agreements reached in this direction, its practice
reveals important shortcomings.

The frequent use of informal mechanisms should
be the usual practice before reaching agreements in the
Council. A decision-making process that does not
include transparent and direct communication of the
Council, as a whole, with interested parties cannot be
considered legitimate.

Another subject that deserves greater attention is
the public aspect of the actions of the Council.
Although it is true that there has been progress in the
number of public meetings as compared to other years,
we are far from the spirit of the norm, which
establishes that every meeting of the Council is a
public meeting as a general rule, unless expressly
decided otherwise.

We recognize that there are situations that
demand discretion, but we disagree with a practice that
has in fact inverted the language of the norm. It is also
true that public meetings demand a greater degree of
preparation and require greater responsibility from all
of us. However, none of this justifies the
non-compliance of a stipulation that was adopted by
the Council and whose compliance is demanded by a
large part of the membership of the Organization.

In looking at the six meeting formats of
paragraph 35 of the President's note, four guarantee
greater access to countries which are not members of

the Security Council. The Secretariat has the duty to
facilitate the application of this existing rule, which
favours transparency and accountability, by presenting
open formats for all meetings as a first option in the
proposed programme of work, prepared by each
presidency of the Council. It is up to the members of
the Council to argue and to convince others regarding
the use of a private format on an exceptional basis.

With regard to the implementation of paragraph
27 of the note, I will not dwell on that subject much,
but, before I conclude, I want to reiterate the shared
responsibility of all members of the Organization,
whether they are members of the Security Council or
not, to contribute to the correct implementation of all
agreements on the working methods of the Council.

We often witness a lack of interest of many
members of the Organization in the work of the
Council, a lack of attention to the information that is
available and the sparse use made of the opportunities
offered. Those opportunities must be taken advantage
of, rights must be exercised and the responsibility must
be assumed.

We have defended, in the abstract, the opening of
channels for participation prior to the taking of
decisions. We are willing to do so concretely in
accordance with the explicit requests of interested
parties. Not all of the doors of the Council are closed,
and we are willing to work to open them up more and
more. But these doors will remain open only if interest
is shown in using them. We spoke before of the need
for a change in the prevailing culture more than a
change in norms. This change in the prevailing culture
includes all of us: the Council, the Secretariat and each
and every one of the Member States.

I wish to conclude by affirming that the holding
of this debate, which is an important achievement,
must be a responsible and constructive exercise. I
would also conclude by affirming that all of us,
especially the members of the Council, must keep in
mind that all exercise of accountability has, by virtue
of its nature, ingredients of criticism, which should not
perturb anyone. The price of constructive and
beneficial criticism is the possibility of the misuse of
these opportunities, and this is a small price to pay for
the gains that are derived from a frank and constructive
exchange.

If we can share this spirit - being open to
dialogue, to constructive criticism and to creative
suggestions - we should agree that it is not necessary,
neither is it possible, to have to wait another 14 years
to have a further opportunity to debate about matters
regarding the working methods of the Council with all
the Member States. We advocate for periodic open
debates on these issues every two years, so that each
elected member can have at least one opportunity,
during its tenure of membership of the Council, to
debate the working methods of this organ. Today, we
are sure that this exchange will enrich the discussions
at the core of the Working Group on Documentation
with a view to making decisions, and we are going to
work to make this happen.

