Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): The
representative of the European Union will shortly make
a statement, with which France aligns itself. Allow me
to add a few complementary observations.

After a difficult 2009, the first few months of
2010 have given us some reason to hope for an
improvement in the situation. Afghanistan and the
international community agreed on a credible road map
at the London Conference, based on an accelerated
undertaking by Afghans of their sovereign
responsibilities. The commitments undertaken by
President Karzai and his Government on an ambitious
reform programme and the announcement of a
reconciliation and reintegration process provide a solid
foundation for that transition. In terms of military
issues, the new strategy developed by General
McChrystal is beginning to bear fruit and is
highlighting the weaknesses of the armed rebellion,
which does not enjoy the support of the people. Finally,
at the regional level, more positive dynamics between
Afghanistan and its neighbours have made the fight
against terrorism more effective.

However, these developments are still fragile. In
order to consolidate the prospects for recovery, it is
essential to quickly implement the reform plans that
President Karzai announced to enable Afghan
institutions to fully take on their new responsibilities.
The United Nations has the legitimacy,
impartiality and expertise that make it an essential
actor in this new phase. The United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) has a key role to
play. We welcome the appointment of Mr. De Mistura
at the head of UNAMA. We have full confidence in his
ability to take on the role of representative of the entire
international community to the Afghan people in an
effective and dynamic manner. In so doing, he can rely
on the new special representative of the European
Union and the new NATO civilian representative. Their
strengthened competencies will help make the
international efforts in support of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General more coherent.

We expect the United Nations to actively support
the transition process undertaken in London. In this
respect, the mandate renewal provides us with an
opportunity to spell out the priorities of the mission.
We see three priorities.

First, political good offices are the cornerstone of
the mandate. The Special Representative must, in
particular, pursue continued dialogue with President
Karzai and the other political stakeholders regarding
the implementation of the mutual commitments
undertaken in London. In this respect, the initial
contacts established between the Special
Representative and President Karzai are encouraging.
UNAMA will also have an active role to play in
supporting the Government in its reconciliation and
reintegration programme. That programme will need to
be implemented within the framework of the
Constitution and in strict observance of democratic
values and norms.

Secondly, UNAMA will also have to commit
itself to supporting the electoral process. Lessons must
be learned from the problems that faced the
presidential elections. Reforms are needed before the
September parliamentary elections. The legitimacy of
the efforts by the Afghan Government and the
international community requires that these elections
be held under the best possible conditions. The Special
Representative will have an important role to play in
forging a consensus between the Government and the
major Afghan political stakeholders, including
opposition leaders, on all of these reforms.

Thirdly, UNAMA must pursue the efforts it has
undertaken since the International Conference in
Support of Afghanistan, held in Paris in June 2008, to
reinforce the efficiency and consistency of aid. As
highlighted in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2010/127), this role must more clearly support the
Afghan authorities, who have the primary
responsibility for coordinating aid.

France would like to thank Turkey for the draft
resolution presented to Security Council members,
which fully reflects its priorities.
The crisis in Afghanistan cannot be addressed
independently from the crisis in the region, primarily
in Pakistan. The Pakistani Government is courageously
combating the scourge of terrorism. The international
community must support it and encourage it to
strengthen its efforts against all terrorist groups.

In addition, regional dialogue and cooperation
must receive increased attention. Important initiatives
have recently been taken in this regard. France
welcomes in particular the lead role played by Turkey.
To go further, we would like to see a mechanism
established dedicated to follow-up to and promotion of
regional dialogue. The United Nations, given its
impartiality, is well placed to bring together all the
regional actors to achieve the common objective of
stability in the region. We urge UNAMA to become
actively involved in that area.

In conclusion, I wish to recall an essential point.
The transition period under way in Afghanistan does
not mean a withdrawal of the international community,
much less an abandonment. In any case, as President
Sarkozy has several times reiterated, France will
remain committed as long as necessary and as long as
Afghans want us to be.

