Mr. Koonjul (Mauritius): My delegation would
like to join you, Mr. President, and previous speakers
in extending a very warm welcome to His Excellency
Mr. Galaydh, Prime Minister of the Transitional
National Government (TNG) of Somalia, and to the
other members of his delegation. We sincerely hope
that today's meeting will provide an opportunity to
have a thorough exchange of views on the situation in
Somalia and will pave the way for a vigorous renewal
of the United Nations relationship with the Transitional
National Government in the larger interest and welfare
of the Somali people. I also wish to thank Mr. David
Stephen, the Representative of the Secretary-General,
for his useful briefing this morning.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2001/963)
comes at a very opportune moment, especially since
the last one was issued in December of last year.
During the intervening period, we have witnessed quite
a few developments in Somalia, some very positive and
others not quite so positive. Since its installation, the
TNG has been confronted with the enormous and
daunting challenge of the political reconciliation,
reconstruction and development of Somalia. We are all
aware that for 10 years Somalia was devoid of any
formal national institutions; the TNG inherited an
extremely poor legacy, and it had to start from point
zero.

Today, the problems faced by Somalia and by the
TNG fall mainly into two categories: achieving
national reconciliation on the political front while
respecting the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
unity of Somalia; and achieving the socio-economic
reconstruction of the country.

It is encouraging to note from the report that the
TNG has begun to set up national institutions.
Ministries have started to function, a judiciary is
gradually coming into place, and militia members are
being demobilized and reintegrated. We also find that
the Transitional National Government is doing the
needful to have a police system in the capital. These
are all indications that the TNG is proceeding, slowly
but surely, in the right direction in the reconstruction
process. The progress so far achieved may not quite
meet the expectations of the international community.
But we need to ask ourselves whether the international
community has remained sufficiently engaged to help
and support the TNG, as it committed itself to doing
following the conclusion of the Arta process. In
accordance with the Transitional National Assembly
constitution, democratic elections are scheduled for
2003. The TNG therefore needs to address the basic
political problems, particularly national reconciliation,
and the country's economic and development
challenges, in anticipation of the elections.

The humanitarian situation in Somalia continues
to be very precarious: 750,000 people are today in need
of assistance to cover food shortfalls stemming from
past harvest failures. Furthermore, the report states that
in the current year, programmes linked to the TNG
received virtually no assistance from international
donors. It also states that in 2000, of the $115.5 million
resulting from international donor assistance, 42 per
cent went to projects in the "Somaliland" and
"Puntland" areas, 31 per cent went to the South and the
remaining 27 per cent was spent on programmes
implemented on a country-wide basis. Those facts give
the impression that the efforts made by the TNG are
not being given full and due recognition. Unless there
is clear, genuine engagement by the international
community to help the TNG in moving ahead in this
perilous endeavour, we feel it will be difficult to see
the results expected from the TNG.

The TNG has made several calls for greater
involvement by the international community in
Somalia in the form of a peace-building mission. It has
so many times been said in this Chamber that post-
conflict peace-building seeks to prevent the resurgence
of conflict and to create the conditions necessary for a
sustained peace in war-torn societies. This is extremely
relevant in the case of Somalia. My delegation
considers that the TNG should be given maximum
support to sustain its current policies of administrative
rehabilitation in the country. That will in turn enhance
its ability to initiate dialogue with the other factions in
the process of national reconciliation.

There is another important security aspect that
has become particularly significant since the 11
September incident. Paragraph 56 of the Secretary-
General's report refers to the Somali-based
organization Al-Itihad Al-Islamiya and to its suspected
terrorist links. Past events have shown us that failed
States are more prone to be a breeding ground for
terrorist activities. We have even seen reports alluding
to the possibility of some notorious terrorists seeking
other safe havens. In that regard, we welcome the
actions taken by the TNG to combat terrorism, which
were announced earlier by the Prime Minister. It is thus
in the interest of us all to have a strong, stable
Government in Somalia, especially when the world is
showing its commitment and is getting fully geared up
to combat terrorism. That is an additional reason why
the TNG should today be given all the assistance and
help it deserves.

Following the conclusion of the Arta process, the
United Nations declared its intention to assist in the
Somalia peace-building process with the possible
deployment of a peace-building mission.
Unfortunately, in view of the negative security
assessment, this has not so far been effected. My
delegation believes that the security situation in
Somalia, since the installation of the TNG, has
improved in many ways. We note, for example, that
some countries have opened up resident missions in
Mogadishu, and we believe that the United Nations
should consider opening an office in the country. In my
delegation's view, the incidents of 14 October, almost
on the eve of our deliberations here, were not
coincidental and were designed to affect the credibility
of the TNG. My delegation fully supports the appeal
made by others at this table to the Secretary-General to
arrange for a thorough security assessment by an inter-
agency team from United Nations Headquarters, so that
the much-awaited peace-building mission can be
deployed in the near future. We also feel that such a
mission should work closely with the TNG.

On the political front, we believe that the
completion of the Arta process remains the most viable
option for a lasting peace in Somalia. We once again
call upon all the political groups in Somalia to engage
in peaceful and constructive dialogue with the TNG.
The TNG was formed last year with the blessing of the
United Nations, the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) and several of the other countries of the region,
and we strongly condemn any other force or so-called
alliance which attempts to supplant the TNG. We
believe that the people of Somalia are now more
willing to move away from clan-based groups; we
encourage the TNG to win the confidence of more
Somalis and faction leaders. However, the TNG should
be fully committed and determined to achieve its goals
of bringing peace, reconciliation and economic
prosperity to the country. To attain those objectives, the
TNG cannot afford to bring about any split within its
ranks.

In this process, the cooperation and collaboration
of the countries of the region, in particular the
neighbours of Somalia, will be of the utmost
importance. We call upon them to have in mind, above
all, the interests of the Somali people and the
importance to their own countries of regional peace
and stability when they frame their policies vis-a-vis
their neighbour.

We support the proposal of considering the
establishment of a Committee of Friends. But we must
ensure that this does not result in a greater proliferation
of initiatives which can further impede the search for a
comprehensive solution.

Before concluding, I would like to put a couple of
questions to Mr. David Stephen. The first one relates to
the flow of arms. Does he consider that, following the
lifting of the arms embargo on Ethiopia and Eritrea,
there has been any impact on the flow of arms into
Somalia? With regard to the security situation, given
that he has been on the ground for some time, I would
like to get his own assessment as to whether he feels
that there has indeed been any improvement.

