Mr. Farhadi (Afghanistan): Habib Bourguiba was a
leader of his country and his people, to whom we express
our fraternal condolences. Moreover, he was a leader in
Asia and Africa. I have personally been a witness to that
fact. May God bestow on him His immense charity and kindness.

We are happy you are here, Mr. President, presiding
over this meeting. Let me thank you for all Canada has
done in favour of peace in Afghanistan. Your statement on
behalf of Canada is highly representative of your views.

We thank very much and appreciate the efforts and
leadership of Mr. Anwarul Karim Chowdhury, who, in the
course of the month of March, presided over the Council.

We support the content of document S/2000/205, of
10 March 2000, on the situation in Afghanistan. We thank
Mr. Renninger of the Secretariat for his comprehensive
briefing. We appreciate the services of Mr. Lakhdar
Brahimi, who deployed so many efforts for peace in
Afghanistan and we assure the United Nations of our full
cooperation with Mr. Francesc Vendrell, who has been in
charge of Afghanistan issues recently. We thank
Ambassador Listre of Argentina, who heads the Afghan
sanctions Committee, for the work he has done.

I would like to thank you, Mr. President, and
Council members for their constant service and their
interest in Afghanistan, which was eloquently expressed
in the statements of Council members.

The Afghan nation is suffering, especially civilians,
and women and girls most particularly.

The involvement of mercenary combatants in
Afghanistan is an awful fact. These mercenaries come
from religious schools in Pakistan. This was also stated
by the Secretariat representative here. This is despite the
political change in Pakistan in the month of October. The
miliary junta in Pakistan is the main policy maker in
Pakistan and of course also had the upper hand in
previous civil Government with regard to Afghanistan.
Afghanistan affairs were and remain in the hands of the
army in Pakistan, especially of the military intelligence,
called Inter-Services Intelligence (181). They have
established training camps on the territory of Afghanistan
for terrorists, and these training camps are still there.
Pakistan still hopes for a military solution in Afghanistan.
This is why it is sending arms and ammunition to the
Taliban. Their logistical support for the Taliban continues
even now.

The military regime in Pakistan continues to use
extremist religious groups for its political purposes in the
region and beyond. This policy has created a major
concern for all the countries of the region. We are firmly
convinced that this policy of Pakistan is not only harmful
to the Afghan people, but that it will also be a major
obstacle to peace and stability in Pakistan and to the
creation of a stable Pakistan as a prosperous nation. The
Afghan people are very much in favour of peace and
prosperity in Pakistan.

The Islamic State of Afghanistan welcomes today's
presidential statement, which has been drafted and will be
adopted by the Council very soon, I hope. As made clear
in the text of that statement, the Islamic State of

 

Afghanistan is ready to agree to a complete cessation of
armed conflict and expects the resolution of the Afghan
problem to be based on the establishment in Afghanistan of
a representative, broad-based Government which represents
all the major ethnic groups. There is no military solution to
the Afghan crisis, as was practically proved during the
course of the last five years.

We highly appreciate the efforts of the Organization
of the Islamic Conference (OIC) and express our readiness
to help towards the success of 01C efforts.

We are grateful to Council members for having clearly
condemned all previous Taliban press statements on the
recent military offensive of 1 March 2000. In fact, our
military intelligence reports show that the Taliban and their
Pakistani military advisers are very busy preparing the
launch of a new military offensive in the spring. This was
also explained by the Secretary-Generals representative. In
such an atmosphere, we are sure that in the presidential
statement to be adopted today by the Council will serve as
a timely warning to the Taliban and to their Pakistani junta
supporters. They must be aware that the international
community cannot remain idle in the face of such an
aggressive and systematically bellicose attitude.

