Mr. Shin Boonam (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, I should like to thank the President of the
Security Council, Ambassador Claude Heller, for
having organized this open debate on the promotion
and strengthening of the rule of law in the maintenance
of international peace and security. The Security
Council has held a number of thematic debates, most
recently in June 2006, on the important issue of the
rule of law and the maintenance of international peace
and security. I believe that it is timely for the Security
Council to return to this issue, not only in order to take
stock of what has been achieved over the past four
years, but also in order to explore the further steps that
need to be taken in this area.

The Republic of Korea remains steadfast in its
commitment to promoting the rule of law as an
indispensable element of lasting peace and prosperity.
The rule of law is indeed a critical component in our
endeavours to build a durable system for peace and
prosperity, especially in conflict and post-conflict
societies.

Peace and prosperity cannot be secured if we fail
to restore confidence in the rule of law among
populations in conflict-torn societies. In this way, we
can see that rule of law programmes are inextricably
linked to the broader peacebuilding agenda. As such, I
believe that the activities of the Peacebuilding
Commission and Peacebuilding Fund are critical to
addressing the rule of law, which has become a
frequent focus of the Security Council.

The United Nations has been playing a central
role in promoting the rule of law at the national and
international levels. In the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2006/28) issued after the last open debate on
this issue in 2006 (see S/PV.5474), the Security
Council expressed its support for the Secretary-
General's proposal to establish a rule of law unit within
the Secretariat. The Unit was established in the
Executive Office of the Secretary-General in 2007 to
support the Rule of Law Coordination and Resource
Group, under the leadership of the Deputy Secretary-
General. Furthermore, the Group adopted and
implemented a joint strategic plan for the period 2009-
2011 in order to improve the coordination and
coherence of rule of law activities.

Last year, the Secretary-General presented his
first annual report on United Nations efforts to
strengthen engagement on the rule of law at the
national and international levels (A/64/298). My
Government welcomes all of these achievements of the
United Nations and believes that the Security Council
can further advance global efforts to strengthen the
coordination and coherence of rule of law activities
among various actors by supporting the Group and the
Unit.

My Government is deeply committed to the
peaceful settlement of disputes, as enshrined in Article
33 of the Charter of the United Nations, and we believe
that the Security Council must continue its endeavours
to help parties to resolve disputes in line with Chapter
VI of the Charter.

My Government fully supports international
efforts to end impunity and to bring to justice those
responsible for genocide, war crimes and crimes
against humanity. Those crimes should not go
unpunished. We would like to take this opportunity to
express our appreciation of the efforts made by the
International Criminal Court (ICC) and other
international criminal tribunals, especially the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR). My Government was pleased not
only to observe the ICC's first trial in 2009 against a
former Congolese rebel leader, but also to witness the
momentous agreement on the crime of aggression at
the Kampala Review Conference last month. We
recognize the many successes of the ICTY and ICTR to
date as significant contributions to the maintenance and
restoration of international peace and security, and
hope for smooth transitions to their residual
mechanisms. All of these achievements ensure that
justice and peace are complementary.

My Government wishes to reiterate its belief that
the Security Council sanctions regimes are important
tools for maintaining and restoring international peace
and security. Indeed, major improvements have been
made since 2006 in order to address several
fundamental concerns over the regimes in connection
with the rule of law. We would like the Security
Council to continue its efforts to improve the present
9

sanctions regimes so that the actual implementation of
sanctions can be more effective.

I believe that today's open debate on the
promotion of rule of law will be very useful in helping
the Security Council to better fulfil its primary
responsibility.

