Ms. Ashipala-Musavyi (Namibia): We thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting. We would like
welcome the High Representative, Mr. Petritsch, to our
midst, and we also thank him for his briefing. The
excellent work that the High Representative and his
colleagues are doing in Bosnia and Herzegovina on behalf
of the international community deserves our support. We
believe that the Dayton/Paris Accords remain the viable
mechanism for bringing peace and stability to Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

 

We note with appreciation that, as reported by the
High Representative, in November 1999 the Parliamentary
Assembly adopted two essential laws: the Law on Asylum
and Immigration and the Law on Refugees and Displaced
Persons. In addition, we also observe with satisfaction the
introduction into the legislative procedure of the Draft
Permanent Rules of Procedure for Parliament, as well as
the adoption by Parliament, on 13 April 2000, of the Law
on the Council of Ministers.

In our view, the second municipal elections in Bosnia
were among the positive developments that could not have
taken place without the firm guidance and support of the
Office of the High Representative and other major players
involved in the implementation of the Dayton Peace
Agreement.

We also regard the official proclamation of the Statute
of the Brcko District as an exemplary achievement. The
appointment of the interim government and District
Assembly stand out as one of the practical building blocks
for a future multi-ethnic and multi-religious Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Indeed, the leaders in that country should set
aside their political and ethnic differences and embrace the
strength that they have in diversity so as to harmonize the
wishes and aspirations of their people.

Against the backdrop of these positive developments,
my delegation expresses its concern, in line with that of the
High Representative, with respect to the little tangible
progress on privatization programmes and the lack of
political will from the leadership, especially the legislators
in the upper House of Parliament, to get things done. We
also register our concern about the application and practice
of human rights and humanitarian law in the country. On
balance, my delegation shares the frustration of
Mr. Petritsch with the slow pace at which these issues are
being considered by the leadership in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

In this context, we hope that the return of refugees and
internally displaced persons to their homes and regions will
provide the necessary momentum for the leaders of both
entities to implement property laws throughout the country.
We also hope that the implementation of the Stability Pact
will help to speed up economic recovery and, as a result,
create employment opportunities for the people.

Notwithstanding the problems involved in the
fulfilment of the Dayton Peace Accords, we cannot fail to
recognize the fact that the authorities in both entities have
no meaningful alternative to cooperating with the Office of
the High Representative and the international community
in their quest for a comprehensive peace.

In conclusion, my delegation acknowledges the
contribution of the international community, major
international humanitarian institutions, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, United Nations
agencies, the European Union and others to the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Once again, we thank the High Representative for
his very useful briefing, and Namibia wishes him well as
he labours to assist the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina
to realize their dreams.

