Mr. Petrella (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank Mr. Miyet for his important presentation, and we
thank Ambassador Holbrooke for sharing his impressions
from his recent trip, which included the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

Unfortunately, the news is not very encouraging.
Indeed, the ceasefire so laboriously crafted, and signed at
Lusaka in July 1999, is violated with ever-greater
frequency. And the United Nations technical survey team,
responsible for assessing the security and safety situation
on the ground with a view to defining the operational
concept of a peacekeeping operation, has encountered
serious difficulties of access and, as we understand it, will
be unable to submit its report before the end of the year.

In our debate yesterday, we spoke of political will.
The conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
extremely complex and will not be resolved unless all
parties concerned evince the political will to find a
democratic, non-military resolution of the conflict. That
said, we believe that the Security Council can continue to
shoulder its responsibilities. Action in a situation such as
that of the Democratic Republic of the Congo entails
risks. We must also evaluate the risks of a resumption of
generalized conflict. In yesterday's debate, we discussed
a number of ideas that all deemed useful both for averting
conflict and for preventing conflicts from worsening.
Perhaps the Council's action could now be guided by
some of those ideas.

We are convinced that the United Nations has a
major role to play in dealing with this issue, and that its
presence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo must
be gradually strengthened. The multifunctional presence
of the United Nations Observer Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) is the first
step towards that goal. Specifically, it sends a political
message of support from the Security Council of support
for the Lusaka process. Argentina is prepared to cast a
positive eye over the report of the Secretary-General with

 

a view to the deployment of up to 500 military observers
and the establishment of a peacekeeping operation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

But a climate of relative security and the granting of
appropriate guarantees for the security, access and freedom
of movement of United Nations and associated personnel
are essential aspects. We realize that it is unrealistic to
demand absolute guarantees, but no one is willing to
dispatch Blue Helmets into a hostile climate.

As we see it, the conflict in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo has an external and an internal dimension.
The former must take into account the legitimate security
concerns of all States involved. At the same time, the
solution arrived at must respect the territorial integrity and
political independence of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. On the other hand, the internal dimension of the
conflict cannot be side-stepped. What must be generated is
an inclusive political climate open to all Congolese who
believe in the values of democracy and a State based upon
the rule of law. We must encourage the civil society to
move gradually and prudently in the manifestation of its
desire for greater participation. Only to the extent that we
can make sustained progress on both these fronts, the
internal and the external, will it be possible to arrive at a
lasting and comprehensive solution. To that end, it is
essential to have the firm commitment of all parties to the
Lusaka Agreement.

