Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): I would like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
for her written report and the very informative briefing
she has just given us.

Belgium welcomes the progress made by the Office
of the Prosecutor in its ongoing investigations and its
work aimed at submitting applications for new arrest
warrants. We also welcome the Office's monitoring
of the current hostilities in order to determine
Whether crimes have been committed that fall within
the jurisdiction of the Court. At the same time, it is
regrettable that the three arrest warrants issued by
the Court have still not been executed. The resulting
impunity is an affront to the victims and their loved
ones, as it undermines any hope of achieving a lasting
peaceful solution to the crisis in Libya, of which justice
is an essential element.

The Council cannot remain indifferent to this
situation, since it was the Council itself that triggered
the ongoing cases before the ICC through its adoption
in 2011 of resolution 1970 (2011). In that resolution,
the Council called on all States Members of the United
Nations, whether States parties to the Rome Statute or
not, to cooperate fully with the Court and the Prosecutor.
We note that the Office of the Prosecutor still has
information on the location of the three suspects, as
Ms. Bensoudajust explained to us - Mr. Al-Qadhafi in
Zintan, whose brigades are allies of the Government of
National Accord; Mr. Al-Werfalli in the Benghazi area,
which is under the control of General Haftar's Libyan
National Army; and Mr. Al-Tuhamy in Cairo. The

Court, which is entirely dependent on the cooperation
of States for the execution of its arrest warrants, once
again urges all of the relevant authorities to facilitate
the immediate surrender of each of those individuals to
the ICC. Failing that, Belgium believes that the Council
should assume its responsibilities by examining every
possible measure to facilitate the arrest and surrender
to the Court of the three suspects. In that regard, I
would like to point out that the Council could consider
including on the sanctions list those persons against
whom the Court has issued arrest warrants, for example.

In its report, the Office of the Prosecutor also
discusses its two-pronged approach to allegations
of crimes committed against migrants in Libya.
Belgium especially welcomes the Office's strategy for
cooperating with Libya and the other States concerned
in order to support investigations and prosecutions
at the national level. As the Prosecutor reminded us,
the ICC has never been called on to prosecute all the
perpetrators of the most serious crimes. In accordance
with the Rome Statute, it is complementary to national
criminal jurisdictions and intervenes only if the
State is unwilling or unable to effectively carry out
investigations or prosecutions. In the circumstances,
we should welcome the fact that the Court's cooperation
strategy has already produced positive and concrete
results in national investigations and prosecutions.

Lastly, I would like to highlight the continued
cooperation of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya with the ICC and its willingness to provide it
with certain kinds of information on events related to
the ongoing armed conflict. We should welcome this
kind of collaboration between a United Nations special
political mission and the Court as a model that could be
followed in other, similar cases.

