Mr. Yousfi (Algeria) (spoke in Arabic): It is an
honour and a privilege for me, Madam President, on
behalf of the Group of Arab States at the United
Nations, to commend you for the manner in which you
are guiding the work of the Council this month and to
thank you for your prompt response to the call for the
convening of this meeting.

The Arab Group called for this emergency
meeting because of the grave developments in the
occupied Palestinian territories. Israel, the occupying
Power, continues to enjoy full impunity and has, in its
habitual manner, carried out aggression in the West
Bank and launched an incursion into Gaza, employing
its full military might, targeting innocent Palestinian
civilians. It has detained a number of cabinet ministers
of the elected Palestinian Government as well as
legislators, in violation of all relevant rules and norms
of international law. This sets a most dangerous
precedent.

Israel has destroyed vital infrastructure such as
power and water stations, thus further complicating the
lives of 1.5 million Palestinian civilians, who were
already the victims of the collective punishment meted
out by the occupation authorities. It is leading the area
into a cycle of violence.

In an expansion of its aggression, Israel has
violated the sovereign airspace of the Syrian Arab
Republic, thus posing a threat to international peace
and security and to the security of the region. We
vigorously condemn these policies.

This aggression may be added to the long list of
acts of aggression against the Palestinian people and
violations of their fundamental human rights that Israel
has been committing for decades. All of these countless
illegal and illegitimate Israeli practices violate
international humanitarian law and numerous
resolutions adopted since 1967 by the Security Council
and the General Assembly.

The aggression - which Israel launched on the
flimsiest of pretexts - is aimed at destroying all
diplomatic efforts to ease tension. Indeed, it is a classic
example of the State terrorism that Israel pursues.
More than ever before, the international community is
thus called upon to work at all levels to halt policies of
double standards and to endeavour to put an end to this
aggression.
The Security Council must compel Israel to
withdraw immediately from Gaza and all the other
occupied territories and to cease all military
operations. The Council should also provide
international protection to the Palestinian people, in
conformity with the provisions of the Fourth Geneva
Convention, of 1949, and relevant international law. It
should ensure that the Government of Israel, as the
occupying Power, assumes full responsibility for the
safety of detainees and abductees in Israeli prisons and
should demand the immediate release of the detained
Palestinian ministers and legislators.

The Quartet, being the guardian of the road map,
should assume its responsibilities and seek a decisive
and just position in order to put an end to the
continuous Israeli aggression on the Gaza Strip and the
West Bank and to expedite the operation of the
assistance mechanism that has been approved, and not
to delay its implementation in view of the tragic
conditions that the Palestinian people are facing.

It is well known that the root cause of the
problem is the continued Israeli occupation of
Palestinian territories and the policies of blockade that
are being imposed on the Palestinian people. The just
and comprehensive peace to which the people of the
region aspire is a whole that can never be realized
without a total withdrawal from the occupied Arab
territories in Palestine, the Syrian Golan and the
Shab'a Farms, and without a return to the 4 June 1967
borders.

