Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay voted in favour of resolution 2334 (2016),
convinced that after eight years we finally had an
historic opportunity to break the Council's stalemate,
which has seriously threatened the two-State solution
and the peace negotiations between the Israelis and
Palestinians. Resolution 2334 (2016), adopted a few
minutes ago, responds to the ongoing call of Council
members to disrupt the reigning status quo and reverse
the negative trends on the ground, in particular
the illegal settlements built by Israel in occupied
Palestinian territory.

We are at a moment of great importance to the
future of the Middle East peace process and the two-
State solution. We hope that the resolution will serve as
a call for action by both Israel and Palestine to promptly
resume bilateral negotiations towards a just and lasting
peace, taking the interests of both parties into account.
Uruguay reaffirms its unwavering support for the right
of Israelis and Palestinians to live in peace within
internationally recognized borders in an atmosphere of
renewed cooperation and free from any threat or action
that could threaten peace. We also reaffirm our support
for the solution based on two independent States, as we
are convinced it is the only possibility whereby Israel
and Palestine could peacefully coexist.

It is very important for the authorities to send
political signals of their desire to escape the current
quagmire created by misunderstanding, hatred and
violent confrontation. Likewise, both sides must refrain
from adopting unilateral decisions that can undermine
dialogue, and comply in good faith with their obligations
under international law and the Council's resolutions.

Uruguay reaffirms its willingness to continue
working to reactivate the peace process in the Middle
East as quickly as possible and achieve once and for
all the two-State solution of two States, living in peace
and cooperation. We owe that to the many generations
of Israelis and Palestinians that have been exhausted by
many years of conflict.

