Mr. Monteiro (Portugal) (spoke in French): It is
a pleasure to see you, Mr. President, chairing this
meeting. Thank you for your kind words addressed to
me and to my delegation. I would like to commend you
on your work guiding the Council as it seeks to assist
Africa, and I wish you every success. Thank you again
for your kind words to me.

(spoke in English)

Today I am speaking on behalf of the troika of
observer States to the Lusaka Protocol: Portugal, the
Russian Federation and the United States.

We would like to welcome Foreign Minister Joao
Bernardo de Miranda back to the Security Council,
where we have come to know him as a valuable
interlocutor on the difficult issues that face Angola and
Central Africa. Indeed, we are grateful to him for his
participation in the Council's meeting with the Political
Committee.

We often hear that the Lusaka Protocol has been
rendered irrelevant due to the catastrophic events that
plunged Angola back into war in December 1998, a
new round of fighting from which the country has yet
to emerge. UNITA's failure to implement the Lusaka
Protocol was the primary cause of this renewed
fighting, and UNITA's reversal of this policy must
remain a demand ofthe Security Council.

We regard the Lusaka Protocol as partly
implemented, and we believe that the role of the
Security Council should be to help complete the
process. While it is true that Lusaka may not be
completed as originally envisioned, it contains
fundamental principles that offer the only viable
solution for peace in Angola.

Key Lusaka principles have already been
translated into reality. Angola has a multiparty National
Assembly, a Government of National Unity and
Reconciliation, and integrated armed forces. It has the
beginnings of an independent media, a gain that we
must encourage the Government to nurture and protect,
and it has an increasingly vibrant civil society
movement. Although we will continue to encourage
additional steps, we should also periodically reflect on
a decade of both suffering and progress for the people
of Angola. We believe that there are concrete gains
from the Lusaka and Bicesse eras that need to be
maintained and developed, even though the belligerent
wing of UNITA has chosen the path of conflict. We are
often asked why we maintain the troika when the
Lusaka process is - at best - stalled. The answer is
that our three countries have spent over a decade
working together with the United Nations and the
Government of Angola in the search for peace.

We do not offer ourselves as the exclusive
interlocutors for peace, but rather we offer ourselves to
the Lusaka parties and the international community as
three countries with unique perspectives on Angola.
We welcome the Government of Angola's renewal of
its commitment to the Lusaka Protocol and call on
UNITA to lay down its arms and take the path of peace.
We appeal to our partners in the international
community to rededicate themselves to the Lusaka
Protocol, which we consider to be Angola's last, best
chance for peace.

The troika will continue to support the only
principle by which the people of Angola can be
delivered from the scourge of war: the demilitarization
of political parties, in return for their full freedom to
compete for the support of the Angolan people. This
means that UNITA - on which the Council has
consistently and accurately placed primary
responsibility for the current conflict - must
demilitarize and irreversibly enter Angola's political
life as a vibrant democratic Party.

The troika welcomes the intent of the
Government and parliamentary opposition to hold
elections in 2002, which will be an opportunity for all
parties to seek a popular mandate through a peaceful
and democratic political process. Help from the United
Nations and the international community would do
much to ensure the success of these overdue elections.
We look forward to discussions with Angola's many
partners on how we can collectively support this
process.

Sanctions against UNITA are a tool for peace in
Angola. Over time, they have increased the difficulty
and cost of UNITA's resupply and contributed to a
degradation of its capacity to wage war. Any step we
take to improve the implementation of these sanctions
contributes to the search for peace in Angola. It is, of
course, painfully slow progress for the people of
Angola, who continue to suffer, but it is important
progress nonetheless.

The Angola sanctions Committee, under
Chairmen Fowler, Heinbecker and Ryan, and the
Expert Panel, under the leadership of Ambassadors
Mollander and Larrain, have done groundbreaking
work in the implementation of sanctions. They are
innovators whose willingness to explore new methods
must be encouraged. At the end of the day, we must
focus on outcomes, not process. The outcome we seek
is peace in Angola through, inter alia, the improved
implementation of sanctions against UNITA.

The troika has actively supported the three
packages of United Nations sanctions on UNITA and
will continue to do so. At the same time, we, as the
troika, believe that neither sanctions nor military action
alone can bring Angola the just and lasting peace its
people so deeply desire and so richly deserve. While
we must work with the Government of Angola and
others to improve the implementation of sanctions, our
dialogue with Angola goes well beyond these narrow
issues.

The troika has consistently maintained that only
the practice of good governance, respect for human and
civil rights and the delivery of better social and
economic conditions to the Angolan people can bring
the Angolan conflict to a lasting conclusion. The
Troika's support for sanctions is part of a broader
policy to engage the Government of Angola on good
governance as its best counter-insurgency tactic.

We note that Under-Secretary-General Gambari
will soon travel to Angola, and we look forward to
continued discussions with him. We hope that
Professor Gambari's trip will contribute to improved
relations between the Government of Angola and the
United Nations. We believe that Angola needs the
engagement of the United Nations in the difficult
search for peace, and it is our hope that the
Government of Angola and Professor Gambari will
work together in our common cause. As the troika and
as individual Member States, we pledge our support to
this effort.
Allow me, as this is the last speech that I will be
making in the Security Council, to say how much I
appreciated working with the Council, when I was a
member, in the search for peace in Angola and how
much I have enjoyed working with my colleagues in
the troika - the delegations of the United States and
the Russian Federation. I very much hope that the
Security Council, the sanctions Committee and the
Panel of Experts will be able to help Angola to find
lasting peace.

