I want to start by thanking the Russian presidency for holding this debate. The issue under consideration today is one of great importance. As I start, let me just also say, in response to Robert Malley, that I want to echo my German colleague on the case of Michael Kovrig, which causes us deep concern. The United Kingdom remains concerned by the trajectory of violence, instability and hostile State activity in the Middle East and the Gulf region. Heightened tensions and insecurity serve no one's long-term interest and instead put all at risk. We continue to call for de-escalation, dialogue and peace. The world cannot afford another conflict in the region. As we have repeatedly said in the Chamber, our commitment to the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) remains resolute, and it is at the forefront of our policy to support regional stability. Iranian nuclear armament would have catastrophic implications for the security of the region and beyond, and the JCPOA is the only vehicle currently available to prevent that. Nevertheless, while we remain committed to the nuclear deal, systematic Iranian non-compliance with its JCPOA commitments is putting it at risk. Iran must engage constructively with the Dispute Resolution Mechanism and it must implement its commitments under the deal. That is critical to security across the Middle East. We have also frequently expressed our concern about Iran's wider activity in the region. Iran has consistently carried out arms transfers to regional non-State actors in violation of Security Council resolutions. There can be no doubt that such proliferation destabilizes the region and escalates already high tensions. That is why we regret the expiry of the conventional arms restrictions provided for under resolution 2231 (2015). We will therefore continue to build our security cooperation with allies and partners and work to find a sustainable solution to Iranian proliferation. And we will redouble our efforts to ensure the implementation of other Security Council resolutions that prohibit arms transfers to regional non-State actors, including resolution 1546 (2004), on Iraq, resolution 1701 (2006), on Lebanon and resolution 2216 (2015), on Yemen. We will also ensure that the remaining provisions of resolution 2231 (2015), in particular the restrictions on Iran's ballistic missile programme, are rigorously enforced. For too long the region has been scarred by terrorism, war and other conflict. However, although instability has increased, we must not lose hope. We therefore welcome the announcements of normalization between Israel and the United Arab Emirates and Bahrain, and we welcome the suspension of Israeli annexation plans. They must stay that way. The Abraham accords demonstrate the potential for and the power of Jewish and Arab peoples in the region, breaking with the resentment and enmity of the past. Nelson Mandela once said: "Resentment is like drinking poison and then hoping it will kill your enemies". The antidote to resentment and enmity is reconciliation, and, as Prime Minister Boris Johnson has said, we hope that other States will follow the United Arab Emirates and Bahrain's example and thereby secure a more peaceful Middle East. We must therefore build on the momentum of the Abraham accords in order to resolve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, which remains a wellspring of tension across the region. There is ultimately no substitute for direct talks between the Israelis and the Palestinians towards the ultimate objective of a two-State solution. As with many of the region's conflicts, mistrust can be countered only by measures to rebuild confidence and facilitate dialogue. Conflicts in Yemen, Syria and Iraq continue to be sources of instability in the region. On Syria, the United Kingdom continues to support an inclusive Syrian- led political process, as provided for in resolution 2254 (2015). Following the latest Constitutional Committee talks, we again implore all parties to engage properly with the process. A political settlement is the only way to bring long-term stability to Yemen and to address the worsening humanitarian crisis. We fully support the peace process led by the United Nations Special Envoy, and we urge all parties, particularly the Yemeni parties, to engage constructively. We remain committed to supporting a peaceful and prosperous Iraq, able to promote stability in the region. We are proud to work with Iraq within the Global Coalition against Da'esh - a clear example of shared cooperation, effectively addressing one of the region's biggest security concerns. We welcome the Secretary-General's participation in this debate and the role of the United Nations working to resolve each of the aforementioned conflicts and sources of tension in the region. The Secretary-General can continue to rely on the United Kingdom's full support in each theatre. However, as the concept note (S/2020/1013) for today's debate suggests, there is a need to look beyond the current crises and to engage on wider issues. In the longer term, that will require a process within the region, which includes confidence-building measures leading to a wider dialogue. The United Nations has a potential role to play as a trusted mediator and, indeed, paragraph 8 of resolution 598 (1987) makes provision for the Secretary-General to examine, with States of the region, measures to enhance regional security and stability. While we hope that today's debate is a step in the right direction, we must be honest that an open debate in the Security Council, however well intentioned, is not the forum for such conversations. Progress can ultimately be made only through candid conversations among all the parties. We are also not convinced that launching into security-focused working groups will result in meaningful dialogue. We must remain realistic about the current level of regional mistrust. The issues involved are complex and sensitive and an incremental approach is needed to build confidence and cooperation. More critically, as Russia points out, any dialogue needs to be shaped by regional participants. I want to welcome the commitment to regional security expressed by Iran in its letter of 15 October addressed to the Security Council covering the Hormuz Peace Endeavour. But, as a party to conflicts across the region, Iran is not an impartial actor, and it would not be appropriate for any initiative to be Iranian- led. More consultation is needed within the region to avoid another failed regional security initiative. We should learn from the many failed attempts in order to make a future initiative a success. The Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, which led to the 1975 Helsinki Accords, provides both positive and negative lessons, on which we can draw. In conclusion, it is vital that we hear from all regional States, and we would welcome discussions beyond the Council that could help to identify political and practical steps to reduce mistrust within the region. Such discussions could include a potential mediation role for the United Nations. As I said at the outset, tensions and insecurity in the region ultimately serve none. I again thank the Russian Federation for organizing this debate on such an important issue.
