Mr. Plumbly (United Kingdom): When this Council
decided three and a half years ago to establish a United
Nations peace-keeping presence in the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, there were many who expressed
doubts as to whether that country's independence could be
sustained. Such dire predictions have been proved wrong.
The United Nations Preventive Deployment Force
(UNPREDEP) is a strikingly successful example of
preventive action by the United Nations. Indeed, it has
come to be seen as a symbol of the international
community's commitment to Macedonian sovereignty and
territorial integrity.

On behalf of the British Government, I should like to
pay tribute to the dedication and hard work of UNPREDEP
and its personnel, who have helped create the conditions
that made such progress possible. I should also like to pay
tribute to President Gligorov and to the wisdom and patient
determination with which he has successfully guided his
country through the various difficulties and crises of the
last few years. It is especially gratifying to a country such
as mine, which has been so closely involved in the
international community's efforts to restore stability to the
Balkan region, that real progress has been made towards
solving those difficulties. One particularly welcome recent
development was the agreement last month between his
country and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia on the
normalization of relations. The British Government urges
both countries to work rapidly towards the full
implementation of that agreement, and in particular on the
demarcation of their mutual border.

The last six months have seen great strides towards
the restoration of stability throughout the Balkan region.
But this newfound stability remains fragile, and it would be
wrong to imagine that the achievements to date cannot be
reversed or that they are immune from future developments,
principally in Bosnia, as implementation of the peace
Agreement enters a critical phase. That is why the United
Kingdom believes that now is not the time to withdraw
UNPREDEP, or indeed to change significantly the
structure of its mission. We have therefore co-sponsored
the draft resolution before us, which would extend
UNPREDEP's current mandate for a further six months.
To extend for a shorter period would, in the United
Kingdom's View, be unwise.

But, in particular at this time of financial stringency
within the United Nations system, it is right that the
Secretary-General should continue to keep all
peace-keeping missions, including UNPREDEP, under
review. The Secretary-General should, in accordance with
the draft resolution before us, undertake a thorough
review of UNPREDEP, in our View, in all its aspects by
this September. We would be ready to consider any
recommendations that he might make to ensure a better
use of scarce United Nations resources, so long as such
recommendations were compatible with UNPREDEP'S
ability to carry out its task. It is in any case clear, as the
representative of Germany has already suggested, that the
time will come when this Council judges that
UNPREDEP has fulfilled its mandate, and that its tasks
should be taken on by others.

