Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We, too, are grateful to the Uruguayan
presidency for its initiative to return to the issue of
the protection of civilians in times of armed conflict.
We thank the Deputy Secretary-General and the other
speakers for their assessments and useful information.

The issue of protection of civilians is on the
Security Council's agenda as one of the key elements
for the resolution of armed conflicts and the
maintenance international peace and security as a
whole. Unfortunately, cruelty and disdain for human
life are characteristic of a number of contemporary
armed conflicts. Civilians are killed and maimed by
the indiscriminate use of force or deliberate attacks,
and subjected to torture and other cruel and inhuman
treatment and punishment and to various forms of
violence. The Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham and
other groups allied to that criminal terrorist structure,
which are running rampant in Iraq, Syria and other
countries, are committing horrific atrocities against
civilians, including women and children.

The protection of civilians remains the priority
responsibility of the parties to a conflict. An important
role in the success of national efforts in that sphere
can be played by assistance to Governments from
the international community. Military response is
possible only with the authorization of the Security
Council and in strict compliance with the provisions of
the Charter of the United Nations. We agree with the
recommendations of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations,and the Secretary-General on the
need for political dialogue as a priority instrument in
settling conflict situations, including in the context of
the protection of civilians. We consider that task to be
one of the elements of the activities of United Nations
peacekeeping missions mandated under Chapter VII of
the Charter.

Key benchmarks in that sphere should be the
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and the
basic principles of the United Nations peacemaking. We
cannot agree with the periodic calls for their flexible
interpretation, depending on changing circumstances
on the ground, above all in the context of the use of force
by Blue Helmets. Undoubtedly, what is unacceptable is

any crime against civilians by peacekeepers themselves,
such as the egregious cases of sexual violence that have
surfaced in recent months.

We attach great importance to the establishment of
conditions conducive to the proper and timely provision
of humanitarian assistance to populations in need. We
note the efforts of the International Committee of
the Red Cross and other humanitarian organizations
in that sphere. The Council has repeatedly called on
parties to armed conflict to unswervingly abide by
the provisions of international humanitarian law with
regard to respect for and protection of humanitarian and
medical personnel working in armed conflict zones.
Nevertheless, the situation in that sphere leaves much
to be desired, and the lives and well-being of those who
provide assistance to victims continue to be exposed to
unwarranted threats. In October 2015, dozens ofpeople
were killed in an air strike on a hospital run by the
international non-governmental organization (NGO)
Medecins Sans Frontieres in Kunduz, Very recently, an
air strike was also carried out on a medical centre run
by the same NGO in Yemen.

Contemporary armed conflicts are accompanied
by the massive displacement of civilians. The
unprecedented increase in the number of people who
have been forced to leave their homes - the largest
number since since the Second World War- and the
continuous rise in humanitarian needs is a serious test
of the United Nations mettle.

It will be possible to overcome the modern
migratory and humanitarian crises caused largely by
conflicts provoked from outside in the Middle East and
North Africa only through political settlement and the
socioeconomic stabilization of situations in migrant
countries of origin. Special attention needs to be
given to issues of providing and protecting their rights
in host countries, taking into account the specifics
and traditions of various cultures and religions, and
ensuring that forced migrants are not automatically
equated with potential terrorists.

The guarantee for success in sparing civilians the
brunt of the suffering caused by conflicts in their midst
lies in unflinching compliance with the Charter of the
United Nations, the norms of international humanitarian
law and relevant Security Council resolutions, as well
as in eschewing politicized, selective and unilateral
approaches to that issue. Only in that way will the
decisions taken be truly effective and ensure genuine
protection for civilians during armed conflict.

One cannot help noting that the importance and
relevance of the theme of protecting civilians, and its
often highly emotional resonance, makes its susceptible
to unscrupulous exploitation for dubious political ends.
Unfortunately, that has happened today. Clearly, the
thinking is that using this discussion as a vehicle to trot
out another slew of unsubstantiated accusations against
Russia will give it some kind of legitimacy.

Civilians, including women and children, make
up a significant part of those who have died and been
injured as a result of the conflict in Ukraine. That
is the tragic result of the refusal in 2014 by the Kyiv
authorities to engage in dialogue with the East and
their attempt to resolve the problem by carrying out
a mass military operation that they cynically dubbed
"counter-terrorist". The solemn vow made by President
of Ukraine on 1 July 2014 never to use force against
civilians and not to target residential areas was followed
by mass shelling of settlements in the Donetsk and
Lugansk regions, and the number of civilians continues
to grow with each passing day. Kyiv's continued
economic blockade of the region continues to take its
toll on the region.

The most reliable way to end the suffering of
residents in the Donbas is the timely settlement of the
crisis on the basis of the clear implementation of all
provisions of the Minsk agreements. The parties to the
conflict, above all the Ukrainian authorities, must find
the political will to implement the decisions enshrined
in the Minsk package of measures.

