Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation wishes to thank you, Sir, for
convening today's meeting. We welcome the report of
the Secretary-General on the current situation in
Somalia (S/2009/132), and we thank Mr. Ahmedou
Ould Abdallah, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Somalia, and Mr. Ramtane
Lamamra, Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union, for their briefings. We welcome the
presence of Mr. Mohamed Abdullahi Omaar, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Somalia, and thank him for his
statement.

The question of Somalia has persisted for 18 years,
during which enormous suffering has been visited upon
the people of Somalia, posing a grave threat to the
regional situation in the Horn of Africa and
constituting a daunting challenge to the international

community. In recent years, with strong support from
the United Nations and other international partners, all
the Somali parties have strengthened the process of
peace talks, which has led to certain positive
developments in the situation in the country. But the
overall situation in Somalia remains fragile and
requires additional efforts by the Somali parties and the
international community.

The key to achieving peace in Somalia is to
strengthen the country's political foundations. We
support the Djibouti peace process and call upon all
parties concerned to effectively implement the peace
agreement that has been signed.

Once again we congratulate Sheikh Sharif Sheikh
Ahmed on his election as President of Somalia and we
welcome the formation of a new Government. We
support the new Somali Government as it works to
strengthen the dialogue with various political parties
and we call upon all Somali parties to join the process
of peace negotiations and political reconciliation. We
encourage the new Government promptly to establish
effective governing institutions, so that it can exercise
authority throughout the territory of the country.

We are highly appreciative of the positive role
played by Special Representative Ould Abdallah and
we call upon the international community to continue
to support the national peace and reconciliation process
in Somalia.

A stable and secure environment is needed to
achieve peace in Somalia. We are highly appreciative
of the excellent work carried out by the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) in extremely difficult
conditions, and we welcome the decision of the African
Union Peace and Security Council to renew the
AMISOM. mandate for a further three months. We call
upon the international community to continue to
provide logistical and financial support for AMISOM.

We condemn all attacks against civilians in
Somalia and against AMISOM. We urge all Somali
parties to immediately put in place a ceasefire
throughout the territory of Somalia and to seek a
political settlement. We hope that the joint security and
police forces will be put in place as soon as possible,
and we call upon the international community to
provide the necessary support.

A greater United Nations role is required to
achieve peace in Somalia. We endorse the United
Nations support package for AMISOM. and welcome
the fact that Secretariat sent a technical assessment
mission to the area and submitted reports in that
connection. We would wish the General Assembly to
expedite its consideration of the support package for
AMISOM, and we hope that the Secretariat will
expedite the establishment of the trust fund. We call
upon all countries to continue to provide bilateral
assistance to AMISOM.

The Chinese Government recently provided the
two major troop contributors to AMISOM. - Uganda
and Burundi - with 5 million renminbi each for
logistic support. China is ready to continue within its
means to provide further assistance to the Somalia
peace process.

It must not be forgotten that the ultimate purpose
of strengthening AMISOM. is to create favourable
conditions for the deployment of a United Nations
peacekeeping operation. The Security Council should
meet the long-held expectations of the people of
Somalia and of the countries of the African Union by
giving favourable consideration to the deployment of a
United Nations peacekeeping operation in the country.
We look forward to the report of the Secretary-General
to be submitted in April.

The coming months will be critical for the peace
process in Somalia. The Council's actions in that
regard will have a long-term impact on the people of
Somalia. The Chinese delegation is ready to work with
other members to further promote a greater Security
Council role on the question of Somalia.

