Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation welcomes you to New York, Mr.
President, to preside over this open meeting. We would also
like to welcome Foreign Minister Miranda of Angola, who
is attending today's meeting.

The question of Angola has dragged on for quite a
long time. The twists and turns of the peace process and the
grave security and humanitarian situation have not only
combined to bring enormous sufferings to the Angolan
people but have also seriously affected peace and stability
in the region. As it refused to implement the peace
agreement, UNITA, headed by Jonas Malheiro Savimbi,
should bear the main responsibility for the present
situation in Angola. Since the arms and petroleum
embargo was applied against UNITA by resolution 864
(1993), the Security Council has adopted a number of
resolutions in recent years to expand relevant measures to
travel, finance, the diamond trade and many other areas.
Unfortunately, these measures have not been implemented
effectively, for various reasons. To this day, UNITA has
not yet laid down its weapons to take the path of national
reconciliation.

Ambassador Robert Fowler of Canada, since his
assumption of the chairmanship of the sanctions
Committee, has made unremitting efforts to facilitate
implementation in earnest by the international community
of the sanctions against UNITA. The Security Council
Panel of Experts investigating violations of the embargoes
has done a great deal of work since its establishment and
has submitted a report in this regard, putting forward a
series of recommendations. Despite the different
responses and evaluations made by different sides, the
report undoubtedly played a positive role in enhancing
efforts by the Security Council and the international
community to strengthen the sanctions against UNITA.

Meanwhile, we should also see that much remains to
be done in strengthening sanctions against UNITA. After
the expiration of the mandate of the Expert Panel, the
international community will still need to monitor
violations of the embargoes closely. The Chinese
delegation supports the establishment by the Security
Council of a new monitoring mechanism to continue the
investigation into violations of the embargoes against
UNITA and to submit a report and proposals to the
Security Council in six months. We hope that the
Secretary-General will be able to appoint experts for this
monitoring mechanism at an early date, and we would
like to call upon all countries to give it their full support
and cooperation.

We support Security Council endorsement of some
of the recommendations in the Expert Panel's report
through the adoption of a draft resolution, and we hope
that this will be truly implemented. We have taken note
of the fact that many of the recommendations involve the
Southern African Development Community (SADC). It
may be said that without the true involvement and
commitment of SADC, it will be impossible to implement

 

many of the proposals, and sanctions against UNITA could
possibly remain hollow talk. We commend SADC countries
for their determination and for their efforts to implement
the sanctions against UNITA. At the same time, we are
aware of the real difficulties SADC countries face, and we
are therefore of the view that the international community
should continue to provide SADC with necessary assistance
concerning the sanctions against UNITA.

The Chinese delegation strongly appeals to all
countries strictly to abide by relevant resolutions of the
Security Council, to stop supplying UNITA with weapons
or supporting it in any other way and to adopt effective
measures to prevent their own citizens from violating the
sanctions. We sincerely hope that in six months' time,
when the Security Council next reviews the implementation
of the sanctions against UNITA, we will be able to see real
and effective results. That would be an important
contribution by the international community to the Angolan
peace process.

