Mr. Vieira de Mello: Let me thank you,
Mr. President, and all today's speakers, for the kind
words addressed to my East Timorese colleagues, to
the staff of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) and to
myself.

May I also express our gratitude - the gratitude
of Timorese and internationals alike - for the strong
support expressed by all the members and non-
members who took the floor today for the set of
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General's
report, particularly with regard to the post-UNTAET/
post-independence phase, with a view to consolidating
the achievements of the Transitional Administration.
Your endorsement - hopefully through a presidential
statement - of the need for the United Nations to
remain fully committed through a predictable and
dependable source of funding for the post-
independence requirements of East Timor - which
perhaps more than any other country will be the child
of the United Nations and of this Council - will send
a powerful, reassuring message to the people and to the
Second Transitional Government, which has a huge
challenge before it in the months ahead, as well as to
the Constituent Assembly of East Timor.

We have taken note, with great care, of your
advice and comments, which we shall keep very much
in mind in the weeks and months to come. I also note
with satisfaction that no specific questions or particular
concerns were expressed to us in the course of this
debate, which is indeed very encouraging.

We are extremely pleased that the Council is
prepared to welcome the date of 20 May 2002 for the
independence of East Timor. That will certainly further
focus our minds and lead us to redouble our efforts in
all the areas that were discussed here today in the run-
up to independence.

The Secretary-General will of course submit to
the Council a sixth-monthly report in January next
year, prior to the expiration of UNTAET's current
mandate on 31 January. It will contain, as several
speakers wished, an elaboration of the post-
independence United Nations structure, as well as of
the precise needs of the independent Government of
East Timor, which could only be presented in a fairly
preliminary fashion at this stage in the report before the
Council.

Finally, may I thank the people and the
Government of Ireland, yourself, Mr. Minister, and
Permanent Representative Ryan and his colleagues, for
your solidarity with the cause of East Timor and the
role of the United Nations in that territory. Allow me,
Minister Cowen, to express my particular thanks to you
for crossing the Atlantic to preside over this meeting,
and to attempt to do so in Gaelic, with apologies for
my deficient pronunciation: a Aire Gno'thaz'
Eachtracha.

