Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): The delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic
welcomes the holding of this meeting. We would like
to convey our gratitude to you personally,
Mr. President, in your capacity as the Chairman of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), for the great
efforts you have made in the last three months. We
fully agree with you that the people of your friendly
country have faced terrorist attacks for many years and
that they have fought terrorism. All of us should make
use of the lessons to be learned from your struggle
against terrorism. My delegation would also like to
express its gratitude to the Vice-Chairmen of the
Committee, its experts, members and Secretariat staff
for all their efforts to make the work of the Committee
a success in the past.

The CTC was able to fully meet its
responsibilities in the period under review. The
Committee has worked tirelessly to make progress in
enhancing the capacity of Member States to harmonize
their national legislation with the provisions of
resolution 1373 (2001). That success is evidenced in
the cooperation of Member States vis-a-vis the
provisions of the resolution, and especially in the fact
that the requisite reports have been provided to the
Committee. Every State has now submitted its initial
report; 154 States have submitted a second report; and
35 States have presented their third report. I am pleased
that Syria is among the 35 countries that have
submitted the third report within the time established.
That is further demonstration of our seriousness in
promoting the international community's efforts to
combat terrorism.

The Committee has pursued an open dialogue
with Member States in a framework of transparency
and has given assistance to those countries that have
expressed the need to enhance their capacity to combat
terrorism. The Committee has had real interaction with
regional and subregional organizations.

My delegation supports the programme of work
for the next 90 days presented by the Chairman of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee. Syria has cooperated
fully with the Committee and would like to reaffirm its
willingness to continue to make every effort to carry
out that programme of work in order to meet the needs
of Member States.

My delegation commends the Secretariat's efforts
in publishing a further page concerning the CTC on the
Internet. I would like to stress that there should be
complete equality among the six working languages on
the Committee's web page.

The danger of international terrorism requires the
concerted effort of the members of the international
community. That cooperation should not superficial or
limited to a set period of time. We would like to affirm
what you, Sir, said in your statement a few minutes
ago. We would like to seriously examine the roots,
reasons and causes of terrorism. We should diagnose
the causes of terrorism in order to eradicate it.

In that context, it is important to define terrorism
and to distinguish between it and the right of peoples to
liberation, which is a right enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations. That right should be safeguarded
by everyone. All measures should be taken to ensure
that right.

