Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): I want to thank you, Madam President, for
giving me the floor. Ialso want to convey our appreciation
to the delegation of Bolivia for having included this
extremely important item in the programme of work of
its presidency in this month of October. I also wish to
thank Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process Mladenov for his excellent briefing today.
Despite the difficulties he faces, the collective work
that he represents has always been commendable.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea is very
concerned about the brutal and ongoing events that,
for many years, have claimed numerous human lives
and e threatened the security in various places in the
Middle East, which is a situation that has led to massive
internal and external displacement of millions of
people in certain countries of the region, such as Syria,
Yemen, Lebanon and Libya, to name just a few. The
United Nations and the international community must
now find a sustainable solution to these conflicts, in
which warring parties have extinguished the hope of
the people, despite the fact that the passage of years has
shown that the conflicts can have no military solution.

On the Palestinian question, I would like to first
express our most heartfelt condolences to the conflicting
parties. We join them in solidarity over the thousands
of citizens who have lost their lives during the seven
decades of this long, tragic history, to which we have
always given due attention since our State's inception.
Like other countries, Equatorial Guinea is dismayed
at the persistence of the conflict and the stalemate in
Israeli-Palestinian negotiations on conditions for the
creation of a Palestinian State.

In recent years, we have seen a massive increase
in violence in the region by parties to the conflict. The
improvised rockets from Gaza and the disproportionate
responses of the Israeli army frighten both sides. The
impact of those unnecessary exchanges has mired
the Palestinian population in Gaza in undesirable
living conditions, with destroyed infrastructure and
insufficient basic daily means of subsistence, including
an elevated rate of unemployment, mainly among
young people. These and other aspects of the situation
described in the media are the result of the insurgency
in an area dominated by fear and destruction, leading
to a precarious and unprosperous future for both sides.

But there is another reality that both Israelis and
Palestinian must recognize, whether they like it or
not - both peoples will always be there, side by side.
Accordingly, the parties would be well served to foster
a peaceful and harmonious coexistence. In this regard,
the Israeli and Palestinian leaders must engage in
political and moral analysis on the future they want for
their people, considering that the best future Israelis
can wish for their children necessarily involves the
creation of an independent Palestinian State, and a
future Palestinian State will not exist unless Israel's
security is guaranteed.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea is convinced of
the crucial role of the United Nations on the Palestinian
question. Since it was put on the agenda in 1947 up to
today, both the General Assembly and the Security
Council have taken very significant steps that could
have resolved the conflict, which is reflected in the
various important resolutions that have been adopted
on the topic. The implementation of these resolutions
and the effectiveness of the work of the United Nations
call for unreserved unity among the members of
the Council. History has demonstrated that Israelis
and Palestinians cannot easily resume negotiations,
let alone reach an agreement, if the Council and the
international community do not engage in a more
united and positive manner.

Ever since we began our membership of the
Council, we have called for the return ofthe Palestinian
Authority to Gaza. We believe that insecurity in that
densely populated enclave and tension with Israel
concerning that area are caused by the considerable
power vacuum. That vacuum, which contributes only to
the deterioration of local living conditions, could pave
the way for extremist organizations in the surrounding
areas to gain greater access to young people. That,
in turn, would increase the level of insecurity in the
region. In that regard, we again call on the international
community to provide greater support for the initiative
of Egypt and other international actors working on
intra-Palestinian reconciliation, while bearing in mind
that the peace agreement signed in October last year
between Hamas and Fatah has not been implemented.

We welcome the efforts of certain countries that
recently announced an increase in their contributions
to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East, which, because of
its ongoing financial crisis, is in danger of reducing the
number of important services it provides to millions of
Palestinian citizens.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the position
of Equatorial Guinea, which, in line with Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions, the Arab
Peace Initiative, the Madrid guiding principles, the
Quartet road map and other instruments, considers the
claims of the Palestinians, which are based on history,
to be just. We therefore reiterate our support for the
two-State solution, based on the 1967 borders, with
Jerusalem as its capital, which should be the subject of
negotiations between Israelis and Palestinians so as to
ensure a safe and peaceful coexistence between the two
States and harmony with other States of the region.

