Let me first congratulate Indonesia on assuming the presidency for the month of August. We thank the Indonesian presidency for convening today's timely and important debate. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has acted as a contrast agent that has brought already visible geopolitical differences into sharper focus. On the ground, the pandemic has been seen to exacerbate existing tensions in fragile regions, fuelling popular discontent and putting peacebuilding gains at risk of reversal. In societies where human rights were already under pressure, we see a reflex to further curb civic space. The pandemic and its direct and indirect effects are by definition an issue of global concern, which means that we must come together as an international community to address it urgently and comprehensively. That means first and foremost that we need a strong and effective United Nations, especially in the area of peacebuilding and sustaining peace. Accordingly, we wish to draw the Security Council's attention to three elements that are essential for the United Nations to be able to deliver: first, United Nations reforms; secondly, financing for peacebuilding; and thirdly, mental health and psychosocial support (MHPSS). With regard to United Nations reforms, in many ways, the COVID-19 pandemic provides a test case for such reforms. The challenges posed are so multifaceted that they can be addressed comprehensively only by involving a variety of relevant United Nations actors, all which would contribute in distinct ways to the aim of sustaining peace. Achieving sustainable peace requires parallel progress on development, security and human rights. Therefore, more than ever, United Nations actors on the ground must pursue cooperation and partnership with the guidance of a resident coordinator. The fact that the Peacebuilding Fund proves so effective at bringing United Nations actors together at the country level is one of the reasons why we are one of its biggest donors. Similarly, we have decided to immediately support the United Nations COVID-19 Response and Recovery Multi-Partner Trust Fund, as it is the centralized United Nations response to the socioeconomic consequences of this crisis, which is a key dimension of sustaining peace. Secondly, with regard to financing for peacebuilding, peacebuilding efforts remain greatly underfinanced, unfortunately, even if needs continue to rise as a result of this pandemic. The Netherlands hopes to continue its substantial funding of different multilateral peacebuilding instruments, but times are uncertain and concerted action by States Members of the United Nations is needed in this regard. We must therefore use the review of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture to discuss in earnest ways to significantly increase means available for peacebuilding. We expect the Peacebuilding Commission to play a role in this regard. The financial proposals set forth in Secretary-General's 2018 report on peacebuilding and sustaining peace (S/2018/43) are still largely unimplemented. Based on the imminent report of the Secretary-General, coming later in 2020, we look forward to joining hands with other Member States to find new and innovative ways to ensure more structural and predictable funding for peacebuilding, including good peacebuilding donorship. Lastly, with respect to MHPSS, the pandemic has laid bare the need for more attention to be paid to mental health and psychosocial support, as outlined by the Secretary-General's policy brief on MHPSS. MHPSS in peacebuilding settings is absolutely critical for creating conditions for sustaining peace. To avoid the cycle of conflict and to counter social disintegration in fragile societies, it is key that we integrate MHPSS in peacebuilding from the outset. Local and national Government institutions, including those working on health, grievance management, transitional justice, dialogue and reconciliation, play a central role in this effort. From the two consultations on the integration of MHPSS in peacebuilding we have organized for the review of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture - one with experts and one with representatives of States Members of the United Nations - it became clear that many participants would like to see an enhanced inclusion of MHPSS in peacebuilding efforts. MHPSS needs to be structurally and explicitly taken into account, in peacebuilding analyses, programming, monitoring, evaluation and learning. The Netherlands looks forward to continuing to make its contribution to bringing this issue forth in the formal phase of the 2020 review of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture, and to work together with many of the participants in today's debate.
