I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity to address the Security Council on behalf of Serbia and participate in the present video-teleconference convened to consider the regular six-monthly report on the work of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals (IRMCT) (S/2020/309, annex). Let me point out at the beginning of my statement that, despite the state of emergency declared to counter the spread of the coronavirus disease, Serbia informed the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals as promptly as possible that it would cooperate and continue to supervise persons on temporary release under the conditions specified in the decisions of the Trial Chambers of the Mechanism. For a quarter of a century, efforts have been made to sanction the consequences of the bloody destruction of Yugoslavia through the mechanisms of international justice. Serbia has made a great contribution in this regard. It extradited to international justice the highest officials and military officers of its former State. No other State has done that. As such, the revisionist history conclusion seeking to attribute greatest responsibility to Serbia and the Serbian people cannot be drawn. Simply put, other States did not do it voluntarily and the international community did not find a mechanism to force them to do so. Many open issues and unpunished crimes therefore remain. That fact casts a shadow over the effectiveness of this body and its very existence. Once again, we are analysing the results of the work of the Mechanism, which is due to fold in the foreseeable future. Not so long ago, in December 2017, the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) ceased to exist, too. The Mechanism, which should not only end the remaining proceedings but also resolve all disputed issues related to the serving of sentences, possible revisions of the proceedings or issues related to archives, has not yet fully achieved any of its goals. I will mention only the key issues that remained unanswered in my country's cooperation with the Mechanism. It can be seen from the third review report on the work of the Mechanism (S/2020/309, annex) and the regular six-month report that the completion of the proceedings has been postponed to April 2021. I see this prolongation as an opportunity to resolve the remaining issues, to which there has been no answer so far. I would like to reiterate that, in cooperation with the ICTY and the Mechanism, Serbia provided the Prosecution with free access to all evidence, documents, archives and witnesses. Cooperation with the Mechanism is going smoothly. Almost all of the requests received have been resolved, and requests of a more recent date are also in the process of being resolved. Answers and documentation from the archives of Serbia's State authorities are being submitted to the Office of the Prosecutor of the Mechanism, court Chambers and the Registry of the Mechanism in a timely manner. Witnesses have been released from the duty to keep State, official and military secrets. Of the remaining proceedings related to Serbia's cooperation with the Mechanism, first-instance proceedings in the retrial of Jovica Stanisi¢ and Franko Simatovic¢ are in progress, as well as the appeal procedure in the case of Ratko Mladi¢. I wish first of all to talk about the problems related to the imposition of prison sentences and the initiative of serving sentences in Serbia, the early release of persons who have served two thirds of their prison sentence, and a kind of illegal monitoring and control of persons after their release. The expiration of the deadline for resolving the issues that Serbia's Minister of Justice had raised previously is evident. I am not hopeful that much will change in that sense, but I also feel a responsibility to present it to the Council until those issues are resolved. The first problem concerns non-compliance with the provisions of the updated ICTY statute of September 2009. In its article 24, on penalties, paragraph | states: "The penalty imposed by the Trial Chamber shall be limited to imprisonment. In determining the terms of imprisonment, the Trial Chambers shall have recourse to the general practice regarding prison sentences in the courts of the former Yugoslavia". That updated statute is available to all on the Tribunal's website. Nevertheless, the Tribunal and the Mechanism have sentenced to life imprisonment the following Serbian citizens: Stanislav Gali¢, Ljubi8a Beara, Vujadin Popovie and Zdravko Tolimir, and they have handed down a first-instance sentence to Ratko Mladie, while Milan Lukie and Radovan Karadzi¢e were sentenced to life imprisonment as persons of Serbian nationality who are not citizens of Serbia. During that period, Serbia provided for a sentence of up to 40 years in prison for the most serious crimes. The only conclusion that can be drawn here is that the Tribunal made those decisions in contravention of its statute. No grievance mechanism is provided for such treatment. Decisions made by the Tribunal outside the rules of its founding act have resulted in far-reaching consequences, that is, the imposition of long-term penalties in cases where there is no possibility of a remedy or any instruction in this regard. Some of those who were sentenced to life imprisonment, Beara and Tolimir, have died while serving their sentences, so the need to resolve this legal nonsense is even more pronounced. Another problem that Serbia raised in 2009 refers to the initiative whereby Serbian citizens would serve the sentences imposed by the Tribunal in Serbia. We have not yet received a response from the Security Council in that respect. The largest number of convicted persons serving their sentences are persons of Serbian nationality and Serbian citizens. Is it not therefore logical that Serbia should be interested in resolving this issue? I believe that we must not allow this issue to remain unresolved until the end of the Mechanism's mandate. The third problem has arisen because the treatment regime for ICTY detainees unfortunately differs from country to country. The treatment of convicts is much better in the most developed countries, which attach great importance to resocialization and where the level of standards is reflected in all other aspects of life, including the conditions under which prisoners serve their sentences. Neither the Tribunal nor the Mechanism has succeeded in imposing general standards that will have to be respected, but, conversely, each of the countries where prison sentences are served has imposed its own principles. Serbia is ready to take on the obligation of, and responsibility for, the implementation of the prison sentences imposed on its citizens convicted before The Hague Tribunal and to accept international supervision in that regard. The competent institutions of Serbia are ready to provide clear guarantees that convicted persons will not be released early without appropriate decisions by the Mechanism. Once again, we invite the representatives of the Mechanism and the representatives of the relevant institutions designated by the Secretary-General to visit Serbia, tour its prison facilities and see for themselves if the prison conditions correspond to that purpose. The fourth major problem is the issue of changing the conditions for early release after two thirds of the prison sentence has been served. Serbia insists that the same conditions should continue to apply to citizens of Serbia convicted before the Tribunal. Last year, most of the requests submitted by citizens of Serbia to the President of the Mechanism requesting early release after having served two thirds of their sentence were not resolved, for the first time. In 2019, two thirds of the prison sentences expired for the following citizens of Serbia: Radivoje Mileti¢e, Sreten Lukic, Radoslav Brdjanin, Vlastimir Djordjevie and NebojSa Pavkovie. All of them had submitted requests for early release. These are people of advanced age and fragile health, and the legal resolution of their cases, for reasons of humanity, should not be left out. At the beginning of 2020, the request by Radoslav Brdjanin for early release was denied. Serbia received a "call for a statement" for Radivoje Mileti¢e in March 2020 and for Sreten Lukie¢ in May 2020. A new practice has been introduced whereby the President of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals addresses the country to which the convict is to return, seeking guarantees that the State of which they are nationals will accept and monitor compliance with the conditions set by the Mechanism in the event of a positive decision on the early release to freedom. Serbia submitted positive answers to these calls for a statement within the set deadline. Conditional release is a legal achievement of a civilized society. The previous Presidents of the Tribunal and the Mechanism decided on this issue without anyone's influence. Certainly, the President of the Mechanism has the right to consult when he deems it relevant in making a decision on early release. Influence by the Prosecution, as well as third parties, in terms of amendments to the Rules of Procedure and Evidence of the Mechanism is inadmissible. Unfortunately, that change did take place. Persons who have become eligible for this condition are in this way additionally punished by procedural obstacles and long waits for a response. The answers to the requests are late, without a reason or justification. Any reason for terminating the work of the Mechanism and the budget at its disposal represents a technical problem; this cannot be an excuse for the non-expediency of the Mechanism. "Administrative silence" in administrative systems the world over is viewed as a procedural legal method for untimely enactment, that is, the non- enactment of acts, which has various legal consequences. The fifth question arises at the end, when convicts are released. The Mechanism Prosecutor's Office continues to observe and monitor them. The regular part of the six-month reports, including this one, refers to the denial and glorification of war crimes. Each report mentions, sometimes by name, the appearance in public of persons who have served a sentence imposed by the ICTY. It is not clear why. The work of the Prosecutor's Office has been completed by the handing down of a verdict. After serving the sentence, such persons cannot be further sanctioned, on any grounds, nor can anyone deprive them of any personal and civil rights. Regrettably, I have to pay special attention to a problem that regularly occurs in the Detention Unit of the Mechanism in Scheveningen and concerns the health status of General Ratko Mladic. On 30 March, Serbia's Minister of Justice addressed the President of the Mechanism, Mr. Carmel Agius, conveying to him her concerns about the operation to which General Mladi¢ was subjected, in the context of the pandemic and despite the recommendation of the Dutch authorities not to perform non-emergency medical procedures, about which his family was only subsequently informed. Due to similar actions by employees of the Detention Unit as well as the members of the medical service in charge of detainees, the family of Ratko Mladi¢ had to intervene, even on previous occasions. An international medical expert team has been formed to protect the life and health of General Mladic. The unanimous assessment of that team was that the operation would pose an unnecessary risk to his life. Fortunately, General Ratko Mladie survived. A special problem is the non-enforcement of court decisions. According to the decision of the Appeals Chamber, the medical service of the Mechanism was ordered to provide information on the health status of Ratko Mladic¢ to his medical team once a week. Contrary to that decision, official reports on his health are hidden from his family and his medical team, that is to say, the Secretariat does not respect the decision of the Appeals Chamber. The behaviour of the administration of the Detention Unit has remained unsanctioned. In such a situation, the Minister of Justice of Serbia requested President Agius to take measures to save one human life and to maintain the authority of the court's decision, endangered by the administration of that same court. President Agius's response was that, in respect of the health of Mr. Mladie, his ability to react was limited and that this authority had been entrusted to the Appeals Chamber, which makes decisions in proceedings related to Mr. Mladic. In addition, he stated that the management of the United Nations Detention Unit, including the provision of medical services to detainees, is the general responsibility of the Registrar. The question is how to solve problems of this kind, when decisions of the court are ignored by the Registry of that same court and while the President of the court leaves them to his administration without any reaction and even calls for the decisions of the court to be respected. The sixth issue is the fate of the ICTY archives. Serbia has submitted a large number of documents to the ICTY Prosecutor's Office, the Defence and the ICTY Trial Chambers. The general position of Serbia is that the documentation submitted to the ICTY Prosecutor's Office, and later to the Mechanism as well, which was not presented as evidence in the proceedings before the ICTY and the Mechanism, should be returned to the authorities that submitted it. The precondition for the return of documentation is the fact that the criminal proceedings before the ICTY and the IRMCT have been finalized. So far, no concrete answer to this question has been provided. Our proposals to launch this great undertaking have not been met with a response from Mechanism officials. The return of documentation is extremely important, not only because of the responsibility for documenting events in the former Yugoslavia in the 1990s, but also because of the volume of material and additional engagement of the relevant institutions of Serbia. In any case, this is not an easy job, and it has been postponed until the last moment, when the end of the Mechanism's work is already in sight. Last but not least, let me point out the cooperation at the regional level, which is the result of joint work on mutual understanding, cooperation and reconciliation. In the period from 16 November 2019 to 16 May 2020, the War Crimes Prosecutor's Office of the Republic of Serbia filed two indictments, according to which proceedings are currently in progress before the court of first instance. In the same period, according to the indictments of the Office of the War Crimes Prosecutor of the Republic of Serbia from the previous period, four first-instance convictions were handed down. In the second-instance procedure, one person was acquitted and two convicted. Cooperation with the competent prosecutor's offices from the region continued with the exchange of requests for assistance. The Prosecutor's Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina submitted 16 requests for assistance to the Office of the War Crimes Prosecutor of the Republic of Serbia, of which six requests were granted and eight processed; two requests were not granted due to formal deficiencies. The Office of the War Crimes Prosecutor of the Republic of Serbia submitted 18 requests for assistance to the Bosnia and Herzegovina Prosecutor's Office, of which four were Republic of Croatia submitted 10 requests for assistance to the Office of the War Crimes Prosecutor of the Republic of Serbia, of which four requests were granted; six requests are still being processed. The Office of the War Crimes Prosecutor of the Republic of Serbia submitted seven requests for assistance to the State Attorney's Office of the Republic of Croatia, of which three were granted, while four requests have not yet been answered. Six requests were submitted to the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo Special Prosecutor's Office in Pristina, but so far none have been answered. The War Crimes Prosecutor's Office was committed to strengthening regional cooperation in war crimes prosecutions. Its representatives participated at the technical level in the regional meeting held on 26 and 27 November 2019 in Sarajevo, in which, in addition to the representatives of Serbia's War Crimes Prosecutor's Office, the representatives of the Prosecutor's Offices of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, the Supreme State Prosecutor's Office of Montenegro and the State Attorney's Office of the Republic of Croatia also participated. In the period from 17 to 19 December 2019, the representatives of Serbia's War Crimes Prosecutor's Office participated in the Regional Conference of Prosecutors in Sarajevo, which was attended by the representatives of Prosecutors from the region - Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and Montenegro, and the Chief Prosecutor of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. On 14 May, the War Crimes Prosecutor of the Republic of Serbia held a telephone meeting with the Chief Prosecutor of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Gordana Tadi¢. The topic of discussion was the improvement of regional cooperation in specific cases. Cooperation with the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals remains active and constructive. On 12 May, the War Crimes Prosecutor of the Republic of Serbia and the Chief Prosecutor of the Mechanism held a telephone meeting. The topics of conversation were the results achieved in the previous period by the Prosecutor's Office, regional cooperation and cooperation between the War Crimes Prosecutor's Office and the Mechanism. In December 2019, the Deputy Prosecutors for War Crimes and Assistant Prosecutors attended the introductory training in The Hague and, on that occasion, the experts of the Prosecutor's Office of the IRMCT transferred to them the knowledge and experience gained through the work of the Mechanism. In the most recent period, the War Crimes Prosecutor's Office of the Republic of Serbia continued to request the necessary documentation from the Mechanism for specific ongoing cases at all stages of criminal proceedings. The joint project of the IRMCT and the European Commission - the visiting national prosecutors programme - is still being implemented, which enables a representative of the War Crimes Prosecutor's Office to stay and work at the IRMCT Prosecutor's Office as a liaison officer who continuously searches the ICTY/IRMCT Prosecutor's Office database and separates and submits documentation and evidence relevant to the proceedings within the jurisdiction of the War Crimes Prosecutor's Office. In addition, case handlers regularly search databases by accessing the electronic disclosure system. I believe that, with the end of the Mechanism's work in sight, the active engagement of the Council on all open issues is extremely important. Serbia expects answers to these questions. In lieu of a conclusion, let me point out that I believe that the highlights I made in my statement are elucidative enough to lead all present to conclude that my country's cooperation with the Residual Mechanism has been successful indeed.
