Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I
would first like to thank you, Madam President, for
organizing this important meeting. I would also like
to express my appreciation to the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and to the Senior United Nations
System Coordinator for Ebola, Dr. Nabarro; and to the
Director-General of the World Health Organization,
Ms. Margaret Chan; and the representative of Medecins
Sans Frontieres, Mr. Jackson Niamah, for their
important briefings.

The spread of Ebola, which is ravaging in Liberia,
Sierra Leone and Guinea and is spreading in an
unprecedented way, has drawn attention to the need to
adopt general methods to deal with major epidemics.
The international community has never seen this kind
of epidemic spread so quickly in cities and rural areas
with such an exponential, complicated impact. That
means that there is a crisis in the countries affected
and on the African continent as well. As that affects
the international community, the challenge of Ebola,
which is causing grave loss of human life, has appeared
at a time when Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone have
reached political stability after many years of suffering,
owing to drought, civil war and conflict. The crisis
has grown exponentially. Each contamination causes
new cases, and health care workers are dealing with
difficult challenges. Care for the sick and burial of
those who have died have themselves become extremely
dangerous.

The crisis, moreover, has had a serious economic
and social impact. Despite the dangers, given our
belief in regard to the principles of the United Nations,
Jordan is playing its role in Liberia. Therefore, we have
deployed over 200 trained police officers, as well as
12 observers. Three observers will depart next week and
three others have been appointed to depart. That is part
of our involvement in the international effort, because
Jordan is trying to protect the Jordanian contingent to
ensure that it is not contaminated, which is beyond the
protections given by the United Nations with respect to
health care personnel. To stop the epidemic, we need
to take exceptional and coordinated measures and to
coordinate our response with the United Nations. In that
regard, we appreciate the initiative of the Secretary-
General to send a health mission to begin work on
29 September.

Finally, we would like to highlight the fact that we
need to give priority to preventive measures to stem
the spread of the epidemic. Jordan encourages the
international community to continue its immediate
assistance to the Governments affected in West Africa
in their efforts to resume the gains of development that
have been undermined by the spread of the epidemic.

