Mr. Allam-mi (Chad) (spoke in French): First, I
would like to take this opportunity to congratulate you,
Sir, on your accession to the presidency of the Council
for the month of April. Allow me also to greet the
Assistant Secretary-General and to stress the great
interest with which the Government of Chad heard his
briefing. It is also my pleasure to welcome the
statement of the Czech Republic presidency of the
European Union and to express yet again the gratitude
of my country to the European Union, which has
responded to our expectations and those of the
humanitarian community by protecting, in the best
possible manner, the people affected by the insecurity
in the eastern part of our country. On 15 March, the
authority of European Union-led (EUFOR) military
force in Chad and the Central African Republic was
transferred to the United Nations, to the satisfaction of
all. We are pleased to note the acknowledgement by the
Secretary-General in his report (S/2009/199) of the
cooperation of the Chadian Government, which
allowed the transfer of authority to take place in the
best possible conditions. We reiterate our willingness
to pursue that cooperation with the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad
(MINURCAT) so that it may effectively accomplish its
mandate in the East of our country.

Turning to the report of the Secretary-General,
my Government has instructed me to make some
observations.
We wish to reassure the Secretary-General of
Chad's unwavering will to resolve its internal
problems. That is why we cannot understand why it is
stressed in paragraph 62 of the report that
implementation of the political agreement of 13 August
2007 has reached an impasse. Unfortunately, some
have been quick to bring up only that point of the
report in order to dramatize the political situation in
Chad. There have been difficulties, to be sure, but they
have already been overcome thanks to the mediation of
partners. A compromise was found between the parties
on a parliamentary amendment of the statute of the
National Independent Electoral Commission to ensure
that its independence could not be contested. It must be
recalled that the Commission's membership is based on
parity - 15 members of the majority and 15 of the
opposition, while its presiding officer must be
appointed by consensus among all parties. All
provisions have been made for the population census to
begin on 20 May 2009 with a View to organizing free
and transparent elections.

As for national reconciliation with the so-called
political and military elements, the Government is
doing its best to that end. Now that the implementation
of the political agreement on the national issue to
which I have just referred is on the right track, it is for
those whom the report mistakenly refers to as armed
opposition to renounce the use of force and to return to
the country in compliance with the Sirte agreement of
25 October 2007, instead of rejecting it on the pretext
of its supposed obsolescence. Those so-called
opposition groups would thus contribute to
consolidating the rule of democratic law, to which we
expect them to display genuine commitment by
adhering to the political agreement of 13 August 2007.
Perhaps, however, we should not dream too much,
since we know that they are not free to choose that
route, which goes against the Machiavellian schemes
of their patron. That is why we call them mercenaries
paid by our neighbour, and not "opposition".

We are cheered by the reference in paragraph 13
of the report to the fact that they have "continued to
consolidate in West Darfur near El Geneina", in the
Sudan. That is why we have taken the military steps
necessary to respond to any eventuality. We cannot be
blamed for defending ourselves. However, not to draw
undue attention to the situation, contrary to what the
report says, the Chadian Minister for External
Relations, Moussa Faki, at a meeting informed some
diplomats of that, but individually and not all. I also
alerted the Secretary-General, who sent his assistant
responsible for peacekeeping operations to meet me.

We would also like to reassure the Secretary-
General and the Security Council that taking measures
to defend ourselves militarily does not obviate our
determination to normalize our relations with our
neighbour, the Sudan, with which we have historic,
multifaceted and unavoidable neighbourly relations.
That is why we reiterate our commitment to respecting
the provisions of all peace agreements - from Tripoli
to Dakar and Riyadh - that link us to those brother
countries. We are ready, if it asks, to help the Sudan
settle the Darfur crisis as we have in the past, before it
betrays us by arming Chadians against its own
rebellion and then against the legitimate institutions of
the country. We hope that the Chadian-Sudanese peace
talks, to be held soon in Doha, Qatar, will open the way
for a true normalization of our relations.

Allow me also to refer to some specific points of
the report.

With regard to the document establishing
MINURCAT II, we cannot accept a document prepared
in advance, a sort of ready-to-wear item that we are
asked to take or leave. For our part, we propose that
negotiations take place in N'Djamena between the
competent authorities and the Secretariat to reach a
legal and administrative agreement that takes into
account the sovereignty and concerns of Chad, without
of course losing sight of the model status-of-forces
agreement annexed to the report of the Secretary-
General contained in document A/45/594.

Furthermore, the Chadian authorities deplore the
fact that they did not know about the 15 patrols and
military escorts that the report mentions in
paragraph 28, since the MINURCAT liaison officer
never mentioned such patrols during meetings of liaison
officers, as the EUFOR liaison officer did in the past.

With regard to paragraph 34 of the report on the
question of installing a VHF radio communications
system, we do not understand the delay, since on
5 February 2009 we were promised that the
communications system would be installed by the end
of February. Since the communications system is still
not operational, the patrol and escort missions of the
Detachement inte'gre de securite (DIS) elements are
handicapped because they are cut off from their base.
Still with regard to the DIS, it should be noted that
there are serious logistics difficulties, as paragraph 34
of the report stresses. It is particularly under-equipped
in vehicles, although we had placed great hope in

logistics financing from the Trust Fund. It therefore
seems to us untimely to suggest, as in paragraph 58 of
the report, the transitioning of DIS from a donor-
supported initiative to one financed by the Government
of Chad. Is my Government not already making
sufficient financial efforts ensuring the security of the
border?

Moreover, unlike the indications of paragraph 49
of the report, the Chadian authorities are completely
unaware of the onset of construction work for two new
parking spaces at the airport of Abeche' and the
international airport in N'Djamena, which at present
are completely overtaken by the military activities of
the Chadian national army, the United Nations, and
even Operation Epervier. It is absolutely necessary that
the parking spaces at the airport of Abeche and the
international airport in N'Djamena be built.

Finally, in general, there is a real need for
consultation and close cooperation between
MINURCAT and the Chadian authorities responsible
for implementing the issues covered by the report in its
sections IV B on justice and prisons, IV C on human
rights, IV D on civil affairs and IV E on gender. The
success of the Mission and the sovereignty of Chad
depend on that.

All our observations have been made in a
constructive spirit so that MINURCAT can deploy in
eastern Chad taking into account the realities of the
country. In other words, my country once again
reiterates before the Security Council its willingness to
cooperate fully and on a sound footing with the United
Nations for the fulfilment of its noble mission to
maintain peace and security in the region in general
and in eastern Chad and north-eastern Central African
Republic in particular.
8
