Mr. Mejdoub (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I will
follow the example of the three speakers who spoke
before me earlier this afternoon and be as brief as
possible.

Tunisia wishes to thank Mr. Petritsch and Mr.
Klein for their statements and welcomes the positive
developments in the overall situation, which promote
inter-ethnic reconciliation and which are laying the
foundations for stable, democratic institutions for the
future of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

There are a few recent and salient points that I
should like to raise regarding developments in Bosnia
and Herzegovina that we feel are of particular
importance.

The first point is the adoption of the election law.
This is a decisive stage which, because of its nature
and its symbolic value, opens the way to ethnic
reconciliation and is preparing Bosnia and Herzegovina
for a pluralistic and truly democratic political life, with
a view to integration in the European process.

We also welcome the establishment of a
Consultative Partnership Forum that brings together the
Office of the High Representative and the Council of
Ministers. This forum will be a place for consultation
and coordination, with a View to guiding the decision-
making process in the direction of the best interests of
all of the inhabitants of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Secondly, I turn to economic reform, which plays
an important role in ensuring the success of the entire
operation undertaken to date by the international
community in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In fact,
economic growth engenders social well-being, which
in turn leads to constructive activities. We believe,
therefore, that in rebalancing the budget account should
be taken of the social aspect of this question. It is also
urgent to seek structural solutions to the problem of
unemployment. Indeed, the creation of employment
can strengthen social coherence and facilitate ethnic
reconciliation.

Thirdly, we welcome the positive results achieved
in the field of judicial reform. It is vital that the
judiciary be independent, impartial and non-
discriminatory with respect to the entire Bosnian
population. Defendants must be firmly convinced that
judges are neutral. It is in this spirit that we welcome
the signing of the memorandum of understanding
between the two entities that are responsible for the
appointment of judges and prosecutors.

The fourth point concerns the return of minority
communities. This is the true indicator of the success
of the entire operation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
are pleased that, in the first half of 2001, there has been
a sizeable increase in the number of returning minority
members.

Fifthly, Tunisia attaches particular importance to
reform and to the modernization of the educational
system, whose ultimate goal is to promote tolerance
and inter-ethnic dialogue. We welcome the adoption of
a shared strategy for the modernization of education,
and we encourage the parties to continue their efforts
to fully implement the reform. The same applies to the
inter-religious dialogue, whose revitalization the High
Representative rightly called for.

In conclusion - and I promised that I would be
brief- I should like to say that, in spite of all of the
successes that have been achieved in various fields, we
believe that Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to
require solid support from the international community.
That support is vital in order to strengthen the entire
structure. We reiterate our position that any premature
disengagement would bear clear risks for the entire
region. It is essential to devise a careful exit strategy
for any disengagement, taking into account the overall
situation in the Balkans and the capacity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to handle its own affairs.

