Mr. Cho Tae-yul (Republic of Korea): Let me also
begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for convening this
emergency meeting of the Security Council on North
Korea's long-range ballistic missile launch conducted
at dawn, local time, on 29 November. I am grateful
for this opportunity to take part in the discussion on
this urgent and important issue. My special thanks go
to Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman for his
briefing, and to you, Mr. President, for your 90-day
report as Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006).

North Korea broke a 75-day pause in its provocations
with yet another ballistic missile launch yesterday. We
are taken aback by the degree of recklessness on the
part of North Korea, acting in defiance of the entire
international community, which has been sending out
an unprecedentedly strong and unified message of
warning to stop its further provocations.

Countries across virtually all continents have
recently taken robust and biting measures against
North Korea's illicit programme of weapons of mass
destruction - not only through the full and thorough
implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions but also through other available voluntary
means, such curtailing commercial transactions and
downsizing diplomatic presence and relations with
North Korea. It was amid those concerted actions by the
whole international community that North Korea came
up with yet another launch of a ballistic missile, with
intercontinental range. We simply cannot, and should
not, take such a reckless provocation less seriously than
any other previous provocations by North Korea.

For the past two months, some viewed the
absence of North Korean provocations following
the Hwasong-12 launch on 15 September as possibly
indicating that North Korea was finally awakened to a
stark reality. Others had high hopes that North Korea
would continue its restraint in the spirit of the Olympic
Truce resolution, which we adopted by consensus at
the General Assembly earlier this month (General Assembly resolution 72/6). Some even saw a possible
window of opportunity, from that relatively long period
of silence, that might tip the balance towards an easing
of the tensions on the Korean peninsula. Those well-
intentioned hopes may well evaporate following North
Korea's missile provocation yesterday.

But it is premature to give up hope. Our road
towards the denuclearization of North Korea has once
again proved to be extremely bumpy, but we should not
stop here due to frustration. As narrow as it maybe,
there is still a window of opportunity. We need to
remain patient and persistent in our diplomatic efforts
to bring North Korea back to the negotiating table.
The Security Council should never stop sending out an
unequivocal message that a nuclear-armed North Korea
with ballistic missile capability is unacceptable. The
Council should also renew its unwavering commitment
to stepping up sanctions and pressure until North Korea
finally abandons its nuclear and missile programmes.

For its part, North Korea must not take lightly the
message coming out of today's meeting of the Security
Council. If North Korea continues to underestimate
or miscalculate the firm resolve of the international
community, it will turn out to be a grave mistake.
North Korea should be awakened from its false sense
of security. We once again urge Pyongyang to take
advantage of the rapidly closing window of opportunity
to resolve its nuclear problem peacefully, and thereby
ensure its security. As has been repeatedly emphasized
loud and clear, the international community is ready to
provide a better future for North Korea - if it makes
the right choice.

The meeting rose at 6.50 pm.
