Mr. Jallow: The updated Completion Strategy
document of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) reflecting the information available to
us as at 15 May 2007 and which has been submitted to
the Security Council reflects the continued progress of
the Tribunal in the implementation of the completion
of our mandate, as set out in resolutions 1503 (2003)
and 1534 (2004).

Our commitment to and our confidence in
attaining the goals of the Completion Strategy remain
firm and unwavering. We continue to believe these
goals to be reachable, and we shall continue to work
towards that end. The President of the ICTR, Judge
Byron, has given the Council a synopsis of where we
stand at the moment. I just wish to add that, with the
conclusion of evidentiary proceedings in the case of
the Prosecutor vs. Bagosora and three others - what
we refer to as the Military I case - a major case of the
ICTR is now reaching finality and awaiting only
judgement. The number of accused persons standing
trial has thus been reduced to 22, with all but five of
them charged in multi-accused trials. All those cases
are anticipated to conclude between 2007 and 2008.
There is a possibility of a case or two which might be
in progress in 2008 extending over to early 2009 for
completion.

Since our last report to the Security Council, the
number of detainees awaiting trial has been reduced
from 11 to 8. We believe that, after making allowances
for possible guilty pleas and for possible referrals of
some of those cases to national jurisdictions for trial,
what remains of this category of cases can be disposed
of by the end of 2008. The negotiation and conclusion
of guilty pleas with accused persons continues to be an
important element of the prosecution strategy, and we
anticipate a positive outcome in that respect shortly.
The Office of the Prosecutor is also actively engaged in
ensuring the trial readiness of these cases in order to be
able to proceed with the trials as soon as the
programme of the Trial Chambers so permits.

The Council will recall that on previous
occasions I have indicated plans to request the referral
of the cases of five detainees to a national jurisdiction
for trial. That figure has now been reduced to a
maximum of three detainees whose cases may be so
referred. The adjustment is due to the reduction in the
number of detainees who are now awaiting trial.
I also reported to the Council earlier that the
Office of the Prosecutor has already handed over some
30 files of suspects to Rwanda and to other
jurisdictions for further investigation and possible
prosecution by the national authorities of the States
concerned. These cases relate to persons who were
under investigation but who had not yet been indicted
and whose cases we believe require further attention
and action where possible.

I am pleased to report that, since my last report to
the Council, in December (see S/PV.5594), the referral
of cases of indictees under rule 11 bis of the ICTR
Rules to national jurisdictions for trial has now started.
After the initial setback in the application for the
transfer of the case of Michel Bagaragaza to Norway,
the judges of the ICTR finally acceded to the request of
the Prosecutor to refer this case to the Kingdom of the
Netherlands, which had agreed to accept the case. The
accused and the case file of the Prosecutor have now
been handed over to the Dutch authorities. We are
immensely indebted to the Kingdom of the Netherlands
for its cooperation in this and several other matters.

Rwanda remains the main possible destination for
the referral of cases under rule 11 bis for prosecution.
The number of cases of indictees which remain for
referral is in the region of 15, comprising 12 of the 18
fugitives and three of the detainees awaiting trial.

Six of the 18 fugitives - including Felicien
Kabuga, businessman and supporter of the Mouvement
re'publicain national pour le developpement et la
democratic (MRND), the then-ruling political party;
Protais Mpiranya, former Commander of the
Presidential Guard; Augustin Bizimana, former
Minister of Defence; Callixte Nzabonimana, former
Minister of Youth; Augustin Ngirabatware, former
Minister of Planning; and Idelphonse Nizeyimana, a
former senior military official - have been earmarked
for trial in the ICTR because of their respective
leadership roles in the genocide of 1994. It is important
for continued success of the campaign to combat
impunity worldwide that such persons of high standing
who bear responsibility for serious crimes not escape
the arm of the law. In the event that these persons are
arrested too late for their trials to conclude by the end
of 2008 at the ICTR, or in the event that they remain at
large and unarrested by that date, the Tribunal will
need guidance from the Council as to how their cases
should be dealt with. The solutions may include
authority for the ICTR to proceed with such cases
beyond the end of 2008 or the referral of these cases to
a national or other jurisdiction for trial.

It is important to stress, however, that if the ICTR
is to succeed in concluding the trials of these six top-
level fugitives in time, by the end of 2008, they - and
here I include Fe'licien Kabuga - need to be arrested
and placed in the custody of the Tribunal by the end of
2007. This will allow the necessary preliminary
procedures and arrangements to be made by the
Chambers and the parties to the case - that is, the
prosecution and the defence - before the
commencement of trials. There is therefore a need for
vigorous efforts by all concerned, including Member
States, to ensure their timely arrest and rendition to the
ICTR.

In my last report to the Security Council, I
briefed members on my discussions with officials and
ministers of the Government of Kenya, which
Government continues to assure me of its full
cooperation with regard to the arrest and transfer to the
ICTR of Felicien Kabuga. Since then, a joint effort has
been under way between ICTR officials and the Kenya
police. That effort disclosed that Kabuga was present at
various times in Kenya up to October-November 2006
and that he has several business interests in that
country as well. An independent source has confirmed
to the ICTR that Kabuga was indeed seen in Nairobi as
late as April 2007. We remain convinced, on the basis
of these intelligence reports, that Kabuga continues to
be present in Nairobi and carry on business in the
country. The joint investigations between the ICTR and
Kenya continue to point in that direction. Welcome as
they are, however, these joint efforts have not led us to
our goal, which is his arrest and transfer to the
Tribunal. These inquiries are not an end in themselves;
they are useful only if they lead us to that ultimate
goal. It is necessary now that the Security Council and
the Members of the United Nations bring their
influence to bear on the Government of Kenya for it to
live up to its international legal obligations by arresting
Felicien Kabuga and handing him over to face justice
at the ICTR. As I indicated earlier, if we wish to try
him at the ICTR we need to have him arrested and
transferred by the end of this year.

Most of the remaining fugitives are reported to be
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Their arrest,
particularly the arrest of those earmarked for trial in
Arusha, must remain a priority. The cooperation of the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and of other States in the Great Lakes region continues
to be sought by the ICTR to that end. I believe also that
a broader view of the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo which would facilitate collaboration among
that mission, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the ICTR would help us achieve good results.

Rwanda has recently enacted legislation, which
has now come into force, providing for the trial of
cases referred from the ICTR and from States for
offences related to the 1994 genocide. That law
excludes the application of the death penalty in such
cases and provides extensive guarantees for fair trial
similar to the provisions of the ICTR Statute. The
Office of the Prosecutor has secured the agreement of
the African Commission on Human and Peoples'
Rights to monitor the trial of any case referred by the
Tribunal to Rwanda. Donor assistance, notably from
the European Union, Canada and the United States of
America, and technical assistance from the ICTR
continue to provide for capacity-building for the
Rwanda legal system. These significant developments
have, in my view, made Rwanda eligible for referral of
cases under rule 11 bis of the ICTR Rules, relating to
the referral of cases of indictees. The final decision, of
course, rests with the judges; the role of the Prosecutor
is to make a request. Accordingly, my Office, a week
ago, filed the first rule 11 bis request for the referral of
the case of an indictee to Rwanda. Should the outcome
prove favourable to the Prosecution, a number of other
similar requests will follow. In the event that these rule
11 bis requests to Rwanda are not approved, I shall
revert to the Security Council.

I also wish to inform the Council that my Office
also filed, a week ago, a request for the referral of the
cases of two other indictees to France for trial. These
are indictees who are resident in France, which has
jurisdiction over the cases and which has also agreed to
receive the cases from the ICTR. We await the
decisions of the Trial Chamber on the requests. I would
like to place on record our appreciation for the
invaluable support that France has provided to the
Tribunal over all these years.

Investigation of the allegations against members
of the Rwanda Patriotic Front, which we had hoped to
conclude by now, need to be continued until we are in a
position to finish that aspect of our mandate.
Rwanda continues to cooperate effectively with
the ICTR. Its support in facilitating access to
witnesses, to sites and to evidence has contributed
significantly to the steady pace of the trials in Arusha.

Staff retention continues, as we reported at the
December 2006 meeting, to be a matter of serious
concern as we progress to completion. The challenge of
proper completion can best be met with the aid of
competent, dedicated, well-motivated staff. We thus
wish to emphasize the need for early approval of
measures and incentives which would enable the
Tribunal to retain the staff it requires for completion of
its mandate.

Let me conclude by conveying our appreciation
for the immense support we continue to receive from
the Security Council and other organs of the United
Nations, as well as from the Secretariat and Member
States. Such support and cooperation are absolutely
essential for the success of the Tribunal's mandate and
for furthering the cause of international criminal
justice.

