Mr. Simonovie: I would like to thank you, Madam
President, for this opportunity to brief the Security
Council. I am very happy that Ambassador Apakan
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, with whom we cooperate closely in our field
activities, is also with us today via video-teleconference.

The assessment of the situation in Ukraine of the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR) is based on reports from the United Nations
Human Rights Monitoring Mission over the past
20 months, both in Government-controlled areas and in
areas controlled by the armed groups. The Mission has
also continued to monitor the human rights situation
in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea, whose status
was defined in General Assembly resolution 68/262,
on the territorial integrity of Ukraine. The Mission's
twelfth report, covering the period between 16 August
and 15 November, was released two days ago.

The past several months were marked by a
considerable decrease in hostilities. Alhough the
hostilities have not ceased completely, the shelling
of populated areas has decreased dramatically. The
number of civilian casualties, especially those caused
by shelling, has also significantly decreased. The total
number ofcivilian deaths recorded by the Human Rights
Monitoring Mission in Ukraine between 16 August
and 15 November was 47. That is a sharp decrease as
compared with the previous reporting period from
16 May to 15 August, when we recorded that 105
persons had been killed. We are now seeing the longest
period since the beginning of the conflict in which no
large-scale indiscriminate shelling of populated areas
is taking place, and reports about people killed by
shelling are unusual.
However, people continue to die, increasingly from
explosive remnants of war and improvised explosive
devices. The percentage of civilian casualties including
deaths and injuries caused by explosive remnants
and improvised devices in recent months stands at
about 80 per cent. We should also not forget that the
current relative calm in the conflict area may be just
another manifestation of the repeated pattern we have
been observing in Ukraine since the beginning of
the conflict * a surge in hostilities accompanied by
massive civilian casualties, followed by a ceasefire
agreement, which is in turn followed by a decrease
in hostilities and civilian casualties, and then a new
escalation of hostilities begins. That must not happen
again. The overall death toll ofthe conflict is already too
high. Between the start of the hostilities, in mid-April
2014 and 7 December 2015, at least 9,115 people were
killed in the conflict area of eastern Ukraine. As in
the past, that is a conservative estimate. The real
number of conflict-related casualties is considered to
be higher. Looking ahead, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights sees
the implementation of the Minsk agreements as the
only viable strategy for achieving a peaceful solution
in Donbas, which, in turn, is a key for resolving the
human rights crisis in Ukraine.

In the area ofhostilities, the continued avoidance of
shelling of populated areas remains a top priority, along
with mine action activities. All the parties involved
in the hostilities should investigate all incidents of
civilian casualties caused by military action, and are
encouraged to establish civilian casualty mitigation
cells. There is an urgent need for extensive mine action
activities, including the establishment of appropriate
coordination mechanisms, mapping and mine-risk
education and awareness on both sides of the contact
line. In that regard, we are glad to see that discussion
on coordinated demining efforts is progressing in the
Trilateral Contact Group on Ukraine. The work of
the Mine Action Sub-Cluster supports the efforts to
decrease risks for the local population.

One of the most gruesome legacies of the conflict
is that of awaiting action on the search for missing
persons and the recovery and identification of mortal
remains. According to the Ministry of Internal Affairs
okaraine, as of 18 September, over 3,000 people were
still registered as missing. In the search for them, three
factors seem to be essential. First, there needs to be
better internal coordination of the governmental bodies
of Ukraine, in particular the Ministry of Internal
Affairs, the security service and the Ministry of
Defence. It would serve as a one-stop shop mechanism
for the relatives of missing persons. Secondly, civil
society should be more actively engaged in the effort.
Last, but not least, interaction with the relevant actors
on the territories controlled by the armed groups is
needed.

Let me now turn to the situation in the east. Even
with the relative military calm on the ground, the lack
of the rule of law makes the human rights situation of
the estimated 2.7 million people living in the territories
controlled by the self-proclaimed Donetsk people's
republic and Luhansk people's republic very difficult.
Reports of human rights abuses in those territories
persist, including those related to killings, torture
and ill-treatment, illegal detention and forced labour.
The rights of local residents are still not effectively
protected, and there is a lack of accountability or
possible redress. The places of detention maintained
by the armed groups remain virtually inaccessible to
independent oversight, and international organizations,
including the Human Rights Monitoring Mission, do
not have access to detainees. Those are the places Where
human rights abuses are most frequently reported, and
where victims are most vulnerable.

Let me give an example. On 15 October, the
Human Rights Monitoring Mission interviewed a man
who had spent a year as a captive of the armed groups.
He described in detail the conditions in the former
premises of the security service of Ukraine in Donetsk,
namely, overcrowding, insufficient nutrition and lack
of adequate medical treatment, as well as ill-treatment,
torture and forced labour. He also reported numerous
incidents when he and other detainees, including
women, were tortured - mock executions, beatings
and electrocution.

Residents of the territories controlled by the armed
groups also continue to face difficulties in exercising
their economic and social rights, especially with respect
to access to quality medical care, accommodation,
social services and benefits, as well as insecurity related
to housing, land and property rights, including possible
confiscation and lack of compensatory mechanisms for
damaged, seized or looted property. The onset ofwinter
and the impediments encountered by humanitarian
organizations could worsen the situation.

A person recently interviewed by the OHCHR team
in Donetsk said, "we are afraid to give birth and we
are afraid to die". Owing to the further deterioration
of the economic situation and the lack of employment
opportunities, even a funeral has become unaffordable
for some families. In addition, civil registration
documents - birth, death, marriage, divorce and
medical certificates f issued in the territories
controlled by armed groups are considered invalid
by Ukrainian authorities. That precludes people from
accessing basic social and medical services. I have
heard numerous examples of the hardships faced by
people to validate their documents or obtain new ones.
There are concerns that children being born now may
remain stateless. Immediate steps need to be taken to
address that problem.

OHCHR also continues to observe pervasive self-
censorship and an inability for media professionals to
exercise any type of freedom of expression in the east.
We also observe that rallies to challenge the policies
of the self-proclaimed Donetsk people's republic and
of the Luhansk people's republic have been extremely
rare because people report being afraid to assemble
and speak out. The majority of civil society actors and
human rights defenders are unable to operate.

Restrictions on movement across the contact line
imposed by the Government of Ukraine in January
remain one of the major challenges for people living in
the conflict area. That has led to their sense ofincreased
isolation, as well as to their impeded access to medical
care and social benefits, and disrupted family links.
People often spend hours, and even nights, waiting in
queues to pass the series of checkpoints, with limited
access to water and sanitation facilities. The presence
of mines alongside the official transport corridors is an
additional security risk. The efforts of the Government
of Ukraine to restore law and order in the conflict zone
continue to be accompanied by allegations of enforced
disappearances, arbitrary and incommunicado
detention, as well as torture and ill-treatment of people
suspected of trespassing against the territorial integrity
or engaging in terrorism or believed to be supporters
of the self-proclaimed Donetsk people's republic and
the Luhansk people's republic. Elements of the security
service of Ukraine appear to enjoy a high degree of
impunity, with rare investigations into allegations
involving them. The conduct of those elements of
Ukrainian law enforcement that are under the Ministry
of Internal Affairs is also of concern.

OHCHR reiterates that a proper and prompt
investigation of every single reported case of a serious

violation of international human rights law and
international humanitarian law by Ukrainian military
or law-enforcement elements should be carried out;
perpetrators should be brought to justice; and victims
should receive compensation.

Accountability has yet to be achieved for the
killing of protesters and other human rights violations
committed during the Maidan events in Kyiv, from
November 2013 to February 2014. Similarly, there has
been no progress in ensuring accountability for the
deaths of 48 people during the violence of2 May 2014
in Odessa, and criminal proceedings so far do not seem
impartial.

Looking back, the human rights situation in
Crimea has shown no sign of improvement in 2015.
Fundamentally, it is still not possible to express
views that differ from those promoted by the de facto
authorities and the Russian Federation. Those perceived
as being in opposition are intimidated and persecuted.
The law-enforcement and justice systems are used
as instruments of repression. Crimean Tatar media
outlets have been shut down. Seven Crimean Tatars
who participated in a pro-Ukrainian demonstration in
February 2014 have been arrested this year. No progress
has been made in the investigations into the murder of
Reshat Ametov or the disappearance of pro-Ukrainian
activists in 2014.

A recent development that brought additional
attention to Crimea has been a trade blockade initiated
in September by the Crimean Tatar leadership in
Ukraine. A further development was the damage
caused to four transmission towers located in mainland
Ukraine that supply electricity to Crimea. While the
de facto authorities of Crimea have redirected the
existing energy resources to the most critical social
infrastructure, such as hospitals, the human rights
impact of this situation has been particularly acute for
people living alone, with limited mobility and on a low
income in remote areas.

On the positive side, during the reporting period,

the Government of Ukraine adopted a national human
rights strategy and started to develop an action plan
to implement it. Ukraine extended the jurisdiction of
the International Criminal Court, which applied to the
period of the Maidan events, for crimes committed
after 20 February 2014, including, therefore, in
relation to the violence of 2 May 2014 in Odessa and
the conflict in the east. Constitutional amendments on
decentralization were also passed on first reading. All
of these are welcome developments.

Finally, a few words on the way forward. In
the territories controlled by the armed groups, the
priority is the release of all illegally detained persons
and the provision of independent monitors, including
international organizations, with access to places
of detention. In this context, we were glad to learn
about the recent statement made by Martin Sajdik, the
Special Representative of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe Chairperson-in-Office in
Ukraine and in the Trilateral Contact Group on Ukraine,
who said that it was very important to achieve progress
in the release of detainees by the New Year. We have
advocated for an "all for all" release to be included in
the Minsk agreements and now urge its full and speedy
implementation.

Regarding the Government of Ukraine, OHCHR
would prioritize justice and accountability for the
violations committed during the Maidan events, the
violence on 2 May 2014 in Odessa, and the human
rights violations reported to have been committed in
the armed-conflict area.

We also call on the Government of Ukraine to
reconsider the restrictions on freedom of movement
across the contact line imposed in January 2015. We
also look forward to seeing the implementation by the
Government of the decision of the High Administrative
Court of Ukraine to resume the payment of pensions
and benefits for people living in areas controlled by the
armed groups and the adoption of amendments to the
law on internally displaced persons.

As an additional human rights and humanitarian-
centred confidence-building measure, we would
encourage the Government of Ukraine to recognize
civil registration documents such as birth, death and
marriage certificates issued in territories controlled by
the armed groups, in line with the jurisprudence of the
International Court of Justice and the European Court
of Human Rights.

With respect to Crimea, we reiterate the importance
of OHCHR monitors being granted access to the
peninsula in order to be able to effectively monitor,
on the spot, the human rights situation, which, as I
mentioned earlier, shows no signs of improvement.

The sentencing of Oleg Sentsov and Aleksandr
Kolchenko are recent examples of the failure to uphold
fair-trial principles. Urgent steps must be taken to
address all disappearance cases, as well as the killing
of Reshat Ametov in March 2014.

We also call for the unimpeded exercise of the
freedoms of peaceful assembly, expression and
religion by all Crimean residents and urge the de facto
authorities and the Russian Federation to accept and
protect all non-violent forms of expression, including
cultural and language rights.

OHCHR will continue to monitor and advocate
on the human rights situation in Ukraine in 2016. We
are planning to look into particular human rights,
especially those that are most at risk, and expand our
presence in the east with the opening of the new office
in Kramatorsk, and by increasing the number of staff in
Donetsk and Luhansk. We also stand ready to facilitate
a number of visits to the country under the special
procedures provisions, so that the Council can have a
better and more comprehensive vision of the human
rights situation.

Last but not least, we are planning to support the
implementation of the national human rights action plan,
working hand in hand with the Council of Europe, the
UnitedNations system in Ukraine and otherinternational
partners to conduct additional technical-assistance
activities so as to build the capacities of national and
local actors, including the Ombudsman's Office and
non-governmental organizations, in order to contribute
to strengthened human rights protection for all. The
deterioration of the economic situation will make the
necessary reforms more difficult, and international
support will be needed for their success.

