I would like to thank Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham, Acting Assistant Secretary- General for Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator, for their briefings on recent developments in the security situation in Yemen. Last month we welcomed not only the unilateral ceasefire announced by the coalition but also the prospects for a comprehensive cessation of hostilities in Yemen through the very encouraging peace initiative proposed by the Assistant Secretary- General for Humanitarian Affairs. The current situation on the ground, marked in particular by the declaration of the Southern Transitional Council proclaiming the autonomy of southern Yemen, is deeply worrisome and reminds us that our hopes were short-lived and that our mobilization must be even stronger. My delegation calls on all parties to respect the various agreements previously reached and calls on them to resume dialogue. Today more than ever, the parties in conflict in Yemen must convince themselves that military force will not resolve their differences. In the light of the events happening in the south and with a view to future peace negotiations, a more inclusive approach is needed to achieve a comprehensive and lasting settlement of the conflict that involves, in addition to the Government and the Houthi, the other major representative groups in the country. We also call on regional actors and Council members with influence on the parties to spare no effort to help move the ceasefire talks forward. With regard to the humanitarian situation, my delegation remains concerned about the consequences of the recent floods in several parts of the country, which have caused loss of life and injuries and made thousands of families homeless. The beginning of the rainy season in Yemen could make the situation of a number of families that have already been displaced and exposed to various diseases, including the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), even more difficult. The continued fighting in the country, particularly in Aden, Ma'rib and Al-Bayda, despite the COVID-19 pandemic, could slow down the flow of basic products and medicines throughout the country and worsen the already difficult living conditions of thousands of families. Yemen will not be able to cope with war, epidemics and floods at the same time. That is why we urge the warring parties to take greater responsibility to put an end to the military offensives. We call on them to lift the restrictions on the movement of humanitarian agencies so as to provide aid and assistance to a population that has been suffering for years from war and whose level of general immunity is decreasing day by day. We appeal to the international community and to the Security Council in particular to spare no effort to prevent the worsening of one of the most catastrophic humanitarian situations the world has ever experienced. In conclusion, the Niger reaffirms its full support for Martin Griffiths's continued efforts to silence the guns in Yemen and to bring the parties to make peace in the country.
