Mr. Ayewah (Nigeria): Mr. President, permit me at
the outset to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency for this month. We are already witness to the
efficient and competent manner in which you are directing
the affairs of our Council. Let me also seize this
opportunity to express my delegation's appreciation to
Ambassador Jean-Bernard Merimee, the Permanent
Representative of France, for the able manner in which he
presided over the Council's affairs in the month of May.

My delegation wishes to thank the Secretary-General
for a very comprehensive report on the situation in Rwanda,
on the efforts of the international community and, in
particular, on those of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR) in assisting the
Government and people of Rwanda in the task of national
reconciliation, reconstruction and rehabilitation with which
they have been faced since the tragic events of last year.

In the political field, one must commend the efforts of
the Government in restoring a climate of relative stability
in the country. The commitment of the Government to
national reconciliation is demonstrated, in our view, by its
continued adherence to the relevant elements of the Arusha
Accord. It is our duty as members of the international
community to assist in this process. My delegation,
however, notes with concern the observations made by the
Secretary-General in his report about some negative
developments that have stalled the process of national
reconciliation. These include grossly overcrowded prisons,
the lack of an effective judicial system, arbitrary arrests and
tension over property rights. There has also been a virtual
halt to the return of refugees and internally displaced
persons to their home communities. The most acute
problem, however, is the militarization of certain camps
outside Rwanda and the arms build-up within them, coupled
with the related phenomenon of cross-border armed
infiltration from those camps into Rwanda. These have all
combined to make a tenuous security situation even more
grim.

Unfortunately, there has also been increasing agitation
against the international community in general and the
United Nations in particular for what is perceived by some
in Rwanda - perhaps with some justification - as the
abandonment of Rwanda in its time of greatest need during
the genocide of last year and the subsequent inability of the
international community to deliver on its promises to help
the Government stand on its feet.

Nevertheless, there is no doubt that the presence of
UNAMIR has helped contribute to an atmosphere of
security and confidence throughout the country. The
efforts of the international community continue to be
crucial in the process of rebuilding Rwanda. That is why
my delegation has expressed its disquiet about the
reported open hostility that has been shown to
UNAMIR'S personnel in recent months. We believe that
it is the responsibility of the Government of Rwanda to
address this problem effectively.

The Security Council must in turn address the
serious issues of the militarization of the camps, the arms
build-up and cross-border infiltration.

I believe that the urgency of the problem was well
emphasized by the Secretary-General's Special
Representative in his briefing to the Security Council. In
this context, we view the measures spelled out in
paragraphs 4, 5 and 6 of the draft resolution as a first
step. After we have received the report of the Secretary-
General, within the next 30 days, we believe that we may
have to come back to the matter and proffer more drastic
measures for solving the problem - a problem which, if
not seriously and promptly addressed, could soon lead to
an explosive situation that could engulf not only Rwanda
but also some of the neighbouring countries.

In the area of reconstruction and rehabilitation, one
cannot fail to note how the lack of resources and the
absence of the requisite infrastructure have hampered the
efforts of the Government. If we are to secure the peace
in Rwanda - which at the moment is tenuous - we
have to find ways and means of addressing this problem.
As my delegation has stated on a number of occasions, it
is no use asking the Government to create favourable
conditions for the return of refugees if it does not have
the means to do so. In this context, we repeat our appeal
to members of the international community to assist the
Government with financial resources. This is a situation
where we feel some conditionalities may have to be
waived, at least temporarily, to enable the Government to
obtain this financial assistance in a timely fashion. We
therefore welcome the call in the seventh preambular
paragraph of the draft resolution for the accelerated
disbursement of international assistance.

National reconciliation, as my delegation has stressed
on several occasions, remains essential to the process of
national healing in Rwanda. In this context, justice is a
key element, and the International Tribunal - which has
already begun to investigate cases - needs all the

 

support it can get from the international community to
achieve its goal. The national justice system also needs to
be revived, urgently.

With regard to the mandate of UNAMIR, we agree
with the recommendation that there is a need for an
adjustment in the mandate to take into account the changed
circumstances on the ground. There appears to be
agreement by all concerned that, in the light of the current
situation in Rwanda, the assistance of the United Nations
through UNAMIR should be focused on activities aimed at
building and consolidating an atmosphere of confidence and
trust among all Rwandese. In this regard, we note with
satisfaction that an understanding has been reached between
the Government of Rwanda and the United Nations on the
appropriate force level that could carry out these tasks. The
new force level, in our view, responds to the legitimate
concern of a sovereign State to take charge of its own
destiny, while taking cognizance of the imperatives of
effective implementation of an agreed mandate. Recent
experience has shown that providing our men in the field
with less than adequate resources would be
counterproductive with regard to attaining our desired
objectives.

In view of what I have said, my delegation will vote
in favour of the draft resolution and support the extension
of UNAMIR's mandate to 8 December 1995.

Finally, let me express our appreciation to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the excellent
work he is doing in Rwanda and to all UNAMIR personnel
for their service to the cause of peace and national
reconciliation in Rwanda.

