Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): We are grateful to you,
Mr. President, and to the briefers.

Just recently, the Council had an important occasion
and a prime opportunity to deliver our concerns
directly to the President of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Joseph Kabila. The political agreement of
18 October 2016 can be seen as an indication ofpolitical
will among a large part of the national stakeholders to
prevent the destabilization of the country.

At the same time, it is, in our opinion, only a starting
point in the long process of resolving accumulated
disagreements and problems among all political actors.
Therefore, the continuation of an inclusive dialogue
among all national stakeholders in order to hold free,
fair and credible, inclusive and transparent elections in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo should be the
next, obvious step. There is no other way to address this
already complicated situation.

If the situation descends into Violence, there
will be no winners, only losers. Ukraine calls on all
national stakeholders to continue the dialogue and find
common ground for a nationwide compromise as soon
as possible.

The deaths of protesters during the 19 and
20 September clashes this year are still fresh in our
memory. Thus, considering the information that is
incoming about preparations for public protests after
19 December, as was announced by some opposition
parties, we call for maximum restraint and urge the
Government to refrain from responding to provocative
acts with force, which would only aggravate the fragile
situation. Respect for human rights, particularly
the freedom of assembly, freedom of opinion and
expression, and equitable access to the media are of
paramount importance for creating an environment
conducive to the holding of future elections.

We call on all political actors to continue working
in a spirit of compromise to reach a swift and
consensual resolution of the current political crisis
and prevent further destabilization of the country after
19 December.

We expect that this message, as well as today's
statement by the President of the Security Council
(S/PRST/2016/18), will be heard by all parties
concerned. The perpetual cycle of violence has to be
broken; otherwise, our efforts will suffer the fate of the
infamous rock of Sisyphus.

In conclusion, I want to recall a recent example
that struck me deeply. In November, the United Nations
peacekeeping Facebook page posted information about
the excavation of an armoured fighting vehicle operated
by Malaysian peacekeepers stationed in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in the early 1960s. The vehicle,
inaugurated as a memorial to the first peacekeeping
operation, was termed "a tangible symbol of the
history ofpeacekeepers in the Congo". Below that post,
someone wrote,

"We do not need memorial pictures for a truck

or tank. We need food, water, new shelter or a

cruise ship to temporarily house these people in
desperate need."

To me, it is a sobering reminder of the fact that in

more than six decades, the United Nations presence in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo still has not fully
succeeded in stabilizing that country. We should not let
history repeat itself.

