Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French): The
Council has addressed the issue of children in armed

conflict on a number of occasions. Today's debate, for
which I would like to thank the President, is a timely
occasion to take stock of the work accomplished by the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict,
established under resolution 1612 (2005).

Belgium aligns itself with the statement made by
my French colleague speaking on behalf of the
European Union.

The 10th anniversary of the adoption of the Rome
Statute and the establishment of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) leads me to place particular
emphasis on the fight against impunity, an aspect that
was addressed in the statement made by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, as well as by other speakers.

Mr. President, as you have noted in your concept
paper, the issue of children in armed conflict requires a
multidimensional approach. Our delegation has often
underscored the fact that this is not only a human
rights, humanitarian or development aid issue, but also
an issue concerning peace and security. The Council
Working Group has made it possible to carry out
structural monitoring of all conflict situations where
children are being recruited or used by armed forces or
groups.

The Working Group's annual report gives us a
very comprehensive overview of the range of activities
that the Group has undertaken. In that context, it is
important that we recall the need to provide the
Working Group with the necessary support so as to
enable it to continue to pursue its activities in an
effective, transparent and efficient manner.

Belgium has always favoured an approach based
on dialogue and partnership, but the situation in the
field must change first. The operational conclusions
adopted by the Working Group serve as an important
tool in assisting and calling on the parties to conflict to
put an end to child recruitment and to the serious
violations perpetrated against children. In the absence
of any positive response from the relevant parties, the
Council must shoulder its responsibilities and adopt
targeted sanction measures.

We must acknowledge that, in spite of the
numerous appeals launched by the international
community and the repeated commitments made by
States, the number of children affected by armed
conflict remains alarmingly high. In that regard, the
fight against impunity must remain our guiding
principle. If we wish to eradicate the practice, all
individuals guilty of committing crimes against
children must be tried and sentenced, as it is only
through systematic sentencing and bringing to justice
of perpetrators that we will be able to change
mentalities and put an end to the suffering of children
affected by armed conflict.

With the establishment of the International
Criminal Court, the international community now has
available to it adequate legal instruments to try and
punish the most serious crimes that have been
committed, in particular against children. The
International Criminal Court will also make it possible
to ensure that those individuals who are involved in
recruitment and enlistment of children are no longer
able to do so. Celebrating the adoption of the Rome
Statute of the ICC today, we must recall the primordial
role that the Court can play in fighting impunity and
preventing those intolerable practices.

