Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, Sir, I wish to welcome your presence
among us and to express my satisfaction at seeing you
preside over this meeting. I would like also to welcome
the Secretary-General's important statement on conflict
prevention.

It is the Chinese delegation's long-held view that
timely and effective preventive measures taken before
conflict erupts are the most fruitful. They help not only
to avert the loss of life and property but also to
preserve resources. For this reason, we would like to
thank the delegation of Jamaica for its initiative in
arranging this open debate.

As the manifestations and causes of conflicts vary
throughout the world, measures taken by the United
Nations to prevent them will also vary from case to
case. However, they all must be taken in accordance
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. Given the ultimate aim of conflict
prevention, actions taken by the international
community should focus on the peaceful resolution of
conflicts and avoid exacerbating tensions or giving rise
to new ones.

The Security Council has already taken some
positive measures in this regard, including the sending
of fact-finding missions to areas of conflict; the
holding of a greater number of open debates on specific
issues; and the strengthening of the implementation of
Article 99 of the Charter, in encouraging the Secretary-
General to play his rightful role in this regard. All of
these commendable measures have enriched the
Council's experience in handling issues involving
international peace and security.

The Chinese delegation maintains that all
conflict-prevention measures must respect the political
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the countries concerned and the will of their
Governments and peoples. The principle of non-
interference in internal affairs is essential in guiding
United Nations conflict-prevention activities.
Preventive measures should be taken only upon request
or with the consent and cooperation of the countries
concerned. As to issues such as the setting up of early-
warning systems or the sending of fact-finding or other
special missions, which bear on the sovereignty of a
State, prior consent must be obtained from the
countries or parties concerned. Otherwise, not only will
the goal of conflict prevention not be achieved, but
many complex problems, or even new conflicts, may
arise. Before any major decisions are made, it is
imperative that the Security Council consider the views
of, and the information provided by, all sides in a
neutral and fair manner.

Conflict prevention has begun to serve as an
important means to solve conflicts peacefully. The
Security Council, which shoulders the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, should play a leading role in
conflict prevention. At the same time, it should attach
importance to the role of regional organizations and
cooperate with them. Such cooperation, however,
should be carried out on the basis of the observance, by
the regional organizations, of the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, as well
as relevant stipulations of Chapter VIII of the Charter.
By accepting the guidance and monitoring of the
United Nations, regional organizations will be able to
win cooperation from the United Nations and more
extensive support from the international community,
thus functioning more constructively in preventive
diplomacy.

As many countries have stressed, in order to
prevent armed conflicts more effectively, importance
has to be given to addressing the fundamental issue of
the economic development of the many developing
countries. Otherwise, the prevention of armed conflicts
will end up curing merely symptoms rather than root
causes and reacting passively to one situation after
another. Therefore, the promotion of economic and
social development in developing countries is of great
relevance to the prevention of armed conflicts.

It is gratifying that the issue of conflict
prevention has attracted increasing attention. However,
a closer analysis shows that the United Nations still
lacks sufficient practice in this field. Some measures
remain at a conceptual stage; others, though already
adopted, need to be tested by practice. Therefore, to
guarantee the success of United Nations conflict-
prevention activities, it is critical that experience be
built up and that lessons be learned continuously on the
basis of experience. To this end, the Chinese delegation
is willing to work together with all other delegations to
continue to contribute actively to this endeavour.

