Ms. Paik Ji-ah (Republic of Korea): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Ivan Simonovie for his
briefing.

We take this opportunity to reiterate our full support
for the United Nations human rights monitoring mission
in Ukraine. We are confident that such independent and
credible international mechanisms can contribute to
the de-escalation of tensions on the ground. We hope
that the United Nations monitoring mission, in close
cooperation with the special monitoring mission of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
will continue to play a constructive role in that process.

The recent report of the United Nations monitoring
mission raises a number of human rights concerns
in Ukraine. There have been credible allegations of
harassment, arbitrary arrests and torture, targeting
journalists and activists. In Crimea, the referendum
was marred by a significant increase in propaganda and
incitement to hatred and violence. We are especially
concerned that such distorted narratives and restriction
of media freedom are also being exploited in eastern
Ukraine to further exacerbate the tense and vulnerable
situation.

We are closely monitoring unfolding events
in eastern Ukraine and are alarmed by the violent
seizure of key public buildings by armed individuals.
Such instances point to a serious deterioration in the
situation. We condemn any use of force in seeking a
change is status. Any further incitement to hostility
and provocative actions aimed at destabilizing Ukraine
must stop.

With the important election scheduled in May, we
call on the Ukrainian Government to lead an inclusive
political process that reflects the region's diversity
and ensures the protection of all ethnic and linguistic
minorities. That is esential for any sustainable solution
to the crisis.

Before concluding, we stress that a solution to the
crisis can be found only by exploring all diplomatic
efforts, especially bilateral dialogue between Russia and
Ukraine. In that regard, we welcome the forthcoming
Geneva meeting among Ukraine, Russia, the United
States and the European Union and encourage all
concerned parties to continue such efforts to seek a
peaceful political solution.

We once again reaffirm our full supprt for Ukraine's
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
its internationally recognized borders. Ukraine's future
must be steered solely by the will and aspirations
of Ukrainians themselves without intervention or
influence by outside forces.

