Mr. Antonio: At the outset, allow me, Sir, to
congratulate you on your country's accession to the
presidency of the Security Council and to thank you for
having invited the African Union (AU) to be a part of
this important discussion on the critical issue of
securing borders against illicit flows.
The developments taking place on various
continents today, particularly on the African continent,

bring into focus the ever-present danger of
uncontrolled borders and the attendant challenges of
illicit activities that include the illicit traffic in small
arms and light weapons, terrorist networks and human
and drug trafficking, as well as piracy, especially off
the coast of Somalia and the Gulf of Guinea.

The question of border security has been high on
the agenda of African leaders, who are determined to
ensure that borders play a constructive rather than a
destructive role in promoting unity, peace, security and
stability on the continent. Accordingly, the African
Union adopted a border programme that is undergirded
by a number of political and legal instruments, aimed
at guiding further action in the management of border
issues in Africa. The programme also focuses on the
centrality of the principle of the respect of borders
existing on achievement of national independence, as
enshrined in the Charter of the then Organization of
African Unity (OAU); the resolution adopted by the
first ordinary session of the OAU Assembly of Heads
of State and Government, held in Cairo in July 1964;
and article 4 (b) of the Constitutive Act of the African
Union.

The goal of the AU border programme is to
comprehensively address border issues with respect to
both delimitation and demarcation, as well as cross-
border cooperation, with the overall objective of
contributing to the prevention of conflicts and the
promotion of integration.

The crises we are currently witnessing in Mali
and in other parts of the Sahel region of Africa, in
Guinea-Bissau and between the Sudan and South
Sudan; piracy off the coast of Somalia and the Gulf of
Guinea; and the increased scale of activities by
terrorist and criminal groups such as the Lord's
Resistance Army are manifest threats to peace, stability
and sustainable development. Indeed, this was clearly
recognized and addressed by the African Union Peace
and Security Council at its meeting held yesterday at
the ministerial level in Addis Ababa. The Ministers
considered the report of the AU Chairperson, which,
inter alia, highlighted the fact that Guinea-Bissau had
become a hub for drug trafficking, posing a serious
threat to regional security and stability.

In the case of Mali, the report, while pointing out
that the situation is a serious Violation of one of the
fundamental principles of the African Union, notably
respect for the borders existing at the time of
independence and the unity and territorial integrity of
Member States, also noted the increase in the number
of attacks by armed groups including Harakat Ansar
ed-Din al-Salafiya (Ansar Eddine), Al-Qaida in the
Islamic Maghreb (AQIM) and the Movement for Unity
and Jihad in West Africa (MUJAO). Most notable is
MUJAO, a dissident branch of AQIM. that brings
together elements of different terrorist and criminal
groups from the region, including Boko Haram.
According to the Chairperson's report, the prevailing
situation in Mali has provided AQIM. with greater
latitude to pursue its terrorist activities, including the
kidnapping of hostages for purposes of collecting a
ransom.

Regarding the situation between the Republic of
the Sudan and the Republic of South Sudan, the
African Union, through its High-level Implementation
Panel, has continued to facilitate negotiations between
the two parties on post-referendum and post-secession
arrangements. Unfortunately, and as noted by the AU
Chairperson in his report, the relations between the
Sudan and South Sudan have deteriorated sharply in
recent weeks, with intense fighting between the armies
of the two countries, mostly in and around Heglig. The
AU Chairperson further noted that the current
situation, which also calls into question respect for the
AU principle on pre-existing borders, had poisoned
relations between the two countries, generating a
humanitarian crisis, undermining the viability of both
States, further jeopardizing the security of the entire
region and further testing the universally accepted
objective of two viable States living side by side in
peace.

The illicit traffic in small arms and light weapons
continues to pose serious threats and challenges on the
continent and calls for a strengthening of the capacity
of African countries to implement subregional and
continental legally binding instruments such as the
Bamako Declaration on small arms and light weapons,
among others.

Mr. President, these ongoing situations on the
continent are the best illustration of the relevance of
your country's initiative to inscribe this critical issue
on the agenda of the Security Council this month - an
issue that, we believe, can be tackled only through
concerted regional and international efforts, including
by building on existing regional and international
mechanisms and instruments.
The African Union stands ready to cooperate for
the realization of this objective.

