Mr. Al Hussein: I thank you, Madam President,
for allowing me this opportunity to brief the Security
Council on the latest developments in Yemen.

I am encouraged by the recent efforts by the parties
to the conflict, supported by the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Yemen, aimed at reaching
a peaceful solution. The earlier intensification of
the conflict in Yemen led to a dramatic increase in
the number of civilian casualties and aggravated the
already dire humanitarian situation. It also continues to
undermine prospects for peace.

The conditions of life have become untenable for
the vast majority of people in Yemen. The combined
impact of the violence and the artificial impediments
to the delivery of humanitarian assistance have proved
disastrous. At least 21 million people - 80 per cent
of the population - currently rely on some measure
of humanitarian assistance, while approximately
half the population is suffering from malnutrition.
Furthermore, the findings of my Office indicate
a continued intensification of existing patterns of
violations, including, inter alia, the violation of the
right to life and the destruction of civilian objects and
infrastructure, as well as illegal detentions, committed
by all parties to the conflict. As the violence continues
to intensify, the number of civilian casualties across
the country continues to increase. According to
information gathered by my Office in Yemen, over
2,700 civilians have been killed and more than 5,300
have beeb injured since the start of the conflict. My
Office has also documented dozens of cases of alleged
illegal detention, primarily at the hands of the popular
committees. Sadly, it is children who are bearing the
brunt of the conflict in Yemen. There has been a steady
increase in the number of children killed and injured.
This year alone, more than 600 children have been
killed, and over 900 have suffered serious injury. That
represents a five-fold increase over the figures for 2014.

In September, I presented a report on the situation
of human rights in Yemen to the thirtieth session of the
Human Rights Council. The report addresses credible
allegations of violations of international humanitarian
law and international human rights law, as gathered by
my Office. The report also presents the Human Rights
Council with a number of recommendations, chief
among which is a call for an international investigation
into credible allegations of violations of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law,
as well as a call for accountability for the perpetrators
of such crimes.

The Government of Yemen earlier announced
its intention to create a national commission of
investigation, which I welcomed. The Human Rights
Council subsequently adopted resolution 30/18, which
calls on my Office to provide technical assistance to
a national commission of inquiry and to report to the
Council on the situation of human rights in Yemen at its
thirty-third session. The recruitment and deployment of
new staff members to support follow-up to that Human
Rights Council resolution are currently pending
approval by the Fifth Committee.

I have observed with extreme concern the
continuation of heavy shelling from the ground
and the air in areas with a high concentration of
civilians, as well as the continued destruction of
civilian infrastructure - in particular hospitals and
schools - by all parties to the conflict, although a
disproportionate share appeared to be the result of air
strikes carried out by coalition forces. My Office will
continue to document credible allegations of violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law in
the context of Yemen, and will continue to call upon all
parties involved to abide by, and commit themselves to,
the protection of civilians and to hold to account those
responsible for serious violations ofinternational law. In
that regard, I also strongly encourage the Government
of Yemen to ratify the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court, or at least to urgently accept its
jurisdiction. I further call on the Security Council to
do everything within its power to help restrain the use
of force by all parties and to urge all sides to abide by
the basic principles of international humanitarian law,
including by immediately removing all impediments to
humanitarian assistance and fully cooperating with the
humanitarian response team.

Unless Yemen and the world urgently rise to meet
the extraordinary challenges presented by the situation,
the consequences could be even more catastrophic. To
that end, I urgently call on the Council to expedite and
intensify diplomatic efforts to bring about a ceasefire
and to help create a framework for negotiating a
comprehensive and sustainable peace in Yemen. Any
military solution that falls outside the context of a
negotiated agreement may in the short term bring about
an immediate strategic advantage to one side or another,
but it will inevitably render Yemen and its neighbours
less stable and less secure over the long term.

A failure to act decisively not only spells misery
for the millions of vulnerable people in Yemen today,
but will inevitably push the country into an irreversible
process of Balkanization, the consequences of which
would lie outside anyone's control. The potential
ramifications of a failed State in Yemen would almost
inevitably include the creation of safe havens for
radical and confessional groups such as the so-called
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham. That, in turn,
could expand the conflict beyond Yemen's borders,
potentially shattering regional stability. Finally, in the
light of the enormity of the crisis, it is imperative that
the relevant stakeholders put aside their political and
ideological differences in order to achieve our common
goal of re-establishing some measure of security and
stability in Yemen.

