Mr. Cheng Jingye (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation thanks Ambassadors Loj,
Mayoral and Motoc for their briefings on the work of
their respective committees and on their plans for the
next phase of their activities. We thank them for their
great efforts to facilitate the work of the three
committees. Let me also commend the new Danish
chairmanship of the Counter-Terrorism Committee for
the great deal of fine work it has done.

We take this opportunity strongly to condemn the
terrorist attacks that recently took place in London.
Our condolences go to the victims and their families.
That incident shows once again that much remains to
be done in the fight against international terrorism.

I shall now make some remarks on the work of
the three committees. As subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council, the 1267 Committee, the Counter-
Terrorism Committee and the 1540 Committee play a
unique and important role in the global fight against
terrorism. We continue to urge the committees to
strengthen their coordination and cooperation in the
gathering and sharing of information. Each of the
committees' monitoring groups, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate and the various
groups of experts should have its own focus based on
its particular mandate and purview. At the same time,
horizontal exchanges should be enhanced in the
interest of efficiency and avoiding duplication. The
committees should also coordinate their activities with
respect to the review of country reports and should
learn from each others' successful experiences. The
three committees should continue to strengthen their
dialogue and cooperation with relevant international
and regional organizations and with institutions within
the United Nations family in order to enhance
cooperation in the global fight against terrorism.

China attaches great importance to the 1267
Committee because of its central role in countering Al-
Qaida, the Taliban and associated individuals and
entities. Consultations on and the adoption of a new
resolution will be important for the work of the
Committee in the near future. We hope that the
resolution will consolidate the consensus recently
forged among all parties on improving the quality of
the comprehensive list, enhancing sanctions measures
and encouraging more Members to submit lists.

China looks forward to the full functioning of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) Executive
Directorate. We hope that, with the support of a highly
efficient and fully staffed Directorate with its work
proceeding along the proper lines, the Committee will
make additional achievements. On the basis of the
relevant Security Council resolutions, China will
continue to participate actively in the CTC's
discussions on the formulation of best practices with
respect to financing the fight against terrorism, with a
View to reaching consensus and helping Member States
in their implementation of the Council's resolutions.

China is pleased to note that the work of the 1540
Committee is proceeding smoothly. We believe that the
Committee's priority for the next phase of its work
should be to continue its serious and objective
consideration of country reports and to urge countries
that have not yet submitted reports to do so as soon as
possible. The Committee should also provide countries
with the assistance they need with respect to the
implementation of Council resolutions.

China stands resolutely against terrorism in all its
forms. We will work actively with all other countries
and will be highly vigilant at all times. We will
enhance our anti-terrorism cooperation and will
continue to make unremitting efforts to eradicate
terrorism. We will also continue to participate actively
in the work of the three committees and will work with
all parties concerned to facilitate the complete and
effective implementation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

