Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I very much welcome
the opportunity to discuss working methods today. It is
an important subject and it affects the Council's ability
to deliver on its responsibilities under the Charter
of the United Nations as an effective, efficient and
transparent organ.
I also thank you, Mr. President, for your
chairmanship of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.

I would also like to highlight the progress that has
been made in recent years, in particular the renegotiation
in 2017 of the note by the President (S/2017/507, annex),
known as note 507, led by the Japanese Ambassador,
whomI see in the Chamber today. That was an important
step - note 507 is both a record of the evolution of
Council practice and an aspirational document that
sets out the Council's collective ambition for how it
should function.

We are still falling short of that ambition,
including on such important issues as timekeeping and
interactivity. I agree with my American and French
colleagues on the need for both greater interactivity
in consultations and the right balance of public and
private meetings.

There is an important balance struck in note 507
between flexibility and the need to ensure that the
Council's working methods are clear and transparent.
Flexibility has been one ofthe hallmarks ofthe Council's
working practices over many decades and remains a
priority for the United Kingdom in its consideration of
any proposal to amend working methods.

The Council is busier than ever; there are ever-
more meetings and products. The increased volume
of work does not necessarily translate into effective
action on the ground. More effective working methods
will not by themselves deliver that but they can make
a contribution. Since the open debate in January 2018
(S/PV.8173), the United Kingdom has focused its efforts
in two key areas and taken a number of actions.

On meetings, we believe that the Council needs to
spend its time discussing the right issues. We spend
too much of our time on yesterday's conflicts. We
are pleased in that context that at the end of last year
the Council was able to agree on a reduction in the
frequency of meetings on Kosovo.

It is also important that we respond to the Secretary-
General's call for a surge in diplomacy to support
conflict prevention. The Council needs to shoulder its
responsibilities under Article 34 of the Charter. Too
often, we have seen members of the Council block or
attempt to block discussions of situations that may
endanger the maintenance of international peace
and security.

In that context, the United Kingdom recently
initiated a monthly, informal discussion at the level
of permanent representatives to encourage a frank
exchange among ambassadors on developing threats
to peace and security. That is a positive development,
but I would like to emphasize that it is no substitute
for proper Council consideration, not least for reasons
of transparency. I agree with what Ms. Landgren had
to say on the importance of well-considered Security
Council missions that are properly aligned with the
activities of other bodies and ensure a focus on conflict
prevention as well. Given the comments that she made
about the cost of such missions, I think we should look
again at the possible use of mini-missions.

With regard to products, they are the principal
way through which the Security Council exercises
its authority. In order to have impact on the ground,
Council products should be concise and use clear and
straightforward language. That has not always been the
case. IfI were to read out one of last year's resolutions
on Somalia, resolution 2431 (2018), it would take me
more than 45 minutes. Last week, we collectively
adopted resolution 2472 (2019) on Somalia, which
brought the length down from 12 pages to seven. The
United Kingdom is committed to continuing its efforts
in that area, in line with our commitments to improve
mandates, under the Secretary-General's Action for
Peacekeeping initiative.

I would like to address some of the issues raised by
my South African colleague in his statement. Where
penholding is concerned, in recent years we have
seen growing flexibility in that area and a variety of
penholding configurations. For its part, the United
Kingdom shares the pen with Germany on the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and
on Libyan sanctions. We are currently working with
Poland on a draft resolution on disabilities and conflict.
We believe it is an important principle to keep the
practice of penholding informal, and we maintain the
principle that every Council member has an equal right
to take up the pen on any issue.

But I also want to underline the importance of how
penholders discharge their responsibilities, particularly
their commitment to conducting negotiations in an
inclusive manner. The United Kingdom is committed
to close consultation with all relevant stakeholders
during negotiation processes. We consult with troop-
and police-contributing countries, Chairs of Sanctions
Committees, countries of the region and Chairs of
the Peacebuilding Commission's country-specific
configurations, and we do that routinely on every draft
resolution for which we are the penholder. When we last
held the presidency of the Council, in August, we made
sure that we spoke to the Permanent Representatives
of every country that was on the Council's agenda that
month or was directly affected.

The Council's subsidiary bodies, including, as
Mr. Cockayne said, its Sanctions Committees, are
a vital element in our work, and I would like to pay
tribute to their Chairs and the work they do. We
support efforts to strengthen their working methods.
Every subsidiary body is different, and it is right that
we therefore consider their working methods primarily
on a case-by-case basis, but there are also cross-
cutting issues, including, of course, with regard to
due process. I definitely agree about the vital role that
targeted sanctions play in giving effect to the Council's
decisions, and about the importance of our ability as
a Council to ensure that those sanctions regimes are
strong. We continue to be happy to discuss those issues
in more detail our Council colleagues. On the subject of
the distribution of chairmanships, the United Kingdom
has chaired subsidiary bodies in the past and we have no
objection in principle to doing so again. Those decisions
should be the result of the annual negotiations between
the current and incoming members of the Council, and
that has always been a process of consensus.

I would like to take this opportunity to underline our
support for the code of conduct of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group, which asks
members to refrain from voting against credible
Council action aimed at stopping mass atrocities and
crimes against humanity, and also, of course, for reform
of the Security Council generally.

Lastly, I welcome the information that the
representative of South Africa shared about the
decision of the African Union Peace and Security
Council to suspend the Sudan in the wake of the
Violence and killings by its military authorities, which
are unacceptable and should be condemned by us all.
The United Kingdom supports the African Union's
decision, and the leadership that it is showing in seeking
to enable a transition to a civilian-led Government in
the Sudan. We call on all Council members to support
it in that regard.

