Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the Chairperson-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine,
Mr. Leonid Kozhara, and we thank him for his detailed
statement.

The Russian Federation has consistently called for
cooperation between the United Nations and the OSCE
to be scaled up on the basis of the 2006 declaration
in that regard. We feel that the OSCE successfully
complements the work of the United Nations in a
number of areas, as clearly reflected in the fight against
transnational threats, such as terrorism, illegal drug-
trafficking and organized crime. The OSCE is making
a significant contribution to implementing the basic
United Nations conventions in those and other areas.

We welcome the cooperation between the OSCE
secretariat and the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime in Vienna. We value the results of the first month
of the Ukrainian chairmanship of the OSCE. To a great
extent, the priorities set out for the organization for the
coming overlap with those of the Russian Federation.
We stand ready to provide the Ukrainian chairmanship
with the necessary assistance.

We, too, believe in the need to strengthen the
conventional arms control regime. Further negotiations
in that area should be conducted Without preconditions,
politicization or attempts to prejudge the outcomes.

We welcome the intention of Ukraine to assist
in the settlement of conflicts in existing negotiation
formats and by fully upholding the interests of parties
to the conflict. We support the intention to scale up the
combat against trafficking in human beings. We believe
that an integral part of that effort should be to prevent
the trafficking in human organs and tissues.

As an active participant in the OSCE, the Russian
Federation hopes that Ukraine will strictly comply with
the chairmanship mandate set forth in the decision of the
OSCE Ministers for Foreign Affairs in Porto in 2002,
and take fully into account the views and interests of
all States participants. It is important to concentrate on
establishing a unifying agenda and on bringing OSCE
countries together on the basis of shared goals and
objectives.
With respect to Russia's priorities for the OSCE,
we note that the most important objective is reforming
the organization so as to address imbalances in its work
and make it a fully-fledged international organization.
Along those lines, the OSCE could draw upon the
experience of the United Nations in institution-building.
First and foremost, a legally binding charter and
procedures for the participation of non-governmental
organizations in OSCE events could be drawn up.

We support Ukraine's intention to develop the
"Helsinki+40" process, which should bolster the OSCE
through the forthcoming fortieth anniversary of the
Helsinki Final Act in 2015. A document should be
drawn up that would not be run-of-the-mill, but rather
breathe new life into the implementation of agreements
set forth in the Final Act and other fundamental
documents of the OSCE.

We attach great importance to the efforts of the
OSCE to counter terrorism and illegal drug trafficking.
We hope to see cooperation with the United Nations
in the context of the OSCE conference on the matter
in Vienna in 2013. We support the implementation of
OSCE obligations in the area of freedom of movement,
in particular with respect to the liberalization of visa
regimes.

We attach great importance to the observation of
elections. We believe that the Office for Democratic
Institutions and Human Rights must carry out its
monitoring functions in similar conditions in all OSCE
countries across the board. We support the conduct
of a comparative analysis of electoral laws and the
drawing up of monitoring standards. We count on the
organization to conduct a seminar on that very matter
this year.

We attach particular importance to the efforts being
made to protect the rights of national, religious and
linguistic minorities and in combating manifestations
of statelessness in Latvia and Estonia. We are convinced
that the OSCE will make an important contribution to
combating aggressive nationalism, neo-Nazism and
neo-fascism.

We believe that, in the context of the economic
crisis, the OSCE must more actively take up matters
touching upon the social and economic aspects of
human rights.

We hope that all of the aforementioned topics will
take their due place in the OSCE agenda for 2013 and be
reflected in the documents of the meeting of the OSCE
Ministers for Foreign Affairs to take place in Kiev on
5 and 6 December.
We hope that the approach of the Ukrainian
chairmanship set forth by Foreign Minister Kozhara
today will help to overcome the crisis of recent years
in the OSCE and adapt the organization to new global
realities. Russia stands fully ready to constructively
cooperate with the Ukrainian chairmanship and other
OSCE participants in that matter.

