Mrs. Rodham Clinton (United States of America): Thank you, Mr. President, for that excellent
statement. I want to commend the United Kingdom for
calling this important meeting, which gives us the
opportunity to help chart a way towards a durable
peace for all of the people of the Sudan. I want to
commend the Security Council for its recent visit to the
Sudan, which was extremely important. I also want to
thank the Secretary-General for his excellent briefing
and his personal involvement in the efforts to find a
durable peace, as well as Special Representative
Menkerios for his skilful efforts on behalf of the people
of the Sudan. I commend the work of the African
Union High-Level Implementation Panel, led by
President Mbeki, as well as the efforts of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, and
especially those of Joint Special Representative
Gambari and Joint Chief Mediator Bassole. I
particularly appreciate the excellent presentations by
His Excellency Minister Karti and Mr. Pagan Amum. I
thought that, if we could translate their words into
action immediately, both of them would have
demonstrated unequivocally the commitment to find a
way towards the durable peace that we seek.

Yesterday marked a milestone in the history of
the Sudan. Voters from Southern Sudan began to
register for the referendum by which they will decide
their own future. Holding this referendum and
resolving the status of Abyei and all of the conditions
of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA)
represent the promise of self-determination made to the
Sudanese people under the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement of 2005. The United States believes that
those are promises that must be kept.

It is critical to peace and stability - not only for
the Sudan but also for its neighbours, some of whom
are here today, and the rest of Africa, represented by
others - that the referendum for Southern Sudan be
held peacefully on 9 January. Regardless of the
outcome, the will of the people must be respected by
all parties, in the Sudan and around the world.

We have already seen the alternative. The
unacceptable alternative is the Sudan's past: more than
four decades of recurring conflict and 2 million people
dead and millions more displaced; and simmering
tensions that stall development and perpetuate poverty,
then erupt again to darken the lives of another
generation of Sudanese children. In the next 55 days,
the Government of the Sudan can ensure a brighter
future, one that offers peace, opportunity and hope.

But there is a huge amount of work to be done in
the next 55 days. I agree completely with Minister
Karti and with Mr. Amum. Each Member State must to
do its utmost to help. None of us should look back and
wish that we had done more. As President Obama has
said, although no outsider can dictate events on the
ground in the Sudan, it is up to the political leaders of
the Sudan whether they will choose peace or
confrontation. But it is up to all of us to help them -
not only to make the right choice but then to
implement it to the benefit of all their people.
It was particularly heartening last week to see the
defence ministers from Khartoum and Juba hold a rare
joint press conference to say that, no matter what
differences and disputes might arise from the

referendum process, they will be resolved through
political dialogue. The ministers said that "there will
be no return to war". We all fervently hope that is the
case.

But to fulfil that promise the North and South
must promptly forge agreements on the crucial issues
that will arise in 2011, namely, oil-revenue
distribution, border demarcation, international treaties,
security arrangements, citizenship rights and the
protection of vulnerable civilians, including
Southerners in the North and Northerners in the South.
The fate of 44 million Sudanese depends on their
leaders' willingness to work together to resolve these
issues.

Most urgently, the parties must make the tough
compromises necessary to settle the status of Abyei.
They must find a way forward that both upholds the
rights of the Ngok Dinka and the other residents of
Abyei as well as those of nomadic peoples, such as the
Misseriya, who regularly pass through the area. They
must do so promptly, because preparations for the
referendum on Abyei have fallen behind schedule, and
tensions will continue to rise.

The Comprehensive Peace Agreement, agreed to
by both parties, calls for this referendum. It also states
that the parties themselves can agree to change it.
However, unless the parties reach a mutual agreement
that is acceptable to all the people of Abyei, the United
States and the international community will continue to
hold them to their commitment to an on-time
referendum, as promised in the CPA.

But even as we focus on the future of Southern
Sudan, Abyei and all of the Sudan, we remain deeply
concerned about Darfur. Violence is intensifying,
human rights violations continue and arms flow despite
the embargo. Journalists and activists are arrested,
some merely for speaking to members of the Security
Council. United Nations peacekeepers are kidnapped.
This is all unacceptable.

The United States stands ready to work with the
Council to support peace efforts in Darfur. We call on
all parties to participate in the Doha talks without delay
or preconditions. We urge the Government not to target
civilians, use proxy militia, support the Janjaweed and
other irregular forces, or prevent the freedom of
movement of United Nations personnel and aid
workers.
In Darfur and elsewhere, the Government of the
Sudan must live up to its international obligations to
respect human rights, allow humanitarian assistance,
protect civilians - including victims of sexual
violence - ensure that refugees and internally
displaced people can return in safety and with dignity,
and bring those responsible for the atrocities to justice.
As President Obama said here in New York,
accountability sends a powerful message that certain
behaviour, including genocide, is not acceptable. In the
twenty-first century, we must uphold universal rules
and values. Officials throughout the Sudan - both
North and South - have a particular responsibility in
the run-up to the voting. They must avoid
inflammatory rhetoric, quell rumours and dampen
animosities. They must allow unfettered campaigning
by all sides and ensure that voters can travel safely to
their polling places. The voting must take place on
time, without violence and in an atmosphere of calm. I
commend the Sudanese people - North and South -
and the international community for working hard to
make that possible.

And we are beginning to see the results. Nearly
33,000 voter registration books have been printed and
delivered, enough to register nearly 5 million Southern
Sudanese voters in the North and the South. Booklets
to register another 350,000 voters believed to be living
abroad have also been shipped. More than 1,000
Sudanese election observers have been trained, and the
Carter Center and the European Union are also
deploying monitors. Russia has generously committed
to providing four helicopters that will be used to assist
the United Nations Mission in the Sudan in its many
critical tasks. But more must be done, and so we urge
all States Members of the United Nations to support
the United Nations Mission in the Sudan, and we hope
that the Government of the Sudan will continue to
fund, with help from others, the Southern Sudan
Referendum Commission going forward.

As we plan this effort, it is essential to include
women. It is unusual that I am the only woman at the
table in the Security Council, so, speaking on behalf of
all women, let me just say that women are critical to
every step of building, negotiating and keeping the
peace in the Sudan. Lasting peace and prosperity will
not be achieved if half the population is excluded from
that process. As we discussed with respect to the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), in country
after country we have seen that the underlying issues
that cause conflicts are more likely to recur and less
likely to be resolved if women are not involved at the
peace table. We certainly hope that women will be
brought into the highest levels of Government in both
the North and South.

The Sudanese people want peace, and the United
States wants to help them achieve it. We have engaged
in intensive diplomacy to help accomplish that. We
have spent more than $200 million to help mitigate
conflict, provide election security, create economic
opportunities, and fund voter registration, education
and observation. We have sent Special Envoy Scott
Gration, Ambassador Princeton Lyman, Ambassador
Barrie Walkley and a whole raft of people to try to
increase our presence in Southern Sudan, as well as to
work with both the Government in Khartoum and the
Sudan People's Liberation Movement (SPLM) in Juba.

This month, the Chairman of our Senate Foreign
Relations Committee, Senator John Kerry, travelled to
Khartoum to deliver a special message on behalf of
President Obama. The message was this: If the Sudan
chooses the path of peace, the Government of the
Sudan can have a dramatically improved relationship
with the United States, including normalization of
relations between our two countries.

To demonstrate our commitment to improving
United States-Sudanese relations, the United States has
already taken two steps. First, we have changed our
policies to ease the sale of agricultural and irrigation
equipment to the Sudan, which will boost food
production and decrease the need for international food
aid. Secondly, to help the Sudan's economy grow, the
United States has supported the creation of a group to
work on ways to ease the Sudan's national debt,
consistent with international debt relief practices.

These are the steps we have already taken, but we
are prepared to do much more. If the Government of
the Sudan fulfils the Comprehensive Peace Agreement;
if it resolves the future of Abyei; if it holds Southern
Sudan's referendum on 9 January and then recognizes
the will of the Sudanese people in the South, then the
United States is prepared to begin the process of
withdrawing the Sudan from its list of State sponsors
of terrorism, which would be done in accordance with
our laws on terrorism.
If the Government of the Sudan commits to a
peaceful resolution of the conflict in Darfur and takes
other steps towards peace and accountability, the
Obama Administration is prepared to offer the Sudan a
path to the ending of United States sanctions, working
towards international debt relief, increasing trade and
investment, and forging a mutually beneficial
relationship.

We are well aware that it takes not only skill but
courage for the Sudan's leaders in both the North and
the South to implement the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement, promote dignity and human rights, ease
suffering, work towards a durable peace, and include
Darfur in that peace. But the world will stand with both
the North and South if they can and do take these steps.

We think that the path to peace and prosperity, to
good-neighbourliness, to partnership and cooperation
for all Sudanese is clear. It is up to the Government of
the Sudan and to the SPLM. in the South to decide
whether to walk that path. If they do, the United States
stands ready to assist them and, most importantly, to
assist the next generation of Sudanese children so that
they can have a future without war and conflict.

