Mr. Errazuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation thanks the Lithuanian presidency for
convening today's open debate on a subject of the
greatest importance and priority for my country.
Similarly, we are grateful for the briefings we have
heard from the High Commissioner for Human Rights
Pillay, Under-Secretaries-General Amos and Ladsous
and Director-General of the International Committee of
the Red Cross Daccord.

My delegation endorses the statement that will be
made by the representative of Slovenia on behalf of the
Human Security Network, of which my country is a
part.

As mentioned in the concept note (S/2014/74, annex)
and the report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/689)
before us - the Secretary-General's tenth report on
the matter - despite the fact that we are celebrating
15 years since the Security Council adopted resolution
1265 (1999), there is little room for optimism. The
briefing of Under-Secretary-General Amos speaks
volumes in that regard. Civilian populations continue
to be the most affected by armed conflicts, which today
are, in the majority, intra-State conflicts.

The primary responsibility to protect civilian
populations falls to each State. However, when that
does not occur, whether deliberately or because of the
incapacity of the State itself to act, the international
community must seek to do so in accordance with the
principles agreed upon in paragraphs 138 and 139 of
the 2005 World Summit Outcome Document (General Assembly resolution 60/1).

The negative situations we face today in the area of
the protection of civilians are the result, fundamentally,
of the lack ofpolitical will to confront the situation, and
not the lack of instruments or mechanisms established
for the purpose. Indeed, we have a comprehensive
legal framework, which is known and shared by the
majority of States, and which includes all the necessary
elements to respond to the protection of civilians and
other vulnerable groups. In many cases, there is no will
to act and to allow access to humanitarian aid where it
is needed, and there is a lack of willingness on the part
of some Governments affected by conflict situations to
understand that the humanitarian organizations, by dint
of their very nature, ought to be able establish contact
with non-State actors within those same States.

We welcome the Secretary-General's initiative
and the "Rights up front" action plan, which reaffirms
the central role that human rights play in the work
of the United Nations and provides fundamental
recommendations for the whole system, aimed at
reacting better to and dealing swiftly with problems
of human rights. Respect for human rights and for
international humanitarian law is, ultimately, the central
concept that underpins the protection of civilians.

In attempting to respond to some of the concerns
raised by the Lithuanian presidency's concept note
(S/2014/74, annex), we feel that the following elements
could contribute to the better protection of civilian
populations in armed conflicts.

First, there needs to be greater cooperation among
the Security Council, troop- and police-contributing
countries and the Secretariat in order to establish clear,
realistic and achievable mandates along these lines.
Missions must be able to count on the availability, in a
timely and effective manner, of the necessary resources
and capacities needed to achieve their mandates. In
the same way, troops must be given training in the
protection of civilians.

Secondly, the improvement and strengthening of
early-warning systems will help us get ahead in crisis
situations. In that respect, we would urge improved
coordination among the various actors on the ground
so that the flow of information is adequate and timely.
With the same goal in mind, my delegation supports the
use of new, non-weaponized technologies as tools for
preventing crises. We also recognize the contribution of
mechanisms, such as horizon scanning, among others,
that can play a role in achieving that objective.

Thirdly, the establishment of a registry system
for civilian casualties could serve as a mechanism for
monitoing violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights law.

Fourthly, accountability for war crimes and serious
human rights violations can serve as an element of
justice and redress and as a tool for deterrence and
prevention. There must be absolute certainty that
abuses and crimes committed will not go unpunished.

In conclusion, we welcome the current aide-memoire
prepared by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, and the presidential concept
note. We recognize the aide-memoire's value as a tool
for query, analysis and diagnosis in matters pertaining
to the protection of civilians by the Council, Member
States and other actors of the United Nations system.

