Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, allow me to pay well-deserved
tribute to Ambassador Joanna Wronecka for her
comprehensive briefing and excellent work as Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1591 (2005), concerning the Sudan. I would also like to
commend her for her practice of making the Committee's
reports public so that they can be discussed at Security
Council plenary meetings.

It is against that backdrop that we take the floor to
point out, in general terms, the concern of the Republic
of Equatorial Guinea about the resumption of fighting
between Government forces and the Sudan Liberation
Army/Abdul Wahid faction in the Jebel Marra area,
which have resulted in several victims and new
displacements, thereby exacerbating the humanitarian
crisis and the abuse of human rights. We also note our
Government's concern about sexual violence related
to the conflict in Darfur, as well as the challenges to
internally displaced persons returning to their homes.

As we know, the Government of the Sudan has
spared no effort to resolve the crisis and normalize the
situation in the conflict regions. As the most recent
report of the Secretary-General points out, the security
situation in Darfur has remained relatively stable, with
the exception of intermittent clashes in the J ebel Marra
area and the persistence of intercommunal conflicts
over land and resources.

In order to further consolidate the progress achieved
through the efforts of the Sudanese Government, it is
essential to counter the activities of the Darfuri armed
groups that are strengthening their position in Libya. It
is their sources of financing that allow them to continue
fuelling the conflict.

In that regard, it is imperative that all the sanctions
on the identified and designated individuals and entities
be strictly enforced, including travel prohibitions and
asset freezes. It is equally urgent that the Security
Council call on the various warring factions in Libya
to refrain from cooperating with the armed groups
in Darfur. As long as the sanctions adopted by the
Council are not strictly observed, it will be difficult to
achieve normalcy in the situation or to guarantee the
security of the population, bring an end to the difficult
humanitarian situation or protect women from sexual
abuse. It is therefore necessary to review the sanctions
imposed under resolution 2400 (2018) in parallel with
the withdrawal process for the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).

We conclude our intervention by congratulating
and UNAMID on the work it is carrying out, and we
encourage it to continue in that vein, specifically the
protection of civilians, during UNAMID's withdrawal
process. We also encourage the Government of the
Sudan to do everything in its power to implement the
sanctions. It should offer capacity-building courses in
relation to sexual violence and establish policing and
judicial centres and institutions in remote areas of
the country in order to facilitate access to justice and
police protection.

