Mr. Paolillo (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay's position on the extension of resolution 1422
(2002) is reflected in the statement to be made by the
representative of Peru in his capacity as Chairman of
the Rio Group. Uruguay wishes to add a few comments
on points of particular interest to it.
A year ago, the imminent establishment of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) was greeted by the
vast majority of the international community with deep
satisfaction as the beginning of a new era in the history
of international relations.

The entry into force of the Statute of Rome, to
which Uruguay is a party, and the establishment of the
ICC early this year were clear messages to the
Governments and people of the world, announcing the
beginning of the new era. This era, we all hope, will be
remarkable not only because those responsible for the
most serious crimes of international concern will
henceforth be prosecuted, but also and above all
because of the prospect that such crimes will not be
committed, or at least not at the scale and frequency
with which they have been committed during the past
60 years. In fact, we are convinced that the very
existence of the ICC will act as a powerful deterrent,
discouraging future potential criminals from
committing the crimes listed in the Statute.

That is why we are concerned about the
possibility of an extension of resolution 1422 (2002),
given that we understand it affects the jurisdiction of
the Court and consequently prevents the fulfilment of
its functions as provided for in the Statute.

Apart from its very questionable legal
foundations - an issue on which I shall not dwell,
because previous speakers have addressed it - a
decision establishing that no investigations or
prosecutions shall commence or proceed with respect
to certain categories or classes of individuals seems
unnecessary to us. The Statute provides more than
adequate guarantees that the decisions taken by the
Court will be neither arbitrary nor politically
motivated. The moral and intellectual qualities of the
current judges and of the Prosecutor-elect provide
additional guarantees. Furthermore, we must not forget
the principles that govern the functioning of the Court
and the office of the Prosecutor, among which I would
point out the principle of non-retroactivity and the
subsidiary or complementary nature of the jurisdiction
of the Court with respect to national jurisdictions.

Moreover, resolution 1422 (2002) introduces a
curious kind of discrimination among perpetrators of
the most hateful crimes: on one hand there are
criminals who may be judged or sentenced for their
crimes, and on the other hand those who may act under
the protection of immunity. I would like to remind the
members of the Security Council that the more than
1,800 Uruguayan civilian and military personnel who
are currently participating in operations established or
authorized by the United Nations have accepted the
possible consequences of the commission of criminal
acts described in the Rome Statute. In such
discrimination among peacekeepers, Uruguay sees a
deep injustice. It is Uruguay's understanding that all
peacekeepers must be subject to the same rules and
must enjoy the same status.

Uruguay is confident that future resolutions
related to the International Criminal Court that this
Council might adopt within its competence will be
aimed at consolidating and strengthening the Court's
function of dispensing justice, while respecting its
integrity. We are of the view that the attempt to extend
or automatically renew resolution 1422 (2002) does not
appear to contribute to that purpose.

