Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank the United
Kingdom for its strong leadership in putting resolution
2170 (2014) forward for adoption today.

The resolution is a decisive step by the Council. It is
an unambiguous condemnation of the brutal and savage
acts of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
and the Nusra Front and an expression of determination
to harness the full force of Security Council tools

on counter-terrorism to target those groups. ISIL
is a major and lethal threat to the people of Iraq and
Syria, including through its indiscriminate targeting of
civilians, its mass executions and extra-judicial killings,
sexual violence and widespread, potentially genocidal
persecution based on religion or belief. It is imposing
its own abhorrent rule and butchering those who do not
submit. The impact of its violent extremism on civilian
populations and stability in Iraq, Syria and the region
is immense. It is a threat to the global community itself,
and we must all rally to counter the scourge.

We welcome the targeted United States air strikes
against ISIL that have relieved the siege of Mount Sinj ar.
Australiajoined the United States and United Kingdom
in air-dropping humanitarian supplies to civilians,
and we will continue to work with other partners in
responding to this humanitarian crisis. We are relieved
to see the political situation in Iraq stabilizing, and
welcome the nomination of Haider Al-Abadi as Prime
Minister-designate as an important step towards the
formation of a new, inclusive Iraqi Government. Iraq's
leaders must now work together, including in meeting
the threat posed by ISIL.

Today's resolution is a clarion call to Member
States to continually review their national counter-
terrorism measures in order to keep pace with the
evolving threat so starkly and lethally embodied in
those two entities. All Member States must take action
to prevent the movement of terrorists and terror groups,
including foreign fighters, across borders, to prevent
the financing and supply of weapons to terrorists,
and to counter the emergence of violent extremism.
On 5 August, the Australian Government announced
its intention to adopt specific new measures to target
the evolving terrorist threat. They will strengthen
our border controls to prevent terrorists from leaving
Australia and make it easier to prosecute foreign
fighters. They will inhibit terrorist training and enable
greater engagement with those at risk of radicalization
or who may resort to extreme violence.

Australia already has a sophisticated counter-
terrorist architecture in place nationally, but it is clear
that the threat from extremism and terrorism is real and
growing, and that all countries should ensure that their
own counter-terrorism measures match this evolving
threat. Today's resolution is also a timely reminder of
the role of the Council's Al-Qaida sanctions regime
in disrupting the activities of groups such as ISIL
and Jabhat Al-Nusra. It underlines that anyone who
provides material support to those entities for either the

recruitment or travel of foreign fighters, or by providing
financing through donations or the illicit trade in the oil
the groups now control, can be subject to the Al-Qaida
sanctions regime. Today's listing of six key individuals
in ISIL and Jabhat Al-Nusra is an important step, but
the Committee established pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), concerning Al-Qaida
and associated individuals and entities, needs Member
States to identify ISIL and Jabhat Al-Nusra's agents and
enablers, wherever they are, and to bring information
to the Committee in support of their inclusion on the
Al-Qaida sanctions list.

Ultimately, the success of the sanctions and
preventive counter-terrorism measures specified in
today's resolution will depend on their implementation
by Member States. To that end, the Council itself must
energize its own existing systems to assist Member
States in doing that, and it must continue to keep a very
close eye on the effectiveness of its own measures to
counter the evolving threat from terrorism. The report
required within 90 days under resolution 2170 (2014)
on the threat from ISIL and Jabhat Al-Nusra, and above
all, the requested recommendations for additional
action to address that threat, will be important.
It will be essential that the Council address those
recommendations quickly.

