Ms. Rodriguez de Ortiz (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation
congratulates you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
May, and thanks the Chairmen of the Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373
(2001) and 1540 (2004) for their briefings today.

The Government of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela reiterates its firm and categorical
condemnation of terrorism and reaffirms its
commitment to combat terrorism in all of its forms and
manifestations with full respect for international law,
international standards on the protection of human
rights and international humanitarian law. The essential
expression of this commitment has been the
strengthening of our legislation aimed at combating
terrorist acts, and the adoption of measures to intensify
our regional and global cooperation in fighting this
scourge, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations.

In this context, our delegation would like once
again to recall before the Security Council the request
for extradition, which almost three years ago the
Venezuelan Government submitted to the Government
of the United States with regard to the notorious
criminal and international terrorist Luis Posada
Carriles, a fugitive from Venezuelan justice who is
responsible for carrying out many terrorist plots, the
most well known of which was the attack on the
Cubana de Aviacion aeroplane, which caused the death
of 73 innocent civilians in 1976 in Barbados. That
request has been ignored by the United States even
though Venezuela has complied with all of the relevant
requirements. In this context, the United States
authorities have accused Posada Carriles only of minor
immigration crimes.

The delegation of the United States has
repeatedly argued that, since 27 September 2005, when
the immigration judge ordered the expulsion of Posada
Carriles, the competent authorities have been
considering how to carry out that order. As has been
stated in this Chamber by the United States delegation,
the immigration judge ordered that this person could
not be deported either to Cuba or to Venezuela, because
it was probable that, if he were transferred to those
countries, he would be tortured.

Such arguments are unacceptable and are simply
technical legal manoeuvres designed to bypass our
request for extradition while this terrorist continues to
walk freely on United States territory. Since 1961,
Venezuela has been a State party to the Convention
against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading

Treatment or Punishment and has always respected our
commitments under international law. We request the
extradition of Posada Carriles so that he can be tried
for terrorist acts, with the due process guaranteed by
our national legislation.

To conclude, it is necessary for all States to
cooperate in accordance with international law in order
to find, deny haven to, capture and bring to justice, on
the basis of trial or extradition under national
legislation, anyone who finances, plans, supports,
prepares or commits terrorist acts or provides safe
haven, or who participates or intends to participate in
any such activity.

Once again, we bring our request to the Counter-
Terrorism Committee to review and verify compliance
by the United States with its obligations in fighting
terrorism, specifically in the case of Luis Posada
Carriles, in accordance with resolution 1373 (2001),
the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, the bilateral
extradition treaty signed in 1922, the International
Convention for the Suppression of Terrorist Bombings
and the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful
Acts against the Safety of Civil Aviation.

Double standards should not prevail in the fight
against terrorism.

