Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, for
his briefing on the report of the Secretary-General on
South Sudan (S/2018/83l), which provides an update on
developments in South Sudan and on the extent of the
challenges to peace and stability faced by the country
since the start of the conflict in 2013. We also thank
Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for the Sudan and South Sudan; Ambassador
Ismail Wais, Special Envoy of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development for South Sudan, and
Ms. Grace John, Governance and Peace Manager for
Community Empowerment for Progress Organization,
for their excellent briefings. We congratulate
Mr. Haysom on his outstanding work as Special Envoy
for the Sudan and South Sudan and wish him every
success in his new post and efforts to achieve peace
in Somalia.

My delegation's remarks on the report of the
Secretary-General will focus on political and security
issues, the humanitarian situation, human rights and the
operational environment of the United Nations Mission
in Southern Sudan (UNMISS).

On the political front, like those who spoke before,
my delegation welcomes the signing, on 12 September,
by the parties to the conflict of the revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in South
Sudan. We commend the tireless mediation efforts of
the region's leaders, who made a major contribution
to the signing of the Agreement. It is now up to the
authorities of South Sudan to commit to its full and
inclusive implementation so that the South Sudanese
people can enjoy the peace and stability for which they
have longed for more than five years.

Cote d'Ivoire encourages the South Sudanese
parties to take full advantage of the positive regional
dynamic and fully commit to working to restore
peace and stability to their country, by refraining
from unilateral acts that could disrupt a smooth peace
process. To that end, it is essential that the authorities
of South Sudan receive technical and financial support
from the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
the African Union, the United Nations and other
partners. In addition, measures must be taken to restore
trust among the parties and create a climate conducive
to constructive dialogue, which is a prerequisite for the
effective and efficient implementation of the Agreement.

On the security front, my delegation is deeply
dismayed about the ongoing intercommunity conflicts
and criminal acts in the country. Furthermore,
continuing clashes in several parts of the country, in
particular in Upper Nile, Bahr el-Ghazal and Equatoria,
and their tragic consequences on the population, are
also a source of concern. Given the situation, C6te
d'Ivoire would like to urge the Government of South
Sudan to step up efforts to protect civilians, who,
under international law, are its primary responsibility.
It also calls on South Sudanese parties to put the
best interests of the people first and end the clashes
throughout the country so that there is a chance for
the Peace Agreement to be effectively implemented
and for security arrangements to be operationalized, in
accordance with the voluntary commitments made.

Recurring violations of international humanitarian
law in South Sudan are widespread; ending them must
be an absolute priority. With approximately 1.8 million
internally displaced persons, 2.5 million refugees and
high food insecurity risks, the humanitarian situation in
South Sudan remains one of the most unpredictable in
the world. According to the Secretary General's report,
approximately 2.4 million children receive no education,
which poses a threat not only for the next generation
but also to the building of a viable State. In addition,
deliberate challenges to humanitarian assistance are on
the rise. Despite constant calls from the international
community, humanitarian workers continue to work
in an environment of extreme violence. Cote d'Ivoire
condemns all acts of violence committed against
humanitarian personnel and equipment. We call on the
leaders of South Sudan to create a security environment
conducive to the provision of humanitarian assistance
and the safe and dignified return of displaced persons
to their homes.

With regard to the human rights situation, my
country notes with deep concern the persistence of
sexual violence, violence against children and the
destruction of property and people's livelihoods. It is
therefore imperative to ensure the implementation of
the principle of accountability, so that the perpetrators
of human rights violations are held accountable for their
actions before the competent international courts. In
that regard, my country welcomes the conviction of 10
Government soldiers for rape and other crimes against
civilians. We call on political and judicial authorities
to make greater efforts to establish the rule of law in
South Sudan.

With regard to the operational environment, Cote
d'Ivoire commends UNMISS on the work it carries out
in extremely difficult conditions, marked by an increase
in the number of violent acts committed against its
personnel. The presence of UNMISS in South Sudan is
essential for the protection of South Sudan's people and
of humanitarian workers. It is therefore important that
the Mission be able to operate in the right environment.
My country also calls on the authorities of South
Sudan to ensure strict compliance with the status-of-
forces agreement and eliminate all obstacles to the
implementation of the UNMISS mandate.
In conclusion, the signing of the revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in South
Sudan heralds an improvement in the situation. The
return of stability in the country will require not only
the political will of the country's leaders but also the
support of all international partners. Cote d'Ivoire
therefore calls for concerted efforts to help restore
peace and stability in South Sudan.

