Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank the United
States presidency for the opportunity to discuss how
corruption fuels conflicts. As for us, we stand for a
system-wide coordination to improve the interlinkages
between development and security, in particular in the
regional context. It is from that angle that we see added
value in scrutinizing that phenomenon as a consequence
of conflict, with development drivers.

We express appreciation to Secretary-General
Guterres and the founding Director of the Enough
Project and co-founder of The Sentry, Mr. Prendergast,
for their comprehensive and insightful briefings.

My delegation would like to make the following
observations on some key points.

First, my country has its own experience in fighting
various threats to peace and security at the national,
regional and global levels. In that vein, we intend to
make every effort to support our common commitment
to preventing and controlling corruption so as to
ensure peace. Transparency, the rule of law, good
governance and accountability are the ways to root
out corruption. That is true for pre-conflict, conflict
and post-conflict societies. Our experience shows that
more engagement of countries in the international
system of relations and transactions, rather than less,
helps to avoid corruptive practices. Isolation plays the
opposite role, fuelling negative tendencies in national
and international development.

Secondly, today's world clearly testifies to the
fact that there are interlinkages between development
and security. We are confronted today by protracted
conflicts with complex political instability and tensions
that defy our interventions. To address them, we
need to assess the alarming intensity and proportions
assumed by problems such as terrorism, armed
groups, transnational crime, the exploitation of natural
resources and historical legacies and trafficking in
drugs, weapons and human beings, and to identify how
corruption permeates all of them.

On the other hand, corruption is also triggered by
insecurities caused by development-related root causes:
deep poverty arising from climate change; food, water
and energy insecurities; and large inflows of money
for capacity-building and development aid. As such,
in order to attain sustainable peace, including through
engagement on conflict prevention and peacebuilding,
we need to promote a threefold strategy by, inter
alia, creating the potential for the close, complex,
multifaceted and case-specific relationship between
security and development, utilizing an innovative
and revamped regional approach, and strengthening
coordination within the United Nations to increase
its effectiveness and ensure greater transparency
and accountability.

Thirdly, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development identifies an explicit link between
corruption and peaceful, just and inclusive societies.
One of the most important commitments in the Agenda
is to leave no one behind in the delivery of services,
decision-making and the dispensation of justice.
Achieving that ambitious goal will not be possible
without tackling corruption in all its forms.

To conclude, my country firmly believes that the
efforts of individual country have to be complemented
by future actions conducted in unity. It is critically
important to build an environment of sustainable peace
and resilient development for all. However, when we
speak about the ways that the Security Council's sanction
regimes and resolutions could lower the probability of
conflict affected by corruption, we have to also bear in
mind that the effect is yet to be thoroughly studied.

Lastly, we believe that the United Nations and its
main organs have a crucial role to play in addressing
that phenomenon, which triggers conflicts and impedes
the post-conflict recovering process.

