Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to come back to the last few lines of my
earlier statement. I said that Costa Rica was still
prepared to work with other members of the Council to
find a lasting solution to the conflict - and,
Ambassador Churkin, that solution should include the
territorial integrity of Georgia, the rights of the
Ossetian and Abkhaz peoples and, above all, the
integrity of international law and the full observance of
the principles of civilized coexistence enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations.

I am grateful to the representative of the Russian
Federation for reminding me of the history of the
region. That was precisely the concern of my President,
who was anxious to strike a balanced position on this
issue and who spent an hour on the telephone with me
seeking to clarify the situation.

I am sure that some will want to analyse the
position that Costa Rica took on Kosovo and contrast it
to that on the situation in Georgia. But the similarities
between the two situations stop in this case with the
use of force to catalyse separatist aspirations. That is
where the similarities between the two situations end.
Costa Rica recognized Kosovo's unilateral declaration
of independence as a legally valid decision. As a State
that respects international law, we have taken a
position that we consider to be legally valid.
But, also as a State that respects international law,
we have accepted and supported the path that Serbia is
taking in seeking an advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice. Representatives of Serbia
who are present in the Chamber should know that
Costa Rica supports - and will support in the General
Assembly - Serbia's aspiration to seek an advisory
opinion from the Court. Then, if we need to adjust our
position, we shall do so. Our conduct will be consistent
with the observance of law. We believe that to be a
principle of civilized and respectful coexistence among
nations: the rule of law, not force.

Hence, it does not seem reasonable to try to
confuse or indeed to equate situations and actions that
are entirely different. In one case, there are divergent
views, conflicting interpretations and peaceful
solutions that have been formulated and that are under
way. In the present case, I would recall that in some
international circumstances there is an attempt to
promote the principle that might is right. That
continues to be totally unacceptable to my country.

