Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): Allow me to make
a brief statement on behalf of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee to provide an overview of the developments
in the work of the Committee and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED).

As I reported on 29 May (see S/PV.7453), the
Committee, with the support of CTED ande as
mandated by paragraph 24 of resolution 2178 (2014),
has undertaken a wide range of actions to address the
threat of foreign terrorist fighters and is in the process

of producing a series of new tools designed to facilitate
its dialogue with Member States on the implementation
of resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005), as well
as aimed at analysing measures specific to resolution
2178 (2014). The Committee has dedicated much of its
efforts in 2015 to identifying principal gaps and good
practices that stem the flow of foreign terrorist fighters.
It submitted to the Council three relevant reports: on
challenges in prosecutions related to foreign terrorist
fighters (S/2015/ 123), on the implementation of
resolution 2178 (2014) by some Member States affected
by foreign terrorist fighters (5/2015/338) and on the use
of advance passenger information (S/2015/377). I would
like to inform the Council today on the ways in which
in recent months the Committee has more broadly
revitalized the way it works in order to maximize the
speed and effectiveness of its responses to new and
urgent challenges.

In the 13 years of its existence, the Committee
and CTED have accumulated a vast database of
information and analysis about the implementation of
counter-terrorism measures in all Member States. Since
2005, the Committee has visited more than half the
membership, and many Member States more than once.
That has enabled the Committee to track the progress
of implementation over time. In its recent visits,
particularly since September 2014, the Committee was
able to address measures related to the implementation
of resolution 2178 (2014) in order to gain a better
understanding of the practical measures undertaken
by Member States to stem the flow of foreign terrorist
fighters. Those on-site assessments, especially in the
most affected regions, have proved to be of great value
to the Committee in carrying out its mandate.

The Committee's goal this year has been to adopt
measures by which this unique store of evidence can
be swiftly and responsively leveraged and utilized to
facilitate useful and sustainable technical assistance
where and when it is needed. It aims to produce not
an assessment or critique of the shortfalls of Member
States, but rather a detailed road map of concrete
measures to be taken by Member States and close
partners to help them build their capacities to resist the
threat of terrorism. The Committee needs to take such
measures not in the least because of the tasks that the
Council has assigned to it in its presidential statement
of 29 May (S/PRST/2015/ll).

To that end, the Committee has for the first time
adopted a risk-based approach, where appropriate,
aimed at facilitating capacity-building tailored to each
Member State's needs. The huge diversity of Member
States, in terms of their size and population, the nature
of the various threats posed by terrorists to particular
Member States, as well as the Member States' relative
capacities and vulnerabilities to address those threats,
makes a one-size-fits-all approach impractical.
Member States should develop a response to the threat
of terrorism based on their own particular national
security concerns, rather than on a fixed template that
might have little relevance to their situation.

In the same context, the Committee has been
reinforcing its direct outreach to Member States. For
instance, on 4 June, as Chair of the Committee, together
with the Vice-Chairs and CTED, I held a meeting here
in New York with the representatives of five Central
Asian countries, which was also attended by the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force and
the Department of Political Affairs. Earlier this year,
from 2 to 6 February, I conducted a high-level political
mission to Mali and the Niger, together with CTED and
the participation of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for the Sahel and the Special Representative of
the Chair of the African Union for Counter-Terrorism
Cooperation.

Throughout its engagement, the Committee has
consistently recalled the position of the Council
that all measures taken by Member States to combat
terrorism must comply with all their obligations under
international law and that Member States should
adopt such measures in accordance with international
law, in particular international human rights, refugee
and humanitarian law. The Committee is also taking
steps to communicate more effectively to the wider
membership the outcomes of its dialogue with Member
States, international and regional organizations and
various other stakeholders. It has therefore increased
the number of open briefings, with three scheduled in
this month alone - on Thursday, 18 June, on the use of
advance passenger information, in collaboration with
the International Civil Aviation Organization and the
International Air Transport Association; this morning,
on crisis management in the aftermath of a terrorist
attack, with speakers from NATO, INTERPOL and the
World Health Organization; and on Friday, 19 June,
on the adoption of the new Additional Protocol to the
Council of Europe Convention on the Prevention of
Terrorism.

The Committee's close relationships with various
stakeholders have always been one of its great
strengths. Aiming to convene with them to lead the
formulation of integrated and coordinated responses on
important issues, this year, the Committee is working
on preparations for two special meetings - one on
stemming the flow of foreign terrorist fighters, to be
held in Madrid next month, the first meeting outside
New York since 2011, and a second on preventing
terrorists from exploiting the Internet and social media
to recruit terrorists and incite terrorist acts, to be
held in November. Earlier this year, on 19 February,
the Committee launched a global research network
developed by CTED with a view to enhancing its
analytical capacity and engagement with leading think
tanks and research institutions.

The Committee recognizes that its effectiveness
rests not just on what is done but when it is done. To
that end, it has been implementing measures to act
more rapidly in its dialogue with Member States,
and thus improve its responsiveness to their needs
without sacrificing the quality of that dialogue or the
opportunity for the States to consider carefully their
responses to the Committee's outreach. One example is
the Committee's request that CTED present an overview
immediately on return from its follow-up visits. In the
course of 2015, CTED has reported pro tempore to the
Committee on visits to Oman, Tunisia, Turkey and
Uzbekistan, while the Committee looks forward to the
productive dialogue it continues to have with each of
those Member States. The Committee will continue
to take the necessary measures to ensure a practical,
responsive and dynamic approach to its dialogue with
all Member States, with a view to ensuring the effective
implementation ofresolutions 1373 (2001), 1624 (2005)
and 2178 (2014).

