Ms. Landgren: The Council has before it the
Secretary-General's sixteenth and final report on
Nepal's request for support to its peace process
(S/20lO/658). Since the issuance of the previous report
of the Secretary-General of 2 September (S/2010/453)
and my briefing on 7 September (see S/PV.6377), the
Council has also heard two oral reports on this issue by
Under-Secretary-General B. Lynn Pascoe. The Council
decided on 15 September (see S/PV.6385) that the
mandate of the United Nations Mission in Nepal
(UNMIN) would terminate on 15 January 2011. Since
then, UNMIN has continued to encourage the early
resolution of issues that would contribute to the
Mission's orderly departure and, furthermore, would
give the United Nations, the Council and above all the
people of Nepal confidence that the peace process is on
track.

Nepal's peace process has remained largely
deadlocked following the resignation of Prime Minister
Madhav Kumar Nepal in June 2010. There has been
little progress on the most critical issues of forming a
new Government and integrating and rehabilitating the
personnel of the Maoist army. Some progress has been
made on the new constitution, but it may be difficult to
meet the promulgation deadline of May 2011.

Despite many problems, Nepal's interim
Government between April 2007 and August 2008
reflected agreement to share power. Since the elections,
the parties have found it extremely difficult to maintain
11-20103
consensus and to find satisfactory power-sharing
arrangements. They recently floated the idea of a
rotational system of leadership, but did not reach
agreement. At issue is not merely whether a new
Government can be formed, but whether Nepal's peace
process can move forward without it.

Voting for a new prime minister has been halted
since the President prorogued Parliament on
20 November, under circumstances described in the
Secretary-General's report. Thereafter, the Government
was not legally obliged to reconvene Parliament, and
indeed Prime Minister Nepal had suggested that he
might not do so until the Maoist army came under the
effective supervision of the Special Committee. After a
special session of Parliament convened at the request
of over one-quarter of its members, it was agreed on
23 December to hold the regular session at the earliest.
Parliament has now been summoned for 9 January, and
it appears unlikely that a new Government will be in
place by the time UNMIN's mandate expires.

Growing differences within the major political
parties continue to add to the mistrust between the
parties. In recent years, the internal processes of all
major parties have arguably become significantly more
open, participatory, inclusive and democratic, in line
with provisions of the interim constitution, but there is
divergence, within the parties on the peace process
itself. Strong voices in the traditional parties demand
an unambiguous embrace of multiparty democracy and
pluralism by the Maoists. Within the Unified
Communist Party of Nepal-Maoist (UCPN-M), there is
a perception of being marginalized and deliberately
excluded from a leadership role in Government.

The remaining tasks of the peace process, and
particularly the integration and rehabilitation of Maoist
army personnel, require collective political will. No
party on its own can identify and implement
satisfactory solutions. But the failure of the peace
process to advance has strengthened the hand of those
on all sides who deride it as unproductive or far too
slow. The Council will recall how close the Constituent
Assembly had come to a premature end last May for
similar reasons. Now, there is a real risk that the failure
of the peace process will become a self-fulfilling
prophecy.

The parties have not resolved the issue of the
future monitoring of arms and armies after UNMIN's
exit. Restrictions on the formerly warring armies have
11-20103

been a cornerstone of Nepal's peace, and as such the
monitoring arrangements are also a potential flashpoint
for failure. The independent, interim monitoring of the
armies was intended initially to help create confidence
for the election of the Constituent Assembly, and
thereafter for the completion of the remaining key
tasks of the peace process. The natural end to
monitoring would have come with the integration and
rehabilitation of Maoist army personnel and the Army's
democratic reform and rightsizing, both activities
which should have gotten under way with the interim
Government in 2007.

Despite many challenges, Nepal's arms
monitoring regime has been strikingly successful.
There have been Violations, as reported to the Council,
but these have been the exception. Based on a legal
agreement and a light presence of United Nations arms
monitors, the main ingredients have been the armies'
self-discipline and the United Nations-chaired Joint
Monitoring Coordination Committee, a reliable
mechanism for building confidence, addressing
violations and resolving disputes.

Since March 2010, and as requested by the
Council, UNMIN has consulted intensively with the
parties on options for a transfer of monitoring
responsibilities. We put forward examples of
alternative arrangements - recalling, for instance, the
original joint monitoring teams of 2007, with
membership of the Nepal Army, the Maoist army and
UNMIN. At the same time, our strong advice to the
parties has been that, rather than simply replicating a
monitoring regime, they should move forward more
swiftly on finding solutions for the 19,000 Maoist army
personnel. UNMIN itself sought to generate discussion
and planning, and many potential donors have also
been active on this front.

Following September's four-point agreement,
there has been some movement in the secretariat of the
Special Committee, as described in the Secretary-
General's report. But there is considerable confusion
and disagreement on how and by whom monitoring
will be conducted after UNMIN. Today, 10 days before
the end of the Mission, there is yet no consensus
mechanism to which UNMIN can hand over its
monitoring responsibilities. It is not clear what will
happen after UNMIN withdraws.

This situation presents potential risks, and I
would like to set out some legal, political and practical
3
considerations in this regard. The Agreement on the
Monitoring of the Management of Arms and Armies of
26 November 2006, witnessed by UNMIN, spells out
the role of the United Nations Mission as the monitor
of these arrangements, as does the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement of 21 November 2006, both referred
to in the interim constitution of 2007.

These agreements are binding on the parties, and
become no less so after UNMIN departs. All the
agreements can be revised by the parties, for example
to provide for an alternative monitoring agent, but they
have yet to do so. The departure of UNMIN, the
designated monitor, seems set to create a legal void. In
September, the Special Committee adopted a directive
for the supervision, control and direction, and code of
conduct for the Maoist army personnel. The directive
itself was not foreseen as substituting for the arms
monitoring Agreement, nor as making the Special
Committee the replacement of UNMIN. The arms
monitoring Agreement is carefully worded. The 24-hour
monitoring of weapons belonging to the Maoist army
and the Nepal Army is set out in some detail, as are the
permitted and restricted activities for both armies and
the mechanism for resolving any disputes that arise in
this regard.

Since October, I have raised repeatedly with the
parties the need for clarity on the monitoring
arrangements that will be in place after UNMIN's exit.
On 13 December 2010, I wrote to Prime Minister
Nepal and UCPN-M. Chairman Pushpa Kamal Dahal,
with copy to the relevant political parties. The Prime
Minister told me on 22 December that the Government
would draw up and present to the Maoists a separate
agreement covering the gaps between the Special
Committee's supervisory regime and the existing arms
monitoring regime. This does not appear to have been
done, however, and on 3 January UNMIN received a
response to our letter from the Prime Minister's Office.
I must state clearly that the positions presented in this
letter do not reflect consensus in the Special
Committee and appear to deviate significantly from the
interim constitution.

The Office of the Prime Minister states that the
Special Committee will, through its secretariat, take
charge of the monitoring functions currently carried
out by UNMIN, and any issues not covered by its
directives will be addressed by the Special Committee
as and when required. Secondly, the letter makes clear
that the Nepal Army will no longer be subject to
monitoring, as set out in the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement and the arms monitoring Agreement, but
will be managed under other existing constitutional and
legal provisions. Thirdly, the Prime Minister's Office
states that there is no longer a need for any dispute
resolution mechanism in connection with monitoring
arrangements, as any disputes will be resolved by
consensus in the Special Committee. And, finally, the
Government reiterates the request that all relevant
documents, United Nations equipment and logistics,
including the containers with arms and ammunition, be
handed over by UNMIN to the Special Committee or
designated mechanism.

The proposal for monitoring the Maoist army
presented by the office of the Prime Minister had
already been rejected formally by the UCPN-M, a
position repeated in a letter of 4 January 2011 from the
UCPN-M. to UNMIN. These monitoring arrangements
are not agreed. Nor is there agreement to end the
monitoring of the Nepal Army.

This proposal would effectively abrogate critical
agreements, with potentially far-reaching political
consequences that should be well understood by the
Council. Expunging these agreements would create
grave uncertainties and can be expected to erode the
confidence that has been built up around arms
monitoring and through the important achievements of
the peace process so far.

UNMIN has consistently pressed for action by
the Special Committee on the supervision, integration
and rehabilitation of Maoist army personnel, as
constitutionally mandated. The Special Committee is a
political body, its nine appointees designated by six
political parties, four of which are members of the
current Government. Its reduced ability to work by
consensus reflects the hardened political divisions
overall. It is in no position to resolve highly politicized
disputes.

With respect to the request by the Prime
Minister's Office for the transfer of UNMIN documents
and equipment, UNMIN has underlined its readiness to
provide all possible support to agreed follow-on
arrangements. UNMIN arms monitoring officers briefed
the Special Committee on the monitoring modalities
and equipment during their visit to main cantonment
site 3, in Chitwan, on 26 December 2010.

In numerous discussions with the Government
about the disposal of monitoring-related United
11-20103

Nations assets, UNMIN has set out the relevant United
Nations administrative procedures. It should be noted
that the stored arms and ammunition belong to the
parties. UNMIN's responsibility has been to monitor it,
but the Mission has no authority for its disposal. We
have explained that the United Nations-owned vehicles
will, as a priority, be sent to other missions. If the other
equipment is not needed by other missions or United
Nations agencies, it may be available for donation or,
in the shorter term, for loan.

As we have underlined, however, the arms-
monitoring function is based on agreement, and UNMIN
requires a clear and consensual response as to how the
monitoring equipment would be used. The Council has
consistently urged the parties "to agree and implement a
timetabled action plan with clear benchmarks for the
integration and rehabilitation of Maoist army personnel"
(resolution 192] (2010), para. 4), and decided that,
working with the parties, UNMIN should make the
necessary arrangements for its withdrawal, including
handing over any residual monitoring responsibilities. It
is not an option for us to hand over monitoring-related
United Nations equipment to the Government without
agreement between the Government and the UCPN-M
on the nature and form of future monitoring. UNMIN
alerted the parties in our letter of 13 December that
without such agreement, the Mission would dismantle
and remove valuable United Nations-owned assets from
the cantonments on 15 January, in line with standard
procedures.

Under the four-point agreement concluded last
September, the Government and the UCPN-M. were to
basically complete the remaining tasks of the peace
process by 14 January 2011. UNMIN has long pressed
the parties to expedite solutions for the Maoist army
and the Nepal Army.

At a meeting of the Special Committee on
19 December, its secretariat presented a work plan for
the supervision, integration and rehabilitation of the
Maoist army. The meeting concluded without
agreement on the work plan, however, as Maoist
members lodged a written dissent, citing the need to
resolve the future of the Arms Monitoring Agreement
and the modalities and numbers for integration and
rehabilitation.

Major issues pertaining to integration and
rehabilitation remain unresolved. These include the
numbers, norms and modalities for integration into the
11-20103

security forces; whether the combatants will be
integrated principally into the Nepal Army and Armed
Police Force or into other forces; and the value of the
proposed rehabilitation packages. The international
community has long been ready to provide support to
rehabilitation options. It is past time for addressing the
largely unproductive lives led by young people in
cantonments, notwithstanding the training provided to
many and their completion of school-leaving
certificates.

The United Nations has also consistently pointed
to the importance of establishing the right size for the
Nepal Army and bringing it under democratic control,
as foreseen in the Interim Constitution. A Cabinet
meeting on 26 December decided to form a three-
member defence directorate committee headed by the
Defence Minister to oversee the process of
democratization and civilian control of the Nepal
Army. The Chief of Army Staff is a member, and the
Defence Secretary is a member-secretary. This is the
first formal mechanism aimed at better coordination
between the Nepal Army and the Ministry of Defence.

The Council and UNMIN have urged the parties
to find a consensual way forward through flexibility
and compromise, while remaining true to their
commitments to the fundamental principles and goals
set out in the Comprehensive Peace Agreement,
including multiparty democracy, human rights, the rule
of law and the fundamental transformation of the State
to address the problems based on class, caste, region
and sex.

The Comprehensive Peace Agreement remains a
lodestar for Nepal, pinpointing the issues that hold the
key to sustainable peace and development. Many
ethnic and traditionally marginalized groups now
anticipate their improved representation at all levels of
society and Government, and the benefits of greater
decentralization. The contestation over resources and a
share in decision-making is now heightened and can be
expected to be a source of future tension and potential
instability.

Issues related to ownership of land and property
are central to the Comprehensive Peace Agreement and
subsequent agreements. But land-reform efforts have
stalled, and the provision of land to economically
backward classes has been limited and incomplete, as
has the return of land and property seized by the
Maoists during the conflict.
5

The human rights situation continues to be
characterized by a general atmosphere of impunity and
lack of accountability. As the Council is aware, some
journalists have been killed, while others have been
threatened. Efforts to establish a truth and
reconciliation commission and a commission of inquiry
on disappearances have slowed.

Security in the Terai remains fragile and the
region has experienced a spate of extrajudicial killings.
Violent youth groups, including the Young Communist
League and the Youth Force, engaged in especially
significant Violence between February and May 2010,
and reportedly remain embroiled in extortion activities.

Despite the stalemate over many critical matters,
there has been some encouraging progress in reducing
contentious issues in the new constitution. While the
high-level task force that helped achieve this was
dissolved in December, the 28 parties represented in
the Constituent Assembly have decided to meet
regularly under the leadership of the Speaker to
address the remaining 83 contentious issues in the
constitution-drafting process. The parties will seek to
amend parliamentary regulations in order to send
unresolved issues to the Constitutional Committee.
Time is short for these tasks to be accomplished before
the 28 May deadline for promulgation.

The political parties showed significant flexibility
in the high-level task force, chaired by UCPN-M
Chairman Pushpa Kamal Dahal, in rapidly resolving
several issues. Serious differences still remain,
however, on the names, numbers and boundaries of
federal states and on forms of governance.

Nepal's new constitution is expected to reflect the
most important commitments of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement, making that constitution perhaps the
single most critical milestone in the country's
democratic transition.

As UNMIN prepares to leave Nepal after four
years, its work should be a source of pride to the
United Nations. The Mission's rapid deployment came
about with strong support from regional and other
actors, notably the Governments of India and Norway.
UNMIN was fortunate in securing deeply dedicated
personnel, and was able to include among its national
staff a high proportion of traditionally marginalized
groups.
6

UNMIN brought expertise and impartiality to the
support of the elections; to the monitoring of arms and
armies and the convening of 134 sessions of the Joint
Monitoring Coordination Committee, which has
resolved many issues and prevented their
politicization; to the registration and verification of
Maoist personnel in cantonments; and to the
negotiation of the discharge of the disqualified.
UNMIN also maintained steadfast impartiality in
investigating and assessing reported violations of the
Arms Monitoring Agreement.

Cooperation between UNMIN and the United
Nations country team has been high. By the middle of
2008, responsibility for mine action had been
transferred to the country team, as had, by early 2009,
leadership of the United Nations Peace Fund for Nepal.
Child protection issues, especially the discharge of
Maoist army personnel disqualified as minors, has
involved solid coordination among UNMIN, the Office
of the Resident Coordinator, the United Nations
Development Programme, UNICEF, the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights and the Office
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict.

Although the process is still incomplete, the
Mission has performed its mandated tasks and has, I
am convinced, contributed significantly to the peace
process. The Mission has faced high expectations from
the public and the parties, well beyond its limited
mandate, as core political disputes can be resolved only
by the parties themselves.

The primary objective of the Mission's
establishment was the successful election of the
Constituent Assembly. Upon its completion, the
monitoring task was extended repeatedly, while
relations among the parties continued to erode. The
Mission would have benefited from a review of the
mandate after the elections. Stronger support to the
peace process overall, possibly including monitoring of
the peace agreements more broadly, as well as
technical support, particularly to the integration and
rehabilitation process, should have been considered
seriously. Some parties did ask UNMIN to take on
elements of these roles.

UNMIN has been an expression of the
international community's support for and investment
in Nepal's peace process. There has been
understandable frustration with an attenuated process
far removed from the optimistic 12-month period
originally mandated by the Council. Four years on, it
should be recognized that Nepal has undertaken a
complex long-term project of peace, democracy and
State transformation.

The historic Twelve-point Understanding which
the warring parties signed in 2005 committed them to
establishing absolute democracy in Nepal, but
completing the course and managing the process have
now become acutely challenging. Deep divisions have
emerged over its direction and the sequencing of steps,
especially with respect to the future of Maoist army
personnel and the promulgation of the new
constitution.

While Nepal's dramatic political gains are not
likely to be reversed, the risks have clearly grown.
There have at times been fears among many Nepalis
over the prospect of a "peoples' revolt", which remains
an explicit Maoist threat; of the President stepping in,
as recently called for by the Vice-President, should the
parties fail to find a way forward; or of an army-
backed coup. Any such measures would sorely threaten
peace and Nepal's fragile democracy.

Adopting the new constitution should close the
door firmly on any undemocratic governance
alternatives, of which the United Nations has also
repeatedly warned. Parties on both the left and the right
will need to show patience and remain faithful to the
core documents of the peace process. The traditional
parties need to demonstrate that their intention was not
simply to marginalize the Maoists through day-to-day
politics, while the Maoists must demonstrate
unambiguously that they intend to abide by democratic
politics.

This peace process can be brought to a close in
two ways: satisfactorily, through the negotiated
resolution of outstanding issues, or abortively, with one
or more parties reneging on their solemn commitments.
Setbacks and challenges are inevitable, but it is in the
interest of the country, the region and the international
community as a whole that the peace process be
maintained, respected and steered to a proper close.
UNMIN has continued to encourage dignified
negotiated solutions, which require a moderation of
positions on all sides. The parties can build on the
dialogue that has been their long-standing strength,
shun the demonizing of one another, and sidestep the
broad array of spoilers. At this moment, we encourage
them to come to rapid agreement on the future of the
monitoring of arms and armies.

It remains vital that the international community
speak with one voice on the need for the peace process
to continue on the basis of dialogue and compromise,
for Nepal to have a new constitution by the end of May
as agreed by the parties, and for a smooth election
under the new constitution.

The matter of Nepal's peace process will now
remain on the agenda of the Council for a further three
years. Consistent with the strong and sustained support
of the Secretary-General and the United Nations over
the past several years for peace efforts in Nepal,
principally through the United Nations Department of
Political Affairs, the United Nations will remain
engaged and continue to make its contribution to the
success of this process.

This is my final briefing to the Council on Nepal.
I would like to thank the Government of Nepal and the
political parties for their engagement with UNMIN,
and likewise the Nepal Army and the Maoist army for
their professional and profound commitment to our
cooperation, particularly in the Joint Monitoring
Coordination Committee. I want to acknowledge the
role played by sectors of civil society in Nepal's peace
process and the knowledge and advice that they have
shared with the Mission. We have worked closely with
the national and international media in Nepal and
beyond, and I appreciate the interest they have taken in
UNMIN's role in the peace process.

UNMIN has benefited from close consultation
and communication with the international diplomatic
and development community in Nepal, and especially
the Council members represented there. On behalf of
the Secretary-General, all my dedicated colleagues in
UNMIN, the United Nations family in Kathmandu, and
the Department of Political Affairs, I would like to
thank the Council and Member States, for the support
they have given UNMIN over the last four years and
will continue to give to Nepal's remarkable peace
process.

Finally, I would like to express my profound
personal gratitude to all my devoted colleagues, and
especially to Ian Martin, Tamrat Samuel and Under-
Secretary-General B. Lynn Pascoe, for our close and
supportive working relationships.
7

