Mr. Andereya (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I
welcome the detailed information provided by the
Permanent Representative of Romania, Ambassador
Mihnea Motoc, in his capacity as Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004).

Among the relevant activities accomplished by
the 1540 Committee relating to the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction in the course of the
current year, we single out and indicate our
appreciation for the efforts that have been made by the
Chairman and the members to ensure that the
Committee fully carries out its work, thanks to which it
now has the necessary guidelines for completing its
work, including the preparation of the reports of
Member States and the hiring of experts.

With regard to the latter item, we appreciate the
decisions adopted by consensus in the Committee,
making it possible to initially recruit four experts, who
can begin by studying, analysing and transmitting the
reports submitted by Member States, in accordance
with the provisions of paragraph 4 of resolution 1540
(2004), as well as by preparing the letters of reply to
the reports that have already been submitted by 86
States.

The exchange of reports and replies to those
reports, will make it possible to maintain a dialogue
between Member States and the Committee, with a
view to satisfactorily discharging the provisions that
govern the measures that will contribute to non-
proliferation - especially towards avoiding having
nuclear, chemical or biological weapons or their
vectors, reaching the hands of non-State actors - and
thereby actively cooperating to combat terrorism.

Resolution 1540 (2004) demonstrated the concern
of the Security Council and its decision to take
decisive action to thwart threats to international peace
and security, resulting from the proliferation of
chemical, biological and nuclear weapons and their
vectors and the fact that they might fall into the hands
of non-State actors, including terrorists, who could take
advantage of gaps within the legal regimes governing
imports and police and border security. The compliance
of Member States with the obligations set forth in the
resolution is of great importance as it will contribute to
ensuring their security, as well as that of the
international community.

That is how we think that each and every Member
State, in accordance with its own domestic legislation,
should set up its own controls on material, equipment
and even information about weapons of that nature. It
is also a good idea for States that do not have the
necessary legal measures to ensure domestic control to
quickly comply with measures set forth in resolution
1540 (2004), with a view to ensuring that there is
appropriate border control. With regard to the illicit
trade of such materials they should also request the
necessary assistance of the Committee.

In that connection, it is also a good idea to devise
international and regional measures of cooperation that
will effectively impede the illicit traffic of weapons of
mass destruction. The control and non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction pose growing challenges
to States that are trying to prevent the use of such
weapons by non-State actors who engage in terrorist
activities and do great damage to freedom and the
collective human rights that should be enjoyed by all
people.

In conclusion, I would like to say that unity and
cooperation in combating the proliferation of terrorism,
have also been reflected in the cooperative nature of
the work of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). That is
similar to the work done by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee as well as the work carried out by the
Al Qaeda/Taliban Sanctions Committee, with
consultations in the form of joint meetings of the
chairmen of those committees. Establishing
cooperation among the three committees, as stipulated
in Security Council resolution 1566 (2004), is an
additional challenge to the 1540 Committee, its
Chairman and its membership, to whom we wish once
again to give our support.

