Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, for presenting the report of the Secretary-
General after the transformation of the Organization's
presence in Haiti into the United Nations Mission for
Justice Support in Haiti. We consider the assessments
made following his own recent visit to Haiti, from 14 to
15 March, especially useful.

Since the middle of October of last year, when the
Mission began its work in its new format, we have seen
some unquestionably encouraging progress. We welcome
the efforts of Haiti's leadership to ensure stability
and establish effective Government administration
systems that rely on its own strengths. In that regard,
we are closely monitoring the implementation
of President Jovenel Moise's Caravan of Change
initiative. Coordinated and collaborative work on the
part of the legislative, executive and judicial branches
of power will be crucial to overcoming the country's
internal problems and laying a firm foundation for
sustainable economic development. We note Haiti's
increased participation in the work of international
and regional organizations. In January it took on
the rotating chairship of the Caribbean Community
and joined the Community of Latin American and
Caribbean States Quartet. The gradual, step-by-step
progress has enabled the Council to begin to carefully
consider the Secretary-General's preliminary proposal
for establishing benchmarks for the Mission's exit
preparedness and handing over its functions directly
to the Government and the United Nations country
team. In that regard, as with any other peacekeeping
operation, it is important at every stage to take into
account not only the views of the host Government but
also the principle of national ownership.

However, there is still a great deal of work to do,
both for the country's authorities, which are being
called on to become more self-reliant and independent
of international support every day, as well as for the
United Nations staff whose job is to provide them with
the maximum support. That thorough, painstaking
support is vital to the Government, which, taking the
Haitian people's views into consideration, must strive
to identify its priorities and tasks on the security,
politics, development and peacebuilding fronts. We
should add that it is just as important to ensure that all
national stakeholders understand the concept of shared
responsibility for sustaining peace.

The ongoing serious humanitarian situation is still
very worrying, since Haiti is still grappling with the
effects of Hurricane Matthew. Also, despite the fact
that people who were obliged to move to neighbouring
States are now returning to Haiti is a very good sign,
their growing numbers represent a special responsibility
for the leadership of a country where 1 million people
still need humanitarian aid.

We are pleased with the Secretary-General's
information on the gradual improvement in the security
situation and the falling crime statistics, including for
sexual offences. We hope that the strengthening of
the National Haitian Police's numbers to reach a total
of 15,300 personnel, 9 per cent of whom are women,
will help to achieve even greater progress. Against
that background, the reports by representatives of
Haitian civil society of sexual crimes committed
by representatives of foreign non-governmental
organizations are extremely worrying, and in the
context of the ongoing efforts within the United Nations
to combat such shocking offences, we urge the Mission
not to ignore such scandalous examples. These are very
grave crimes that tarnish the image of international
support generally. Any such reports should be
investigated and those found to be responsible should
not escape the punishment they deserve.

The Council will soon have to agree on the draft
resolution that will extend the Mission's mandate for
a year. In accordance with its mandate, the Mission
will continue to assist the host country in ensuring
the rule of law and strengthening the capacity of its
law-enforcement bodies. The Council must be certain
that adequate account is taken of the realities of
the country's situation, including with regard to the
Mission's structure, something that the Secretary-
General also brings up in his report.

In conclusion, I would like to affirm our support to
the Government and the people of Haiti, who have to
overcome the destructive legacies of natural disasters
as well as their domestic problems on their road to
stability and prosperity. In order to ensure that they can
recover more quickly, they need a strong State and a
cohesive society through whose joint efforts they can
build and strengthen Haiti's potential.

