Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): Allow
me to thank Jordan for having taken the initiative of
convening this open debate under the presidency of His
Majesty Crown King Abdullah II bin Al Hussein. The
Secretary-General, Mr. Peter Neumann and Mr. Scott
Atran illustrated the importance of this debate by
identifying the role of youth in the fight against Violent
extremism and promoting peace. We welcome the
fact that the Security Council has given this issue the
attention it deserves.

Luxembourg fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union. I will
make a few comments in my national capacity.

First, as our Prime Minister said at the Security
Council meeting (see S/PV.7272) devoted to the fight
against foreign terrorist fighters, in September 2014,
we must intensify our efforts to prevent radicalization,
which could lead young people to terrorism, and to
counter violent extremism. In Europe, the European
Commission has put in place a radicalization awareness
network that works at the local community level. In its
capacity as President of the Council of the European
Union, which it will exercise in the second half of
2015, Luxembourg will ensure the follow-up to the
implementation of the European Union strategy aimed
at fighting radicalization and the recruitment of
terrorists.

At the national level, our relevant agencies are
implementing a strategy for the prevention of extremist
radicalization. A mentoring and awareness-raising
network has been established in close collaboration
with the educational and penitentiary structures of
our country, religious communities and with the full
support of the Red Cross Society.

The concept paper (S/2015/231, annex) circulated by
the Jordanian presidency ahead of this debate properly
identifies the main root causes that lead to youth
radicalization. Young people seeking a sense ofidentity
and of belonging to a social group are particularly
vulnerable to the phenomenon. The feeling of exclusion
as a precondition for radicalization has been eloquently
described this morning by Mr. Neumann and is clear in
the number of young people who leave Europe to fight
alongside Daesh other extremist terrorist organizations.

To counter the rise of violent extremism and
prevent the exploitation of young people, it is essential,
in our View, to invest in the development and well-
being of youth themselves. For although we must avoid
oversimplifying reality, the lack of prospects and
economic opportunities, including the lack of access
to employment that young people are faced with,
undeniably contribute to creating a breeding ground for
the radicalization of young people. The link between
violent extremism and economic and social problems
goes back to the broader link that exists between
security, development and the respect for the rule of
law and human rights.

As the Secretary-General underscored this morning,
we must avoid reducing youth to a simple potential
security risk. On the contrary, we must acknowledge
them as agents of change and as actors in building
peace and development. We must give young people the
opportunity to show their potential by promoting their
full participation in the life of society.

It is in this spirit that Luxembourg is committed,
at the level of the Peacebuilding Commission, to
supporting the Guinean authorities in their policy
aimed at promoting employment and the socioeconomic

reintegration Organizationf young people and at
building an inclusive society. Our development
cooperation policy has a special focus on education and
vocational training for young people. It is in this sense
as well that Luxembourg has been working, together
with Bulgaria and Panama and the Group of Friends
for Children and the Sustainable Development Goals,
with the support of UNICEF, to ensure that the post-
2015 development agenda fully takes into account the
specific needs and potential of children and young
people in general.

