Mr. Klein: I will also be brief.
Police professionalism is improving, but we need
to pay the police a living wage. A food basket for a
family of four in Bosnia and Herzegovina costs 450
convertible marks. Many policemen are paid less than
that. We know, obviously, that in all of our countries,
when you pay the police and civil servants a reasonable
wage, you minimize corruption. Our major goal this
year is the rationalization of police salaries. We will be
working closely with the leadership of the Federation
and the Republika Srpska to discuss, and address, that
issue.

With regard to Herzegovina, I think much
depends on the constitutional decisions that will be
made in the coming weeks. As I said three weeks ago
in Mostar, the Croats needs to engage constructively
with the State institutions to use the power they have.
Bosnia and Herzegovina cannot work as a European
State without Croats and Serbs, but they have too often
been misguided and misled by leaders who put their
own financial interests above the interests of their
people. We have an old Alsatian proverb that says "If
you ride a dead horse, you're not going to get very far."
It is time they got off the dead horse. We still have all
too many leaders who led them into war and not into
peace. They have addressed a past that they cannot
change; there is a future they cannot yet see. Some
people still vote too "ethnically"; they still do not vote
economically or politically, as we wish they would.

In closing, let me say that progress in Bosnia and
Herzegovina may be slow. It is, at times, hesitant. But
there is real progress. Obstructionists remain, but there
is an old Bosnian proverb that says "The dogs may
bark, but the caravan moves on."

Finally, let me also thank and congratulate my
colleague Wolfgang Petritsch for the work he has done
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. I also thank the President
and the members of the Council for their generous
comments directed at my people. I will take those back
to Sarajevo with me, and let them know that you think
kindly of them.

