Mr. Richardson (United States of America): Allow
me to begin by welcoming you, Sir, to the presidency of
the Security Council and to thank your predecessor,
Ambassador Dangue Rewaka of Gabon, for his skillful
guidance of the Council in February. The United States
thanks the Secretary-General for his strong, clear speech.

The United States welcomes the Secretary-General's
efforts to obtain Iraqi agreement to comply with its
obligations. We are impressed that through his dedication
and skill he was able to bring back the Memorandum of
Understanding the Council has just endorsed. The
Memorandum forcefully reiterates that Iraq must cooperate
fully and unconditionally with the United Nations Special
Commission (UN SCOM) and the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA). We are all deeply grateful to the
Secretary-General for his courageous and diligent efforts.
Through his diplomacy, backed by America's willingness
to use force, he has achieved what could be, if implemented
fully by Iraq, a breakthrough.

I also would like to thank my fellow Council members
for their patience and spirit of cooperation. We should take
some time to congratulate ourselves, because we've worked
hard to reach unanimity on a solid text that we all can and
will stand by - and that, if adhered to by Iraq, could lead
to a resolution of this crisis.

The issue here is not the so-called eight presidential
sites. The principle is access. The Secretary-General's
mission to Baghdad has secured commitments from Iraq
which, on paper, promise that Iraq will provide UNSCOM
full, immediate and unrestricted access to all sites within
Iraq. The Secretary-General's mission secured an Iraqi
commitment to adhere to the terms of all relevant Security
Council resolutions - not just on disarmament, but also on
prisoners of war (POWs) and Kuwaiti property. And while
we welcome the statements by Iraq, its commitments are
mere words on paper. The proof is in the testing.

We are skeptical after six years of broken promises.
Iraq has yet to live up to its word, or up to the demands
made by the Security Council in its resolution.

Yet, we hope the Memorandum of Understanding,
signed by the Iraqi Deputy Prime Minister and the
Secretary-General, will mark an end to Iraq's policy of
non-cooperation and confrontation and will lead to Iraq's
full compliance with all relevant Security Council
resolutions.

We look forward to receiving the Secretary-
General's proposed procedures for the presidential sites,
and we have full confidence that the guidelines will
conform to all Council resolutions.

We have full faith in the United Nations Special
Commission and its Executive Chairman. We will be
watching UNSCOM's inspections to be sure that Iraq has
provided full and unrestricted access to UNSCOM. -
access that Security Council resolutions demand and
require.

The resolution that this Council has just adopted
unanimously states this plainly yet eloquently. Iraq must
comply with Security Council resolutions or else face the
consequences of its actions. Any, repeat any, attempt by
Iraq to provide less than immediate, unrestricted and
unconditional access to any site will, as this resolution
states, result in the severest consequences for Iraq.

This resolution also provides for a new beginning for
Iraq to cooperate fully with UNSCOM. and the IAEA.
The Secretary-General's initiative offers us all new hope.
But only Iraq has the choice, only Iraq holds the key.
And that key is full and complete cooperation. Unless
Iraq demonstrates that it is ready to rejoin the
international community and abide by the rules of
civilized behaviour, it can expect nothing but certain
punishment and continued isolation. The choice, as I said,
is Iraq's.

