The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.

First of all, we thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2019/6) on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO), as well as the good offices
of Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General of the United Nations and Head of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We urge her
to pursue her efforts in the post-electoral stage and in
the implementation of the mandates of MONUSCO
in order to successfully conclude the election process
and continue making progress towards the political,
economic and social stability ofall the Congolese people.

I also want to highlight and commend the valuable
briefings delivered by the President of the Commission
electorale nationale independante (CENI), as well
as by the representatives of the African Union, the
Conference episcopale nationale du Congo and the
Southern African Development Community. We
commend their dedication and valuable contributions
to the electoral process in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

In particular, the Dominican Republic wishes to
congratulate the Democratic Republic of the Congo for
undertaking this historic election process. We recognize
the sign of maturity and political determination that
the Congolese people have shown, as evidenced in the
high rate of participation and in the good management
of the organization of the electoral contest, despite the
challenges that arose. However, we regret the loss of
lives and the episodes of violence that occurred during
and after the process, and offer our condolences to the
relatives of the victims.

We received with interest the publication by CENI
of the preliminary results of the presidential elections.
We also understand that the incoming Government
should enjoy the maximum possible consensus, which
would guarantee a climate of stability and governability
in the country. We therefore urge all actors to do their
best to ensure that the final results accurately and
beyond all doubt reflect the decision of the majority of
the Congolese people and that this decision is respected.
We also trust that the process of the transfer of power to
the winners is carried out peacefully and with respect
for the Congolese Constitution.

We support the statement of the Secretary-
General, calling on all actors to channel any electoral
dispute through the established institutional channels.
Similarly, we trust that they will act responsibly by
putting the democratic stability of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo above all other considerations.

To conclude, we trust that the conclusion of the
recent elections and the presence of new actors in the
national political life will open a new stage of open
dialogue in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and contribute to the development of an increasingly
participatory democracy, with the inclusion of all
sectors of the population. We urge the Congolese people
to undertake the process of transition in a peaceful
climate, to look to the future with optimism and to
participate actively in the construction of an inclusive
country, in a climate of peace and lasting union that
will bring stability to the entire Central African region.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Mr. Gata Mavita Wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic 
of the Congo) (spoke in French): At the outset, Sir, I am
honoured to congratulate your country, the Dominican
Republic, on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month and to express our
full appreciation for the good manner in which you are
leading our debates. I also thank you for having taken
the initiative of convening this important meeting to
consider the situation in my country, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

I take this opportunity to once again express the
thanks and gratitude of the Congolese people and their
Government to all members of the Security Council for
the tireless efforts they continue to make in seeking
solutions to ensure that my country regains the peace
and stability it so badly needs for its reconstruction
and development.

My delegation thanks Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO); the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Zambia; the Permanent Observer
of the African Union Mission to the United Nations;
the President of the Commission electorale nationale
independante (CENI); and Monsignor Marcel Utembi
of the Conference episcopale nationale du Congo
(CENCO) for their briefings on developments in the
electoral process in my country. I, in turn, should like
to convey the position of my Government developments
in that process.

As the Special Representative highlighted in
her briefing, the electoral process has just reached
a milestone with the organization of elections on
30 December 2018 throughout the country, with the
exception of the region of Beni and Butembo in North
Kivu province, where the Ebola epidemic has been
raging for several months, and in the Yumbi territory
of Mai-Ndombe province, which has seen violence
causing loss oflife. The elections were postponed until
March 2019 for all of those regions.

The Council is already aware that Mr. Fe'lix
Tshisekedi Tshilombo was proclaimed the winner of
the presidential election by the Commission electorale
nationale independante and will be invested as
President of the Republic as soon as the Constitutional
Court publishes the final results.

I should emphasize that, despite some scattered
incidents during the electoral campaign that have
already been mentioned and occasional voting machine
power failures registered on polling day, which were
repaired by CENI technicians, it is important to
recognize that the elections went smoothly in general.
The candidates for the three polls conducted their
campaign freely, and voters came out in large numbers
and expressed their choice with complete peace of
mind. Similarly, the candidates' observers, deployed
in all constituencies across the country, also performed
their duty freely. As for the duly accredited national
and international observers, they welcomed the smooth
conduct of the elections. In the end, the voting machine
that was disparaged by some was not only appreciated
but was also used by the population and all candidates.

Given the low percentage of votes - 20 per
cent - counted in the two or three days preceding
the scheduled date of 6 January for the publication of
the provisional results, CENI deferred the publication,
which occurred on 10 January, opening the way for a
changeover at the highest level of State for the first
time in the history of our country. The results that were
released to the public were received favourably across
the country.

It goes without saying that, in the event ofa possible
challenge by those candidates who do not agree with
the results, especially with regard to the presidential
election, they have remedies similar to those available
in other countries. According to the Constitution and
the laws of the Republic, the deadline for appeal is 48
hours after the publication of provisional results. My
delegation draws the attention of the Council to the
fact that the Democratic Republic of the Congo, like
any sovereign State, has institutions established by the
Constitution and the law of the land to settle disputes.
Many Council members have advised us to resort to
that procedure. However, it is not good policy for the
international community to impose requirements on
the Democratic Republic of the Congo that are likely to
replace those institutions.

In view of the foregoing, we feel it important
to urge our partners and friendly countries not to
pour oil on the fire by speculating on the results, but
instead to work to strengthen democracy and peace by
encouraging all political actors and their supporters
to exercise restraint, to prioritize the greater interests
of the nation by avoiding any act of violence likely to
compromise social calm, and to resort to legal channels
if necessary. It is important that the peaceful climate
that prevailed during the elections continue after the
publication of the results until the peaceful and historic
transfer of power at the highest level of State between
an outgoing Head of State and an incoming Head of
State occurs.

I cannot close this chapter without paying
due homage to His Excellency Mr. Joseph Kabila
Kabange, President of the Republic, who honoured
his commitment to respecting the Constitution by not
seeking a third term and leading the country towards
the organization of free, democratic and transparent
elections. In the same vein, the Government should
be commended for the efforts made to fully fund
the elections with its own funds. CENI is also to be
congratulated on having remained on course despite
interference and pressure. It can be proud today of the
work accomplished. Finally, the Congolese people, who
have demonstrated maturity and patriotism throughout
this process, must be congratulated.

My Government, as the principal body responsible
for ensuring the well-being of its people and for
consolidating democracy, has a duty to ensure by all
legal and regulatory means that the electoral process
succeeds in peace. In that context, it shares the desire
expressed in the various pre-reports of international
election observers to see this electoral cycle continue in
a calm manner until the local and municipal elections.
The Government therefore invites all stakeholders in
the electoral process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to combine their efforts responsibly to ensure a
soft landing for the aforementioned process.

The security situation prevailing in the eastern part
of our country continues to be an issue of concern for
my Government. The Forces armees de la Republique
Democratique du Congo (FARDC), in collaboration
with MONUSCO, is pursuing military operations in
that part of the country. Particularly with regard to
the Allied Democratic Forces terrorists who, in recent
months, have distinguished themselves with a series of
deadly attacks against our people in Beni and Butembo
and against MONUSCO and FARDC troops, Council
members will recall that following the dismantling of
their main strongholds early last year, their operational
capacity was appreciably diminished. Their current
modus operandi is unusual and should lead MONUSCO
and the FARDC to review their strategies and join
forces to do away with these terrorists and put an end
to the suffering endured by the populations of Beni
and Butembo.

With regard to child protection, the latest report of
the Secretary-General (S/2019/6) states in paragraph
52 that:

"MONUSCO continued to engage with armed
groups in Ituri, North Kivu and South Kivu,
resulting in the release of more than 440 girls
and boys. During October and November, six
commanders of armed groups signed a declaration
stating that they would no longer recruit children or
commit other grave, child-related violations. That
brought the total number of armed groups who have
signed engagements with MONUSCO to eight,
five of which are listed by the Secretary-General
for child recruitment. The commanders also
committed to implementing a road map, which, in
addition to preventing grave child rights violations,
also requires them to take measures to stop and
prevent sexual violence."

The Council will agree that, in the context of
the restoration of State authority and peace, my
Government is waging a great struggle to eradicate
armed groups that disturb the peace and sow insecurity
in the communities where they operate. The FARDC is
assisted in this fight by MONUSCO. We ask ourselves
therefore how MONUSCO is able to maintain relations
and collaborate with the armed groups it is supposed to
fight alongside the FARDC.

Turning to humanitarian concerns, the many
population displacements due to the insecurity created
by the armed groups of which we have just spoken, the
resurgence of certain diseases and the unscheduled
return of several thousand of our compatriots from
Angola along the border with that country are issues of
concern to the Government to which it is working to find
urgent solutions. It goes without saying, moreover, that
any assistance from our partners to ease the suffering
of those in need will always be welcome.

Turning to the Ebola virus, which is raging in
the Beni and Butembo regions, efforts continue to be
undertaken by the Government, in collaboration with
the World Health Organization and a number of other
partners, to combat the disease. Since the outbreak of
the epidemic, the total number of cases reported as of
8 January is 628 - of which 580 are confirmed and 48
probable - with 383 deaths reported and 222 persons
having recovered. In terms of treating those afflicted,
a new centre opened on 3 January in the Katwa health
district. Also, the Beni transit centre, which was
destroyed during protests on 27 December, is once
again operational.

Before concluding, allow me to remind the Council
that the Democratic Republic of the Congo is writing a
new chapter in its history. It looks forward to the support
of the international community and all its friends to help
it usher in a new era in a calm and peaceful way. In that
regard, my Government commends and warmly thanks
all those who stood by our side in good times and in
bad and who offered their assistance when we needed
it most. We are especially grateful to the Southern
African Development Community, the International
Conference of the Great Lakes Region and the African
Union. We also express our profound gratitude to the
troop-contributing countries and the United Nations,
which have contributed so much to the restoration of
peace and stability in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. My delegation also reiterates its gratitude to all
the members of the Security Council for their consistent
focus on the situation in our country and, as the new
year opens, we wish all members the very best in 2019.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give
the floor to Mr. Nangaa Yobeluo to respond to the
comments that have been made.

