Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset, let
me thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this debate
on the important subject ofpeacekeeping and its crucial
role in building peace in post-conflict situations.

India is proud to have been associated with
United Nations peacekeeping from its very inception.
As a country that has contributed to virtually every
United Nations peacekeeping operation in the past
six decades - more than 100,000 peacekeepers in
all - we have an abiding interest in United Nations
peacekeeping. During our presidency of the Security
Council in August 2011, we organized a debate on
United Nations peacekeeping (see S/PV.6603). Even
today, India is one of the largest contributors to major
peacekeeping missions, and we remain committed to
that global enterprise.

I also wish to convey our deep appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his presence here today and for
his useful briefing on the subject.
Peacekeeping has been a critical activity of the
United Nations in maintaining international peace
and security. Its collaborative character infuses it
with a unique legitimacy that defines its strength. The
core values of United Nations peacekeeping explain
its enduring relevance. The principles of consent,
impartiality and the non-use of force except in self-
defence and in defence of the mandate have all outlived
the many transitions that peacekeeping has witnessed,
from the truce-supervision missions of yesteryear
to the multidimensional mandates of today. Today's
debate on the multidimensional nature of peacekeeping
underscores in ample measure how the nature of
peacekeeping has evolved.

Peacekeeping is often deliberated as a stand-alone
exercise, rather than as a contributory endeavour that
imparts strength to the larger peace enterprise. That
reflects the substance of its currency. In order for peace
to be sustainable, enduring and lasting, it is imperative
that all components of the comprehensive peace
enterprise contribute to achieving peace.

In that regard, I would like to draw the Security
Council's attention to the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2011/l7) issued in August 2011, which called
for meaningful engagement with the troop-contributing
countries and the inclusion of field expertise and
experience in peacebuilding strategies and in the
drafting of mission mandates.

The nature of mandates will continue to shape
the practice of peacekeeping. My delegation has often
spoken strongly in favour of a tiered and inclusive
mandate-making process in order to ensure that
mandates are updated, flexible and in tune with the
realities on the ground. In-depth consultations with
troop- and police-contributing countries should be an
integral part of the mandate-generation process. A fair
assessment of mandates, with corresponding resources,
will inject a sense of realism into expectations with
respect to mission objectives and achievements.

Unfortunately, resource allocation has failed to
keep pace with mandate expansion, and peacekeeping
missions are called upon to do more and more with less
and less. That has added to the operational challenges
faced by peacekeepers. Missions are overstretched due
to shortages ofpersonnel and equipment. The resources
provided need to be commensurate with mandates, and
efficiency measures should not compromise operational
necessities.

A reference was made to the United Nations Military
Observer Group in India and Pakistan (UNMOGIP).
Suffice it to say that the role of UNMOGIP was
overtaken by the Simla Agreement of 1972, between
India and Pakistan, which was signed by the Heads of
the two Governments and ratified by their respective
Parliaments. In times of austerity, we need to address
the question of whether the resources being spent on
UNMOGIP would not be better utilized elsewhere.

Peacekeeping and peacebuilding are two sides
of the same coin. Critical peacebuilding tasks such
as disarmament, demobilization and reintegration,
security sector reform, the rule of law, basic governance,
institution building and support to the democratic
process are all premised on peacekeepers' proactive
involvement. Our strategies and approaches therefore
should be geared towards capitalizing on those
strengths. United Nations peacekeeping in fact makes
all of that affordable at a fraction of the cost involved in
similar endeavours elsewhere.

Two thirds of the United Nations field presence is
comprised of uniformed personnel. They respond to a
complex set of challenges in a holistic manner. In that
context, we should synergize the keeping of peace and
the building of peace. Their mutual complementarities
should be harmonized, rather than being zoned as
civilian versus military aspects.

Functional necessities should guide us in developing
programmatic content and budgetary outlines. The
propensity to create new structures, mechanisms and
positions that only add additional bureaucratic layers
need to be discouraged in the current context.

Partnership is peacekeeping's central pillar. All
stakeholders in the process have a duty to enhance
dialogue and mutual understanding. The triangular
cooperation framework in that regard offers a viable
way to engender and consolidate that partnership.

The representative character of peacekeeping and
its reform process is the key to its across-the-board
acceptability. It is imperative that the work on that
reform process is not the prerogative of a few, but is
representative across the board.

Finally, my delegation is happy that a resolution
(resolution 2086 (2013)) has been adopted today that
will strengthen the peacekeeping framework.

