Ms. Jahan (Bangladesh): The Bangladesh
delegation welcomes this opportunity to participate in
this important open debate on post-conflict
peacebuilding. We thank the delegation of the United
Kingdom for having taken the initiative to organize
this meeting.

While we align ourselves with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Jamaica on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement caucus of the
Peacebuilding Commission, we have taken the floor to
underscore the following points.

Long after the guns have fallen silent, the scars of
war continue to haunt the minds of the people as well
as the economy of the country concerned. The first and
foremost task of post-conflict peacebuilding, therefore,
lies in expediting the healing process while, at the
same time, creating the conditions necessary to prevent
the situation from sliding back into conflict. In that
context, the key focus should be on developing an
integrated approach, with clear-cut commitments by
the Government in question and the international
community to broad-ranging interventions meant to
restore peace and security, on the one hand, and to
bring about economic growth and development, on the
other. Needless to say, the country concerned should
always play a leadership role in the process of
consolidating peace if that peace is to be sustainable.

Analysis of conflict situations reveals that the
twin phenomena of unemployment and conflict
continued to feed each other in many cases.
Empowerment, particularly of youth through education
and employment, should be a key focus in preventing
situations from sliding back. Furthermore, the overall
experience in implementing resolution 1325 (2000), on
women and peace and security, at all levels has been
somewhat mixed.
While we have integrated a gender perspective in
some aspects of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, in post-conflict peacebuilding efforts much
remains to be done. As one of the largest troop-
contributing countries, Bangladesh is ever conscious of
its responsibility to incorporate the essential elements
of resolution 1325 (2000) in the predeployment
training of peacekeepers. As a member of the
Peacebuilding Commission we will continue remain
vigilant in our focus on the provisions of the
resolution.

Peacebuilding, being a holistic process, involves
inter-agency cooperation across a wide range of issues.
The main challenge lies in achieving the necessary
coordination between agencies in post-conflict
situations. Ownership, especially at the national level,
and close coordination between United Nations and
national actors and the international donor community
are crucial. We would like to reiterate the NAM
position that the Peacebuilding Commission should
have the central role in post-conflict peacebuilding and
reconciliation. The Commission should be equipped
with the necessary resources for implementing its
mandated functions effectively.

The concept of "Rapidly deployable and skilled
civilian capacity" is being discussed in various forms
in the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations
since 2005. The idea of civilian observers in the
context of United Nations peacekeeping operations was
floated in previous meetings of the Committee but it
was not agreed upon for further consideration. Certain
specific areas of multidimensional peacekeeping
and peacebuilding - for example disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, rule of law and so on -
warrant experts in their own fields. This expertise
could be from both military and civilian backgrounds.
Hence, we are not in favour of the creation of any type
of cadre or pool comprising United Nations staff for
rapid civilian deployment. The purpose can be served
by filling the vacant posts in field missions and country
offices with personnel recruited from Member States
and host countries.

Some pertinent questions on this need much more
clarification, the most important of which is the
question of the relationship between such United
Nations capacities and national capacities. We need to
remind ourselves that national ownership of the
peacebuilding process is a fundamental prerequisite.
Any progress towards building such rapidly deployable
capacity, therefore, should be thoroughly discussed in
more inclusive forums, including the Peacebuilding
Commission.

The question of leadership on the ground also
requires careful thought and discussion. We underscore
the necessity of close coordination among the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General or the
executive representative of the Secretary-General, the
national Government and the Peacebuilding
Commission. We also would like to emphasize that the
extended role of the Special Representatives envisaged
in the concept paper should in no way undermine the
national ownership of the peacebuilding process.

We very much support the concept of a more
rapid and flexible funding mechanism. Disbursements
from the multi-donor trust funds and other funds
should be rapid and immediate to ensure early
stabilization of countries emerging from conflict. This
is crucial in assisting the national and local authorities
in delivering a peace dividend. However, we reiterate
that one of the main purposes of the Peacebuilding
Commission, as described in General Assembly
resolution 60/180 and Council resolution 1645 (2005),
is to marshal resources for reconstruction and
institution-building in countries emerging from
conflict. Therefore, the Peacebuilding Commission
should have a central role in any discussion regarding
the creation of a new rapid funding mechanism.

Many of the issues and ideas raised in the concept
paper before us have for some time been discussed in
the Peacebuilding Commission. We believe that the
proposals advanced by the concept paper would benefit
from further analysis within the Commission itself,
which, as an intergovernmental advisory body, is I
believe competent to do so. Consultations among the
Security Council, the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council on these issues are also
necessary. We would underscore that these
consultations should be inclusive and exhaustive to
ensure a practical outcome with pragmatic
recommendations.

Finally, our experience in dealing with the
country-specific situations in the Peacebuilding
Commission strengthens our conviction that the post-
conflict peacebuilding process requires the
involvement of all the stakeholders: the Government;
the Peacebuilding Commission's full membership;
potential donors; the United Nations country team;
financial institutions; non-governmental organizations;
civil society; and the private sector. It would also
require the continued support of the Security Council.

