Mr. Kamal (Pakistan): Mr. President, it is a pleasure
for me to participate in this debate under your presidency
and to render tribute to you for the exceptionally
transparent manner in which Sweden is conducting the
affairs of the Security Council during this month.

Through you, we would also like to salute your
predecessor, Ambassador Danilo Turk of Slovenia, for the
manner in which he guided the affairs of the Council
during the preceding month.

Allow me, Sir, to express our gratitude to you for
arranging today's meeting to consider the report of the
Secretary-General on protection for humanitarian assistance
to refugees and others in conflict situations. We must also
thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive reports
on various aspects of the causes of conflict in Africa, as
well as for his recommendations for the promotion of
durable peace and sustainable development in the region.
These reports have generated enormous interest among the
Member States and encouraged them to address the issues
involved with a sense of due urgency.

In his latest report, the Secretary-General has aptly
identified the obstacles in the way of effective
humanitarian operations in various parts of the world.
Refugees, displaced persons, other victims of conflicts,
and humanitarian personnel are subjected to cruel
treatment both in conflict areas and in post-conflict
situations. They face adversities, despite the existence of
a substantial body of international law and principles
evolved over a long period of time to protect civilians,
refugees and humanitarian personnel.

The 1949 Geneva Conventions and the Additional
Protocols of 1977 are well established norms of
international humanitarian law for the protection of
civilians and other persons who are not party to any
hostilities. Similarly, the 1951 Convention and the 1967
Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees are the
principal international instruments concerning the
protection of refugees. We have a collective responsibility
in ensuring effective adherence to these legal codes by the
Members of the United Nations.

We share the view of the Secretary-General that
there is a perennial problem of effective compliance by
Member States with the relevant norms, principles and
provisions of international law in conflict situations.
These codes are particularly violated in situations of
internal conflict where whole societies are mobilized for
war, including armed groups, militias, foreign
mercenaries, child soldiers, criminals and other desperate
groups. There should be concerted efforts to create
awareness about the responsibilities of State authorities
for violations of humanitarian norms.

In this connection, we welcome the establishment of
the International Criminal Court, having jurisdiction over
genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes and the
crime of aggression. Pakistan actively participated in the
deliberations of the United Nations Diplomatic
Conference in Rome.

It is our firm conviction that refugees, displaced
persons and other victims of conflict should be provided
protection and assistance under international law. In
fulfilling its moral obligations under international law,
Pakistan continues to host close to 1.5 million Afghan
refugees. Despite the adverse impact of such a large
number of refugees on our political, social and economic
systems, we will continue to provide shelter to these
Afghan refugees. Unfortunately, there has been a
continuing reduction in the assistance provided by the
international community for the Afghan refugees in

 

Pakistan. They seem to have been totally abandoned by the
international community.

Conflict situations also persist in other parts of our
region, resulting in similar problems of displaced persons,
civilian victims and gross human rights violations.

The Secretary-General has rightly pointed out the
problem of humanitarian access in conflict areas. There is
a need for an in- depth study aimed at ascertaining the
reasons for the growing resistance in some societies to
unhindered access to humanitarian organizations. We also
agree with the assertion of the Secretary- General that the
"issue of resources is of critical importance not only
for the purpose of ensuring access but also for the
provision of humanitarian assistance itself.
Humanitarian access must be supported by sufficient
funds" (S/I998/883, para. 21).

In recent years, a number of humanitarian operations
have been undertaken by the United Nations in conflict
areas through the establishment of safety zones, safe areas,
neutralized zones, demilitarized zones and safe corridors.
While these efforts were generally welcomed by the
international community, the double standard in enforcing
humanitarian access in different parts of the world has
become the subject of criticism by Member States and
humanitarian agencies alike. We believe that there should
be uniform humanitarian treatment for all, irrespective of
cast, colour or region.

It is a matter of grave concern that between January
1992 and August 1998, 153 United Nations international
and local staff members lost their lives in the line of duty.
We render our condolences to their bereaved families. This
issue needs to be addressed on a priority basis. Some of the
reasons for such occurrences have been identified in the
report of the Secretary- General, the most important reason
being

"A general mistrust and suspicion regarding the
motives and intentions of humanitarian organizations"
(ibid., para. 27)

We need to study in greater detail the reasons for suspicion
and mistrust, and suggest effective measures to curtail these
negative tendencies.

While we believe that the General Assembly has
primary responsibility for providing policy guidance for the
United Nations humanitarian operations, the Security
Council must also continue to play its due role in the
complex dynamics of conflicts in various parts of the
world. However, care needs to be taken so that
discrimination is avoided and selectivity is minimized.

In conclusion, I should like to reaffirm our support
for and cooperation with for the Secretary-General in his
efforts to identify the causes of conflict and for the
promotion of durable peace in Africa and in other parts of
the world.

