Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Judge Jorda for introducing the
report before us.

We welcome the efforts of the judges of the
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the
Former Yugoslavia since 1991 (ICTY) to improve the
functioning of that body of international criminal
justice. We understand their frustration at the pace and
methods of the functioning of the Tribunal. For our
part, we, too, have serious reservations about the work
of that international body.

When it established the Tribunal, the Security
Council believed that the ICTY would make an
important contribution to settling the crisis in
Yugoslavia and that it would fulfil this task unburdened
by political considerations. Unfortunately, however, we
have seen political ambitions emerge in the activities of
the Tribunal and a clear anti-Serb line has been
adopted. Having predetermined for itself the main
culprit in the Yugoslav tragedy, the Tribunal
nevertheless often turns a blind eye to cases of non-
compliance with the norms of international
humanitarian law by other parties to the conflicts.

When it comes to reports of violations committed
by the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, the Tribunal
immediately issues indictments and gets down to work,
as, for example, in the case of the situation in Kosovo.
However, if questions arise - for instance, concerning
the actions of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO)- the Tribunal, even in the face of such
obvious facts as the deaths of innocent civilians, the
destruction by air strike of civilian targets, finds no
grounds for launching an investigation. We are
appalled by the Tribunal's failure to act in response to
ongoing ethnic cleansing against Serbs and other
national minorities in Kosovo.

With respect to the judicial activities of the
Tribunal, we cannot fail to recall that, when the statute
of the body was being drafted, it was assumed that the
ICTY would strictly apply only existing norms of
international humanitarian law. The statute says
nothing about the right of the ICTY to create any new
law. In practice, however, an entirely different picture
has emerged. In recent years, the Tribunal has
repeatedly tinkered with the norms and rules of
international humanitarian law to suit its own purposes
and interpreted them at it own convenience. Moreover,
exploiting the lack of any real control by the
international community over the elaboration of the
rules of procedure and evidence, the Tribunal has
introduced into these documents some very legally
dubious practices, such as handing down sealed
indictments and submitting them to international
organs.

Also wrong was the 1996 decision taken by the
Tribunal, behind the Security Council's back, to
conclude a memorandum of understanding with NATO,
which virtually sanctioned the special operation by the
NATO contingent in Bosnia and Herzegovina, whose
purpose was to track down indictees. This runs counter
to the mandate of the Stabilization Force in Bosnia. Let
me recall that the memorandum remains secret and has
yet to be submitted to members of the Security
Council.

In our View, then, the ICTY is not helping, as it
should, to normalize the political process in the former
Yugoslavia. Moreover, the Tribunal's activities have
had a destructive impact on the process of reaching a
settlement in the Balkans. This situation cannot fail to
be of concern to us. In our view, the Security Council
needs to engage in a thorough, careful consideration of
this matter.

We are convinced, for example, that the
Tribunal's Rules of Procedure and Evidence, as well, of
course, as the amendments made to them, should be
approved by the Security Council. Moreover, the
activities of the Tribunal should be brought into
conformity with the resolutions of the Security
Council. If we do not do this in the near future, the
Tribunal will no longer be viewed as an impartial organ
handing down fair international justice.

With regard specifically to the proposals
contained in the report of the President of the ICTY,
Judge Claude Jorda, these are controversial in many
respects; we do not think they have been the object of
sufficient work. It is our understanding that there is a
lack of unanimity on these proposals among the judges
of the Tribunal as well. It is noteworthy that two years
ago the Security Council, at the Tribunal's request,
increased the number of judges. At that time, Ms.
Gabrielle Kirk McDonald justified the creation of an
additional trial chamber by assuring the Council that it
would significantly speed up the Tribunal's discharge
of its mandate. But that measure has yielded virtually
no results.

Judge Jorda's report includes the rather
discouraging conclusion that, if those against whom
indictments have already been issued and those now
under investigation were brought to justice, the
Tribunal would require 15 to 20 years to deal with all
cases. That forecast, of course, makes us think hard
about whether so long a time is advisable for the
functioning of what is supposed to be an ad hoc body.

The solution being proposed to resolve this
situation - the appointment of ad litem judges -
needs careful analysis. At first glance, it does not
inspire particular optimism in us. Very careful study is
required also of the financial implications of the
proposed innovations.

Thus, while we are certainly prepared to consider
the judges' proposals, we think it is important to
conduct a wide-ranging, thorough analysis not only of
those proposals but also of other views on how to
enhance the effectiveness of the work of the ICTY, in
particular the ideas set out in the report of the Expert
Group to Conduct a Review of the Effective Operation
and Functioning of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, contained in document
S/2000/597, along with ideas to be found in other
available documents.

If it is necessary to change the statute of the
Tribunal, as the President of the ICTY proposes in his
report, the question must be approached in a
comprehensive fashion on the basis of a comprehensive
analysis of the work of the Tribunal and bearing in
mind the need to redress the well-known deficiencies
in that work. That is the position we shall adopt when
we consider the proposals regarding organizing the
work of experts in the Security Council to discuss
possible amendment of the statute of the ICTY.

We reaffirm that Russia will support the activities
of the Tribunal on the condition that these are strictly
in keeping with the mandate adopted by the Security
Council for that body.

