Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I thank Deputy
Secretary-General Jan Eliasson for his briefing
and for providing us with the main elements for our
debate on what is clearly a very serious manifestation
of organized crime in the twenty-first century and a
challenge to international peace and security. Portugal
naturally supports the position that will be presented
later on behalf of the European Union.
As we well know, maritime piracy may have major
human, economic and security consequences that go
beyond the region directly affected. One should also
keep in mind that most often piracy groups are part of
larger transnational criminal organizations dedicated
to other types of crime, such as drug trafficking,
trafficking of human beings or trafficking in arms.
The complexity of those activities and the way they
may interlink and potentiate dangerous national effects
require the international community to remain vigilant
and prepared to act whenever the situation so requires.
As Portugal has underlined before, there is a role for the
Security Council in monitoring these new threats, given
the potential they have to seriously endanger peace and
security. It is thus important that the Council continue
to play its preventive role in closely monitoring such
situations.

The causes of piracy are often related to low-
intensity conflict that devastates a given country, such
as Somalia, to the unstable political situations in fragile
States that create lawless zones, or to the socioeconomic
context of local communities, particularly coastal ones.
For those reasons, Portugal advocates a comprehensive
approach to the piracy problem that includes structural
transformations at the political, social and economic
levels. With specific respect to law enforcement,
such transformations include the need to diversify the
mechanisms to fight impunity according to the principle
of proximity to justice, building regional jurisdictional
networks and building the capacity of local judicial
systems. In that regard, we would like to underline that
the prosecution of high-level suspects is decisive in
disrupting piracy networks.

Portugal welcomes the fact that, on the subject of
Somalia, the Secretary-General's report (S/2012/783)
dedicates a significant part of its focus and
recommendations to the need to strengthen the legal and
judiciary capacities of the surrounding countries and
regions of the country, including in particular Puntland
and Somaliland. We fully support his efforts, and we
think that reinforcing those capacities has become part
and parcel of the overall solution to piracy in the region.

The implementation of such measures, in our view,
should respect the principle of national ownership,
attributing the responsibility for concrete solutions to
local authorities, with the support of the international
community, as required. That is why we support the
strong involvement of Somalia in all the efforts being
undertaken, with appropriate Somali law and Somali
courts and judiciary - in sum, a Somali solution to a
problem that has its roots in Somalia.
In that sense, we encourage the new Somali
authorities to adopt the necessary anti-piracy legislation
and to establish the necessary judicial structures, with
the participation of international assistance and relevant
expertise as necessary. Extraterritorial Somali courts
could also be useful tools, in our view, to be used as a
transitory measure.

Piracy affects countries with very different levels
of institutional capacity to deal with the problem and
cannot be solved through isolated measures by each
individual State. That is why regional initiatives are
also key to the successful combat against piracy and its
root causes.

The United Nations should have a central role in
ensuring the coherence and overall coordination of
those initiatives as well as in mobilizing international
assistance to build the capacity of regional organizations
in crucial areas, such as surveillance, patrolling and
information-sharing.

In that regard, allow me to recall the important
role that the United Nations Development Programme
and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
are called to play in helping build the solution to the
problem of piracy off the coast of Somalia.

The phenomenon of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea
is a strong reminder of the need to develop regional
mechanisms to counter the impact that such illegal
activities have on the economy and security of States
in the region. As an example, I would simply recall that
West African economies have reportedly lost about
$2 billion in annual revenue as a result of piracy. Benin
in particular has seen its shipping activities decline by
70 per cent as a result of attacks in the past two years.

It is very positive that the number of regional
organizations in West and Central Africa are paying
attention to and addressing the problem of piracy: the
Economic Community of West African States and the
Economic Community of Central African States, as
well as the Commission of the Gulf of Guinea and the
Maritime Organization of West and Central Africa.

To be effective, those different efforts must be
coordinated, respecting each organization's particular
area of competence. We look forward to the summit
of regional leaders on piracy, which should pave the
way for a region-wide strategy that is also based on
best practices from individual countries and bilateral
assistance programmes already in place.

I should like to conclude by stating that piracy
is a complex phenomenon requiring our regular and
close attention. Encouraging better capacities, better
knowledge and better coordination among actors in
their fight against piracy will prove to be a decisive
contribution of the Security Council to stability and
development.

