My country, Syria, both in its national capacity and in cooperation with several other States Members of the United Nations, has sent a number of official letters and appeals to both the Secretary-General and successive Presidents of the Security Council demanding to put an end to the economic, commercial, financial and health terrorism inflicted by unilateral coercive measures imposed by some Member States on the Syrian people and other friendly peoples. Our calls were positively received by the Secretary-General and several senior officials of the Organization, including Mr. Geir Pedersen, United Nations Special Envoy for Syria, the Special Rapporteur on the negative impact of the unilateral coercive measures on the enjoyment of human rights, the Special Rapporteur on the right to food and representatives of the World Health Organization. All these senior officials, together with 40 international and United Nations bodies, have demanded an end to the measures imposed on around 2 billion people in affected countries. Nevertheless, the United States Administration and its allies have continued to violate international law, the Charter of the United Nations and human rights instruments. Over the past two months, they have deliberately spared no effort to thwart all initiatives and draft resolutions demanding an end to the negative impact of unilateral coercive measures on the health and service sectors in affected countries while they are fighting the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. That is not all. The United States Administration announced an extension of the unilateral coercive measures imposed on the Syrian people - in wanton disregard of international law, the United Nations Charter and the relevant resolutions - despite all appeals to do away with those measures. The stance of the United States Administration manifests a new step in its hostile policies towards my country and refutes the humanitarian claims presented by the representatives of the Administration and its allies, whether inside or outside the United Nations. Over the past years, I have repeatedly briefed the Council on the catastrophic impact of the coercive measures on the daily lives of 24 million Syrians and how those measures hinder State institutions and the health, economic and service sectors in Syria from effectively fulfilling their duties. The COVID-19 pandemic has increased the magnitude of the workload and challenges created by those measures. I once again highlight the hollow humanitarian pretences presented by some Western Governments that recently even refused to allow Syrian airplanes to repatriate Syrian nationals stranded in European countries. The clarifications recently issued by the European Commission about coercive measures demonstrate, once again, what we have always said - that these measures only harm people. We therefore stress the fact that those Governments do not intend to lift these measures, which lack any acceptable moral, economic or political basis. The unilateral sanctions imposed by the European Union and the United States cannot be justified, because they are illegal, attempt to circumvent the legitimacy of the Security Council and seek to undermine the sovereignty of the Syrian State. As a matter of fact, this is nothing but a desperate attempt by the Western Governments that impose coercive measures on my country to humanize their vicious behaviour and the economic terrorism and collective punishment practiced by them against the Syrians living in areas under Government control. We assure the Council that, due to the imposition of a wide package of restrictions and preconditions on supplies, the prospect of European and American humanitarian and medical supplies reaching Syria is nil. Nevertheless, we will not be deceived by allegations made by those countries, and we will not give in to their dictates in any way. In that context, my delegation reiterates its demand that the Council immediately insist that the Secretary-General submit to it a comprehensive report on the disastrous impact of the unilateral coercive measures imposed on the Syrian people within the next 30 days. That is an essential part of our understanding of the humanitarian concerns at play and the impartial, objective and professional role of the United Nations in humanitarian work, international cooperation in fighting the COVID-19 pandemic and the implementation of the principle of leaving no one behind and other important principles that form the parameters of work of the United Nations. My Government reaffirms its position regarding Brussels conferences and stresses that they are nothing but propaganda aimed at the implementation of the agendas of the hostile countries that organize and sponsor such conferences in a flagrant politicization of humanitarian work and the imposition of their preconditions and deep-rooted obstinacy. My Government reiterates that it does not recognize any Syria-related initiatives or meetings without the participation of, and full coordination with, its Government. My Government also renews its demand that the United Nations not participate in such conferences, so as to maintain its impartial role and ensure its respect of humanitarian work parameters, under resolution 46/182. The Turkish occupation forces in north-west Syria, along with the American occupation forces in the north-east and in the Al-Tanf area, where Rukban camp is located, continue to support terrorist organizations and their proxy separatist militias. That fact has been confirmed through the confessions of a number of terrorists belonging to the Islamic State in Iraq and the Shams who were recently been captured by the Syrian Arab Army, and who confirmed that they had been trained by the terrorist Maghawir Al-Thawra group, under the supervision of American occupation forces in Al-Tanf. Such behaviour has been met with absolute silence in the Council, as some of its permanent members are seeking to transform the Council into a platform for NATO and an umbrella for the defence of their allies within it, all while turning a blind eye to their violations of international law and the purposes and principles of the United Nations. In the light of the sponsorship and investment in terrorist organizations, the Al-Nusra Front and its partner terrorist groups have reorganized their forces in their areas of presence in north-west Syria to launch further terrorist attacks, as we witnessed a few days ago when Huras Al-Din and the Turkistan Islamic Party - or "moderate terrorists", as some like to describe them - reorganized themselves and launched an attack on one of the Syrian army military points in the village of Tanjara, adjacent to the Al-Ghab region in the north-west. That attack led to a number of martyrs and wounded many others. Moreover, terrorists of the Turkish- backed Turkistan Islamic Party destroyed the Zayzoun power plant tower in the Idlib countryside, which alone is worth about $44 million, after having jointly looted, with Turkish technicians, the plant's equipment, estimated at $660 million. They then transported the equipment into Turkish territory through crossings - controlled by the terrorist organizations and their Turkish sponsors, and claimed by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) as humanitarian crossings. That is compounded by the crimes committed by Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, the latest of which is drilling to extract metal pipes, copper cables and landline wires to be sold in the Turkish market. The Turkish regime also continues to use water as a weapon against Syrian civilians in the city of Al-Hasakah and its surrounding communities by cutting off water from the Allouk station, thereby depriving | million Syrians of drinking water, which is a documented war crime and crime against humanity. The Council must meet urgently to put an end to such crimes and hold the war criminals in the Turkish regime accountable, instead of covering up the crimes and holding numerous supposedly urgent meetings on fabricated and artificial issues. Today the Turkish regime is again violating its obligations under international law and the agreements governing international waters and rivers by constructing the Ilisu Dam along the Tigris River and starting to fill the dam's artificial lake, which will deprive millions of Syrians and Iraqis of water from the Tigris for years. Furthermore, the United States occupation forces have prevented the Syrian Arab Red Crescent from working in north-east Syria and have sought to replace it with illegal organizations that are not recognized by the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies. Moreover, the Turkish regime also attempted to bring the Turkish Red Crescent to work in the areas it occupies in the north and north-west of Syria and prevent the Syrian Arab Red Crescent from working there as well. It has also attacked its offices, looted their contents and attacked its workers, just as Israel - the occupying Power - has done since its occupation of the Syrian Golan in 1967. In that way, the Israeli occupation and the Turkish occupation are similar in their violations of the decisions of the founding conference of the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies. What is worse is that the Turkish regime has pitted its affiliated terrorist groups against the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and urged them to prevent humanitarian access from within Syrian territories as a pretext for extending cross-border activities. That is a common practice that we and our partners in humanitarian work have previously seen in a number of areas, including the eastern and southern regions, with the aim of justifying the expansion of cross-border activities and facilitating the smuggling of arms, equipment and supplies to terrorist organizations. Accordingly, my country reaffirms its rejection of cross-border activities and again demands the closure of the OCHA office in Gaziantep, which has become an instrument for anti-Syria Governments and armed terrorist groups, a mouthpiece of lies and a platform to mislead the Security Council and world public opinion. My country emphasizes that improving the humanitarian situation will require the full cooperation of, and coordination with, the Syrian Government. In addition, the politicization of humanitarian action must end, and hostile Governments should refrain from enacting policies that impose coercive measures, preconditions and obstacles on humanitarian and developmental assistance. It is unfortunate to see that some Council members prefer starting fires to putting them out, notwithstanding their duties as members of the Security Council. It is crystal clear that Council members are not performing their duties in a realistic and transparent manner; indeed, they are part of the problem, not the solution. They are therefore unable to play a positive role in meetings of the Council designed to help the Syrian people. When they use the term "regime" instead of "Government", they are showing their real intentions.
