The President (spoke in French): I should like
to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of
the Council, to His Excellency Mr. Eugene-Richard
Gasana, Permanent Representative of the Republic of
Rwanda, for his service as President of the Security
Council for the month of April 2013. I am sure that
I speak for all members of the Council in expressing
deep appreciation to Ambassador Gasana and his team
for the great diplomatic skill with which they conducted
the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Somalia

Letter dated 19 April 2013 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2013/239)

The President (spoke in French): Under rule 37 of
the Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Somalia to participate in this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2013/259, which contains the text ofa draft resolution
submitted by Australia, France, Luxembourg, the
Republic of Korea, Rwanda, Togo, the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United
States of America.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2013/239, which contains a letter dated
19 April 2013 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council, transmitting the
results of the Secretary-General's technical assessment
mission to Somalia, pursuant to Security Council
resolution 2093 (2013).

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it. I
shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.

A vote was taken by Show ofhands.

In favour:
Argentina, Australia, Azerbaijan, China, France,
Guatemala, Luxembourg, Morocco, Pakistan,
Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Togo, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and United States of America


The President (spoke in French): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 2102 (2013).

I now give the floor to the representative of Somalia.


