Mr. Baja (Philippines): We too wish to thank His
Excellency the Foreign Minister of Serbia and
Montenegro, who has joined us this morning for a
discussion on the situation in Kosovo. We also thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Kosovo, Mr. Harri Holkeri, for introducing the recent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2004/348) and for
briefing us on the latest situation in the province.

In considering the situation in Kosovo today, it
may be relevant to recall the history and context of
United Nations involvement there. Five years ago the
international community intervened in Kosovo to put
an end to the slaughter that was being perpetrated
against its ethnic Albanian population.

It should be noted that the Security Council
initially ceded to NATO and the Group of Eight initial
responsibility for Kosovo. By virtue of Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999), the international
community, through the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), assumed
the responsibility of healing Kosovo of the wounds of
inter-ethnic strife and rebuilding it into a tolerant,
multi-ethnic and democratic society. Since that time,
Kosovo has been a de facto United Nations-NATO
protectorate.

During the last five years, UNMIK and its
partners - the European Union, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the
Kosovo Force (KFOR) - have accomplished much in
putting Kosovo back on the road to peace and stability.
Provisional Institutions have been established and
competencies have been transferred. Inter-ethnic
tensions appeared to have subsided and the start of
discussions on Kosovo's final status seemed possible in
the foreseeable future. Also, the parties on the ground
did not challenge, but rather accepted, United Nations
authority.

Our hopes for Kosovo's future were dashed two
months ago, when a wave of inter-ethnic violence
again plunged Kosovo into another abyss of death and
destruction. Ambassador Holkeri this morning
presented us with a graphic tale of the violence and its
consequences. This time, it was the ethnic Serb
population at the receiving end.

What happened in Kosovo two months ago has
made the task ahead more difficult for the international
community, but it should not prevent the rebuilding
process from moving forward. In that connection, the
Philippine delegation welcomes the actions taken by
UNMIK and KFOR to reassert control and restore the
rule of law in the province immediately after the
outbreak of violence. We welcome the arrest of those
involved in the riots and the fact that the judicial
process towards their prosecution has begun. We also
welcome Mr. Holkeri's statement that UNMIK is
reviewing operational procedures and coordination in
responding to crises there.

The privatization process should also be pursued,
and we are glad to hear from Mr. Holkeri of the
progress in that area, with agreement on operating
procedures between UNMIK and the authorities. We
also continue to advocate the resumption of
constructive dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina.

Even as we reiterate our commitment to the
international community's efforts in Kosovo, we also
call upon UNMIK to exercise greater flexibility in
exploring all avenues that would lead us to our
common vision for Kosovo.

In an earlier briefing to the Council, Mr. Holkeri
spoke of his plan - or vision - to develop his own
political constituency among the people themselves,
beyond authorities and institutions, to support his
political and economic programme for Kosovo. I
wonder if Mr. Holkeri has an update on that effort,
especially concerning the Kosovo Standards
Implementation Plan.

In that connection, we welcome the views
presented to the Security Council this morning by His
Excellency the Foreign Minister for Serbia and
Montenegro, which may be worth looking into and
which could be considered along with other proposals
aimed at putting the Kosovo process back on the right
track.

