Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Envoy De Mistura for his briefing.

The clashes in the areas of Syria under discussion
have recently escalated, resulting in heavy civilian
casualties, and a United Nations humanitarian
assistance convoy has been attacked. China is very
concerned about this. We regret the fact that Syrian
Government forces were hit by an airstrike and suffered
casualties, and hope that all the parties concerned will
improve their coordination and prevent such incidents
from happening again.

The Syrian conflict has persisted for more than five
years now. China is deeply sympathetic to the suffering
of the Syrian people and believes that the situation cannot
be allowed to continue. Right now, the priority is for all
parties in Syria to work to effectively implement the
Security Council resolutions on the Syrian issue. The

international community should pursue all four tracks
of a ceasefire, political negotiations, humanitarian aid
and cooperation against terrorism, in order to facilitate
the finding of a solution to the question of Syria.

China hopes that the agreement reached between the
Russian Federation and the United States regarding the
cessation of hostilities among all Syrian parties will be
successfully implemented so as to create opportunities
to improve the situation on the ground. The international
community should work in collaboration to urge all
parties in Syria to effectively implement the agreement
in order to resume the ceasefire as soon as possible.
The more complex the situation in Syria, the
more important it is to uphold the general direction of
political settlement, give full play to the United Nations
in its role as the main channel of mediation, continue
to support the efforts of Special Envoy De Mistura,
relaunch the Geneva talks as soon as possible, and press
ahead on a Syrian-owned and -led political process
so as to achieve arrangements that accommodate all
interests. Countries of the region should play a positive
role in promoting a political settlement in Syria.

The humanitarian situation in Syria is becoming
more and more precarious with each passing day. All
parties in Syria must provide full humanitarian access
and ensure that humanitarian supplies can be delivered in
a timely and safe manner. The international community
should continue to scale up its humanitarian assistance
to Syria so as to alleviate the humanitarian situation
on the ground, provide assistance to neighbouring
countries and help them in hosting refugees.

Counter-terrorism is a very important component
of any solution to the situation in Syria. The Syrian
conflict has led to the rise and spread of terrorism.
Unless we root it out, there will be no peace for the
Syrian people and no security for regional countries.
The international community should work with resolve
to combat all terrorist forces listed by the Security
Council, including the Islamic State. In the process of
international counter-terrorism cooperation, we must
enhance intelligence-sharing, prevent and stop social
media from spreading extremist ideology, and cut off
the flow of terrorists and their channels of financing.

China has made unremitting efforts to promote a
political settlement in Syria, and stepped up its efforts
to urge all parties to end the conflict as soon as possible
and achieve a comprehensive political solution. China
stands ready to play a constructive role in promoting a
full, just and appropriate settlement in Syria.

