Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We are
grateful for the convening of this meeting and to Special
Envoy Geir Pedersen for his comprehensive and very
valuable briefing. We acknowledge the intensive work
that he has done with a View to bringing the parties
closer together, and we reaffirm our commitment to
ensuring the success of his mandate. We also thank
Ms. Sabah Al Hallak for the information she provided
this afternoon.

Peru has been closely monitoring the work of the
Constitutional Committee in Geneva and welcomes
the constructive spirit and willingness to compromise
demonstrated by all parties. We hope that will help to
find the common ground necessary to move towards
a process of national reconciliation. We encourage the
participants to ensure that the meetings ofthe Committee
and the various topics discussed there continue to take
place within a framework of transparency, which will
enable the international community, and the Council in
particular, to monitor and support the implementation
of the agreements reached and foster greater trust
among all the parties to the peace process.

We believe that we are at a critical point, at which
it is essential to act quickly on the political front and
make concrete commitments in line with resolution
2254 (2015) and the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex). The grave humanitarian situation and the latent
threat of terrorism in Syria require it. We stress how
important it is that in addition to those efforts all the
parties continue to work on measures that foster an
atmosphere of understanding, including by releasing
detainees, identifying missing persons and handing
over mortal remains. We underscore that progress in
that area is not only a gesture of great humanity that can
heal open wounds and ease tensions, but also represents
an ideal way of advancing Syria's process of political
dialogue, accountability and reconciliation.

As the Organization has pointed out, it is crucial
that the Syrian Government and the opposition focus
on achieving more extensive solutions that go beyond
the current level of individual and reciprocal exchanges
of prisoners towards the simultaneous release of
unequally sized groups. Another major challenge
that must be addressed is the serious situation facing
millions of refugees and internally displaced persons,
which requires not only making the necessary financial
resources available but especially demonstrating the
political will needed to guarantee their safe and dignified
return within internationally accepted parameters. In
order to achieve that, we highlight the importance of
avoiding an escalation of the conflict, which would
undermine the prospects for a political solution. An
effective ceasefire in Idlib and its surrounding areas is
vital in the current circumstances.

In conclusion, I want to reaffirm that there can be
no military solution to the conflict in Syria and that
my delegation will continue to work to put an end to
the suffering of the Syrian people and build sustainable
peace in the country.

