The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Burkina Faso and Cote d'Ivoire, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Djedje
(Cote d'lvoire) and Mr. Zakane (Burkina Faso)
took seats at the Council table.

The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2007/275, which contains the thirteenth
progress report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire. Members also have
before them document S/2007/389, which contains the
text of a draft resolution prepared in the course of the
Council's prior consultations.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall now put the draft
resolution to the vote.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Belgium, China, Congo, France, Ghana,
Indonesia, Italy, Panama, Peru, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Slovakia, South Africa, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America


The President (spoke in French): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1763 (2007).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.
07-40473

