Mr. Mejdoub (Tunisia) (spoke in French): Allow
me at the outset to thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened this open briefing on the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Today's meeting,
which is taking place at a very crucial stage of the
peace process, makes it possible for the members of the
Council and for the other participating States to assess
together the situation and the prospects for peace.

I should like also to welcome among us the
Secretary-General and to express to him our deep
appreciation for the tireless efforts he has been making
in the search for peace in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, in Africa and throughout the world. Let me
also thank him for the important statement he made.

My delegation would like also to thank
Ambassador Kamel Morjane, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, for his extensive briefing. We
would like to pay tribute to him for the outstanding
role he has played as head of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC). His dedication and his personal
efforts, as well as the efforts made by the Force
Commander, General Diallo, and by all of the
personnel of the Mission, to restore peace and security
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo - often in
very difficult conditions - deserve our greatest
appreciation and support.
The assessment just presented by the Secretary-
General and his Special Representative shows that
progress has been made in the peace process. We are
pleased with this state of affairs. However, they also
pointed out that that progress is fragile, that the point
of no return has not yet been reached and that there are
still obstacles to be overcome. The Mission sent by the
Security Council to the Great Lakes region had
concluded that the momentum gained could easily be
lost and that therefore every effort needed to be made
to maintain the dynamic of peace and to make it
irreversible. Indeed, the primary responsibility in that
respect lies with the parties themselves. They must
abide by their commitments under the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement, the Kampala plan and the Harare
sub-plans on the disengagement and redeployment of
forces and to comply with the resolutions of the
Security Council.

We must therefore call once again on the parties
to finalize and implement the plans for the orderly
withdrawal of all of the foreign forces from the
territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as
well as the plans for the disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation or resettlement of armed
groups.

The Council has been concerned in recent days by
the lack of cooperation on the part of the
Rassemblement Congolais pour la democratic (RCD)
with MONUC. We call upon the RCD once again to
make the necessary efforts and fully to cooperate with
MONUC.

Furthermore, we would recall the need for the
urgent demilitarization of the town of Kisangani, as
required by the Security Council in its resolution 1304
(2000). As has been repeatedly stressed, including
during the discussions between the Security Council
mission and the parties, Kisangani has a symbolic
value.

While the responsibility for the consolidation of
progress in the peace process lies primarily with the
parties themselves, the United Nations and in particular
the Security Council also have an important role to
play in assisting and encouraging the parties to move
forward and also in continuing to support the efforts of
MONUC.

The information we have received on the
resumption of the activities of armed groups in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
is a source of deep concern and requires particular
attention. We are pleased with the results of the
meeting that took place, in parallel with the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) Summit at
Lusaka, between Presidents Kabila and Kagame, at the
initiative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan,
and we encourage the continuation of this dialogue. We
believe that the outcome of that meeting requires
urgent follow-up as well as the joint efforts of all of the
actors involved.

The process of the disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation or resettlement of armed
groups is among the most important elements of the
Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement, and the achievement of
peace and security in the subregion is strongly
contingent upon it. We must seize the opportunity that
presents itself today. MONUC must therefore have the
necessary resources at its disposal to fully play the role
that is expected of it.

Another important element of the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement is the inter-Congolese dialogue.
We appreciate the efforts made by Mr. Masire and his
colleagues, and we hope that the dialogue will begin as
soon as possible and in the best possible conditions,
which will allow the Congolese people to devote
themselves to the future of their country without any
foreign interference.

The humanitarian situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, particularly in the eastern part
of the country, remains a source of deep concern and
requires massive aid on the part of the international
community. In this regard, we welcome the
considerable efforts made by humanitarian agencies, in
cooperation with MONUC, to relieve the suffering of
the people affected, and we call upon all of the parties
to facilitate and to support those efforts.

The Panel of Experts on the Illegal Exploitation
of Natural Resources and Other Forms of Wealth in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo will continue its
investigations in order to submit an annex to its report,
as requested by the Security Council. In this
connection, we recall the importance of putting an end
to the illegal exploitation of the natural resources and
other forms of wealth of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, and we call upon all parties concerned to
fully cooperate with the Panel of Experts.

The Security Council mission to the Great Lakes
region had noted a strong desire on the part of the
Congolese people to bring about peace and national
reconciliation and to achieve development. The
international community is called upon to assist them,
inter alia, through initiatives accompanying the return
of peace, including support for the country's economic
recovery. We believe also that the United Nations must
begin to prepare for the reconstruction phase, which
would be a manifestation of the peace dividend for the
Congolese people.

It has long been stressed that the close links
among the problems afflicting the Great Lakes region
demand a comprehensive regional conception of peace
and security. Here, the convening, under United
Nations and Organization of African Unity auspices, of
an international conference on peace, security and
development in the Great Lakes region could help lay
the foundation for peaceful coexistence, good-
neighbourliness, cooperation and development in the
interests of all the peoples of the region.

In this period of transition between the second
and third phases of MONUC deployment, there have
been some positive developments, which we must
support. During the third phase, MONUC will have to
shoulder important new duties and, to do this, will need
substantial resources.

We expect the withdrawal of foreign forces from
the territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to be effective, rapid and complete; that would make it
possible to restore the sovereignty and the territorial
integrity of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
also expect the disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation or resettlement of armed
groups to take place without delay.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo is a vast
country with enormous potential. Its present problems
can be overcome with continued political will among
the Congolese themselves and among their neighbours.
The international community can provide very
effective assistance. My country, which participated in
United Nations peacekeeping efforts in the Congo a
generation ago, is today contributing to MONUC with
a guard unit and with military observers, who are there
to help the parties achieve peace.

We hope that the dialogue that has begun among
the heads of State of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda and Uganda will continue and develop,
to make it possible to speed the implementation of the
Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement and to promote peace,
security, stability and cooperation in the region. The
advent of peace and of a solution to the problems of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo will be a positive
turning point for the entire continent of Africa.

