Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I would like
first to congratulate the French presidency on having
organizing this important meeting on peace and
security in Africa, focused on the Sahel region and the
prospects for the implementation of the United Nations
integrated strategy. Today's meeting amply reflects
the special attention that the Security Council and the
Secretary-General attach to that issue, and manifests
once again the international community's awareness of
the inextricable link between peace and security, on the
one hand, and economic and social development on the
other.

I thank the briefers, including the Secretary-
General himself, the President of the World Bank, the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sahel
and the representatives of the African Union and
European Union, for their statements.

A little more than a year ago, while the Council was
seeking ways to put an end to the tragedy unfolding
in northern Mali, the United Nations, in particular the
Security Council through resolution 2056 (2012), had
the vision to make the drawing up ofthe United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel an urgent and essential
issue given the complex and many problems facing the
region. That initiative, in itself, is a challenge given
that it involves bringing together, in a comprehensive
approach, the multidimensional challenges of the
humanitarian, governance, security, socioeconomic
development and human rights issues that the Sahel
region faces.

Today, the strategy, which we believe to be a
thorough document, has become a reality. While
its drafting was promising, its implementation is
challenging given the objectives that it aims to achieve,
the various interventions required for it to become a
reality and the many factors involved in achieving
the desired results. Increased mobilization by all and
coordinated activities are therefore key requirements,
all the more so given the realities on the ground.
Those realities require a multitude of considerations,
including awareness of those whom it is aimed at and
their ownership of the essence of the strategy that I
have mentioned above.

From that perspective, we welcome the joint visit
of the Secretary-General and the President of the World
Bank, with the participation of the World Bank and the
European Union, to the Sahel region on 7 November.
That j oint visit to the four countries primarily concerned
by the strategy, namely, Mali, Niger, Burkina Faso and
Chad, is a symbol of great interest to see the partners
acting together to tackle the challenge as well as an
expression of solidarity for the populations concerned.
That visit is therefore an important step towards
mobilizing the populations and the States of the region
for the effective implementation of the strategy.

In that regard, we can only welcome the positive
response of those affected by the strategy, which
is demonstrated by the support of the States of
the region for the strategy through their decision,
adopted at the 5 November meeting in Bamako, to
establish a coordination platform that will meet every
six months with a flexible technical secretariat to
support the coordination efforts in the region. Those
are praiseworthy initiatives given that harmonizing
projects initiated by various bodies under their own
strategies remains a decisive factor in effective support.

The firm commitment of the international
community should make it possible more easily to
overcome another challenge, namely, of putting people
at the heart of projects and programmes and allowing
them to take ownership of them, while reconciling their
expectations and the constraints of available resources.
It also meets the requirement that the reality on the
ground demands action. For an appropriate definition
of priorities, that requires partners to be in contact
with the populations in order to better understand their
expectations.

Here, there is another clearly major challenge, that
is funding the strategy. It is important that financial
and other support take into account the constraints of
the area, the risks and the time for the population to
acquire the capacity for strengthened resilience. Togo
therefore welcomes the funding pledges made by the
World Bank and the European Union during the visit
to the Sahel and calls on other donors to provide their
crucial support in order to meet the expectations of the
States and peoples of the region.

At a time when the international community is
mobilizing for the entire Sahel region, it is clear that
Mali remains the focus of the threats and challenges
facing the region. We must therefore bear in mind
that, with the deployment of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali and as Togo has previously underscored, Mali
remains a pilot project in terms of implementing the
strategic goals of the integrated strategy for the Sahel
in terms of peace, security, stability, resilience and
socioeconomic development for the Sahel.

However, the volatile security situation in northern
Mali is complicated by an equally difficult one in the
region of Kidal, The continuing terrorist threats, which
could go as far as the heinous killing of journalists,
reminds us that security and stability remain the
most pressing concerns. That requires us to settle
grievances, to reconcile as soon as possible the interests
of the actors of the States in the Sahel region, while
fully upholding their sovereignty, in order to ensure
conditions conducive to the calibrated implementation
of the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel.

Coordination and cooperation among the States
of the region, on the one hand, and among subregional
organizations, on the other, are crucial in order to
counter all kinds of threats, in particular, the activities
of terrorist groups, arms proliferation and transnational
organized crime, including drug trafficking. Such
coordination and cooperation is an indication of the
effectiveness of the results expected of the implemented
strategy. In that regard, we are pleased with the holding
in Rabat, Morocco, on 13 and 14 November of the
second regional conference on border security among
the States of the Sahel and the Maghreb.

The United Nations integrated strategy for the
Sahel brings great hope for the peoples of the Sahel
region, clearly given that it is taking place in the wake
of the Malian crisis and because the international
community has acknowledged that if we do not take
action against poverty, in particular in the context of
a difficult environment that undermines the resilience
of populations, threats to peace and stability, such as
transnational organized crime and terrorism, will
certainly find fertile ground in the most vulnerable
regions.

It is therefore important to continue the momentum
that has allowed for progress in the case ofMali. That is
another reason that must be the engine for mobilization,
in particular in terms of financial resources, to ensure
that the objectives of the strategy are achieved.

Finally, Togo welcomes the adoption of the
presidential statement on the issue under consideration
(S/PRST/2013/20) and thanks the Moroccan delegation
for having led the process that led to that adoption.

