Mr. Zhang Yesui (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank you, Mr. President, for convening today's open
debate. I would also like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Lynn Pascoe for his briefing. We welcome the
presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Palestinian National Authority and thank him for his
statement. We also listened attentively to the statement
made by the representative of Israel.

The Middle East question, including the question
of Palestine and Israel, is a difficult issue that has been
a focus of the Security Council since the founding of
the United Nations. Despite the unremitting efforts of
all parties concerned to achieve a settlement of the
Middle East issue, the Middle East peace process has
remained stagnant and the regional security situation
unimproved. At present, what is most disconcerting to
the States of the region - and, for that matter, to the
entire international community - is the grave
humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including Gaza.

Following the issuance of the report of the Fact-
Finding Mission established by the Human Rights
Council (A/HRC/12/48), the miserable plight of those
living in Gaza is once again the object of much
attention on the part of the international community.
Nine months have elapsed since the adoption of
Security Council resolution 1860 (2009), yet it has yet
to be fully and effectively implemented, and there has
been no progress in the reconstruction of Gaza. The
people of Gaza still find themselves in a difficult
situation that continues to deteriorate.

The difficult situation of the Palestinians on the
West Bank of the Jordan River is also a cause for
concern. The Chinese Government expresses its deep
concern and sympathy over the plight of the
Palestinian people and its ongoing exacerbation. We
hope that the Security Council will address this matter
with great concern and take active steps to promote a
settlement.
The current humanitarian situation in the
occupied Arab territories, in particular the Gaza Strip,
is unsustainable. The international community and the
Security Council should follow it very closely and take
practical measures to help reverse it. At this point, the
international community should intensify its efforts in
the following four priority areas.

First, all parties concerned should be urged to
comply seriously and fully with resolution 1860 (2009)
by establishing and maintaining a lasting ceasefire and
avoiding any action that could cause tension or pose a
threat to regional peace and security.

Secondly, Israel should respond in earnest to the
appeals of the international community by opening all
crossing points into Gaza and ensuring the unimpeded
delivery of humanitarian assistance and reconstruction
materials there, while the international community
should expeditiously honour its commitment to
assisting in Gaza's reconstruction. At the same time,
Israel should freeze its activities related to settlements
and the separation wall.

Thirdly, all parties should renounce the use of
force and cease all acts of violence against civilians.
We oppose all use of force against civilians. The
excessive use of force is unacceptable. We support the
Security Council in explicitly reiterating that all
violations of international humanitarian law are
intolerable and subject to prosecution. We appeal to all
parties to abide by international humanitarian law and
to maintain the necessary cooperation with the relevant
United Nations agencies.

Fourthly, Palestine and Israel must honour their
obligations under the Road Map and support the
negotiated-settlement approach. The Quartet should
play a more active role in pressing for an early
resumption of peace talks between Palestine and Israel.

Achieving intra-Palestinian reconciliation is of
the utmost importance in order to protecting the
national interests of Palestine and to resuming the
Middle East peace process. The international
community should continue to support Egypt's efforts
to that end.

The Middle East peace process is now at a crucial
juncture. Fulfilling the vision of two States, Palestine
and Israel, living side by side in peace is the only way
to settle the Middle East question. We support the
achievement of the two-State option on the basis of the

09-5573]
relevant Security Council resolutions, the Arab Peace
Initiative and the principle of land for peace, in order
to ensure that the Palestinian people will be able to
establish an independent and viable State.

