Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): My
delegation echoes the congratulations addressed to you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of July 2005 and the
tributes paid to Ambassador De La Sabliere of France
for his excellent guidance of the Council's work last
month.

Our thanks go to Danilo Turk, Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his
excellent briefing on the successful conclusion of the
Bougainville peace process. Here, the annals of the
United Nations can reflect an indisputable success.
That success was the result of the Organization's
sustained efforts in Bougainville to provide ongoing
mediation between the parties and to help them
overcome their differences and build a new
relationship based on mutual trust. An enormous
distance has been covered since 1998. This long-term
endeavour was carried out in phases. Each phase,
described by Mr. Turk in his briefing, was marked by
real challenges. If today we are able to speak of the
success of the peace process, it is because those
challenges were met through an sustained approach
implemented under the watchful and beneficent eye of
the United Nations Political Office in Bougainville and
its successor, the United Nations Observer Mission in
Bougainville (UNOMB). The results are a tribute to
their efforts.
We also pay tribute to the people, the authorities
and the leadership of Bougainville. We offer special
commendation to the donors that helped the central
Government to meet its obligations under the peace
process. The United Nations should draw lessons from
this historic experience in order to enhance its
peacebuilding capacity.

But the completion of the peace process does not
mean the resolution of all the problems facing the
province on its path to sustainable development. The
province's Government and its legislature should
shoulder their responsibility to strengthen and ensure
the viability of the autonomy arrangements that have
been put in place. It is important for the Bougainville
authorities to work to reduce the heavy dependence on
subsidies from the central Government; that
dependence results from the lack of local resources to
meet the province's budgetary needs. We urge donor
countries to continue to support the efforts of the
Bougainville Government. We are confident that the
new provincial Government will successfully manage
its relations with leaders in the "no-go" zone.

We now need to consider how best to integrate
forces that have remained outside the peace process.
Such integration would make it possible, for example,
to complete the collection of weapons remaining in
circulation.

In the light of what I have said, my delegation
urges the United Nations to retain the ability to
continue to monitor developments in the situation in
Papua New Guinea after the closure of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Bougainville.

