Mr. Panayotov (Bulgaria) (spoke in Russian): At the
outset, I should like to express the sincere condolences
of the Government of Bulgaria in connection with
the passing of an outstanding diplomat and human
being, the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Ambassador Vitaly
Ivanovich Churkin.

(spoke in English)

It is a privilege and honour for me to be here today
to engage in this discussion. Let me first thank Ukraine
for convening today's debate on a topic of particular
importance to my country, and all the briefers for their
comprehensive presentations.

As has already been highlighted, the end ofthe Cold
War unleashed a profound geopolitical transformation
in Eastern Europe that doubled the number of States
on the map. Most of the border changes came about
peacefully, but the continent also witnessed a level
of violence unseen since the end of the Second World
War. The United Nations and the relevant international
organizations in Europe have been engaged in finding
peaceful and sustainable solutions to the conflicts.
The applied tool box has been extensive, from outright
military interventions, through peacekeeping and
preventive deployment, to the incentives of membership
in the European and the Euro-Atlantic institutions. In
some instances we have celebrated success; in others,
painful lessons had to be learned.

Many of the countries that went through difficult
times have been able to turn the page and to prosper.
However, there are still a number of protracted and
unresolved conflicts in Europe that remind us that the
post-Cold War transition is not yet over. In the current
global instability, it is essential that no efforts be spared
to resolve the conflicts in Europe. If any conflict is to
be resolved, it is vital that all parties be guided by and
respect the relevant international law and the principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, in
particular the principle of preserving and respecting
the territorial integrity of countries - a core principle
of the post-1945 world order.

In recent years, however, the international
consensus on the principle of territorial integrity has
begun to erode, with an impact on Georgia and Ukraine,
among others. This poses a great danger to stability
and security in Europe, as whenever the principle of
territorial integrity is challenged violent confrontations
and bloodshed arise as a natural consequence, as seen
in a number of instances.

Regional organizations have demonstrated that
they can play a constructive role in conflict resolution.
In today's world of global challenges, international
organizations have to find a smart balance between the
principles of subsidiarity and complementarity, while
taking into account the particularity of each conflict
and its context.

Bulgaria is eager to see a peaceful way out of the
crisis in Ukraine, with full respect for the sovereignty,
unity and territorial integrity of the country within its
internationally recognized borders. What remains most
important is to guarantee the full implementation of the
agreed package of measures and, first and utmost, to
abide by the latest ceasefire, to complete the withdrawal
of heavy weapons, and to grant unhindered access to
the Special Monitoring Missison of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) to all
sites. That would allow the Normandy format and the
Trilateral Contact Group of the OSCE to accelerate the
implementation of the Minsk agreements.

Bulgaria reaffirms its strong support for the unity,
territorial integrity and sovereignty of Georgia within
its internationally recognized borders. We support the
Geneva international discussions and the meetings in
the framework of the Incident Prevention and Response
Mechanism in Gali and Ergneti, which are essential to
stabilizing the situation on the ground and achieving
a lasting solution of the conflicts in Abkhazia and
South Ossetia.
We fully back the Minsk Group co-Chairs
and support the negotiations on a comprehensive
settlement of the Nagorno Karabakh conflict without
precondition. The best prospect for a peace settlement
is to continue the mediation efforts ofthe Minsk Group,
as the internationally established format endorsed by
the Security Council. We stress the importance of
re-engaging in meaningful negotiations and of moving
beyond the status quo, as we believe that the status quo
is not a solution.

We appeal to all sides in the afoermentioned
conflicts to be engaged in reaching concrete results on
outstanding issues, such as commitment to the non-use
of force and the improvement of the humanitarian
and security situations of the affected population. We
believe that the United Nations is well positioned to
monitor developments on the ground, including the
implementation of agreements and respect for human
rights, thereby providing the members of the Security
Council with objective and quality information in a
timely manner.

Even though we are all aware that there is no
one-size-fits-all solution to addressing conflicts in
Europe, it is evident that the unity of efforts within the
Security Council, complemented by the engagement of
the Secretary-General and the support of the relevant
regional organizations, represent a potent force. An
illustration of the promise of such an alignment can
be found in the current phase of the peace process
in Cyprus, where the Security Council is united
behind renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus, the Secretary-General
is providing his good offices and the European Union
is giving constructive support to efforts to reach a
solution based on the relevant Council resolutions.

We firmly believe that - despite major setbacks
such as the recent encroachments on the territorial
integrity of Ukraine, Georgia and other countries
in Eastern Europe - the European continent can
be conflict-free, and that vision can be realized by
creating synergies between the efforts of the relevant
international organizations and through the good-faith
commitment of all the parties involved.

