Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We
highly appreciate your presence in the Security Council
today, Sir, and thank the Government of Lebanon for
its initiative of organizing this important meeting of the
Council, at which we have the opportunity to reflect on
a topic that is and should be of particular importance to
the Organization. The great majority of Member States
have a multi-ethnic makeup that promotes diversity
and plurality in contemporary society.

All cultures and civilizations without exception
make their own contribution to enriching humankind in
the sense that respect for and acceptance of religious,
ethnic and cultural diversity are essential values that
strengthen the purposes and principles set out in the
United Nations Charter. My delegation welcomes
today's discussion because we are convinced that the
active promotion of the culture of peace and dialogue
among civilizations, in which cultural diversity is
respected and encouraged, should prove to be a
fundamental value governing relations between States.

In the first decade of the twenty-first century,
armed conflict, terrorism and the most serious
violations of human rights - including genocide and
crimes against humanity - have exacerbated suspicion
and fear among various societies. Misperceptions,
ignorance and prejudice often lead to acts of violence
that threaten international coexistence. That is why it is
essential that we counter stereotypes and false
assessments that help to create patterns of hostility and
undermine trust among societies and individuals.

However, racism, xenophobia and intolerance in
all their manifestations are too deeply rooted in
contemporary reality, despite binding legal agreements
and the good diplomatic intentions that have emerged
in recent years. Intercultural dialogue undoubtedly has
a special role to play in promoting mutual
understanding and improving relations among nations.
The Security Council must, among its responsibilities,
join in efforts to promote greater rapprochement among
cultures in order to overcome prejudice and strengthen
reconciliation initiatives based on respect, tolerance,
diversity, fairness and justice. To that end, the Council
must be mindful of all extremist movements that
threaten international peace and security.

We also feel that, when we speak of intercultural
dialogue for peace and security, we should also
incorporate notions of vital importance to the
prevention and resolution of conflicts, such as the
strengthening of democracy and the rule of law, the
promotion and protection of human rights, and respect
for international humanitarian law. The integration of
those elements into the decisions adopted by the
Security Council undoubtedly contributes to a culture
of peace and to respect for traditions and beliefs.

Mexico feels that we should promote the added
value of multicultural societies. While in theory the
benefits of diversity are recognized, in practice some
sectors fear that it could weaken the State, cause
conflicts and hold back development. We must
demolish this myth in order to promote tolerance in
favour of international peace and security.

As a nation with a deep-rooted multiethnic and
pluricultural character resulting from its history,
Mexico has a very rich and varied culture which is fed
daily by the combination of all groups and individuals
of the most diverse backgrounds, including the
Lebanese immigration and groups and individuals who
make up the Mexican nation. That is why we attach
particular importance to the dialogue between cultures.
This dialogue transcends borders whenever it deals
with the ongoing communications and interrelations
that flow between those groups and societies associated
with the natural movements of persons who, for
various reasons, emigrate to other parts of the world
but also maintain close links with their countries of
origin.

The free flow of persons should be accompanied
by cultural understanding, tolerance and constructive
dialogue in favour of open societies that respect
plurality and difference.

Mexico is part of the Group of Friends of the
initiative known as the Alliance of Civilizations, which
seeks to prioritize dialogue and the search for mutual
understanding among various cultures, both within our
own societies as well as in relations among the
peoples. Among its guiding principles the Alliance
stresses appreciation for the diversity of civilizations
and cultures, not only as a basic characteristic of
human society, but as an engine of its progress. Thus
its mechanisms are directed at promoting harmony and
easing conflicts between different societies.

My country hopes that the Middle East will
become an example of this in upcoming years,
enjoying peace and security for all States, including
Israel and Palestine.

