Mr. Vrailas: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States.
The candidate countries the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina as
well as the Republic of Moldova, Armenia and Georgia
align themselves with this statement.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive report (S/2015/151), Special
Representative Haysom for his briefing and Ambassador
Tanin for his statement.

Let me start by reiterating the EU's full support
for the continued important role played by the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
and all ofthe United Nations agencies in supporting the
Afghan people, and in coordinating the international
community's assistance. Since the completion of the
International Security Assistance Force's mission, the
role of the United Nations is now even more important
in assisting the national unity Government to implement
its priorities. In that regard, it also remains important
that the Mission maintain a countrywide presence. The
successful implementation of reforms has an important
part to play in underpinning the continued unity of
the Government and a continued unity of purpose.
That can ensure that gains made in the past 13 years
are safeguarded and used as the foundation for further
progress.

The EU welcomes the lead taken by the national
unity Government in renewing momentum towards the
initiation of an inclusive peace process. A meaningful
peace process has the potential to be transformative
in enabling Afghans to believe in an Afghanistan that
can fully meet their legitimate aspirations for a more
prosperous and more secure life.

But a peace deal should not come at any price.
Afghans were relieved to hear President Ghani
Ahmadzai's words that the price of peace must not be
greater than the price of war. The EU fully supports
the national unity Government in that endeavour. It is
imperative that Afghanistan never again be the base
from which terrorist groups operate.

We must also protect the gains made by Afghan
women since the fall of the Taliban regime, as their
active involvement in rebuilding the State remains
crucial. In that regard, the EU would like to emphasize
the need for the full implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). The EU has previously raised the issue of the
central and critical role of women in all spheres of life
in Afghanistan. As the High Representative recently
said on the occasion of International Woman's Day, on
8 March, "Women make the difference." We therefore
wish to see women actively involved in the negotiations
on the future of their country.

The EU welcomes the more positive atmosphere
now existing in regional relations. Credit must go
to President Ghani Ahmadzai and the other leaders
in the region for their endeavours to build links and
cooperation among their countries. The EU knows from
its own experience that greater security and prosperity
are interlinked.

The Central and South Asian regions remain among
the least integrated in the world. Increased cooperation
has the potential to benefit all countries in the region.
The cooperation structures that develop from those
processes will offer the possibility of deepened
relationships and increased interdependence, thereby
enabling a shared and structured approach to resolving
differences of opinion.

The EU is a strong supporter of the Heart of
Asia-Istanbul Process and other processes that are
owned by the countries in the region. They need to
be reinvigorated. The full implementation of the
Afghanistan-Pakistan Transit Trade Agreement and
other agreements can also play a valuable role in
stimulating economic activity along vital economic and
transport arteries. In turn, increased economic activity
can offer increased economic opportunities to those
living in insecure areas.

In conclusion, peace and security in Afghanistan are
the heartfelt desire of the Afghan people. The EU will
work with and support the national unity Government
during this difficult transformation period and calls
upon it to further promote an inclusive dialogue on
reconciliation and political participation with all
members of society. Lasting peace can only come
with the constructive engagement of all neighbouring
countries. The EU will work with the leading members
of the international community to support that outcome.
UNAMA's role in promoting peace and security for
all Afghans will be a vital one, and we reiterate its
importance.

