Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China welcomes Estonia, the Niger, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Tunisia and Viet Nam to the Security Council as its new elected members. We appreciate the work of the United States as President of the Council in December and congratulate Viet Nam on assuming the presidency of the Council this month. China will actively support its efforts. China also thanks Special Representative Chambas for his briefing. At present, the region of West A frica and the Sahel is enjoying overall political stability, sustained economic growth and notable successes in self-empowerment through unity. At the same time, some countries are still being confronted with severe security threats, including violent extremist and terrorist activities, transnational organized crime and intercommunal conflicts. Such security risks have given rise to a grave humanitarian situation. The international community needs to increase its support and assistance for countries in the region. I wish to share the following thoughts. First, we must step up cooperation in a joint response to conflicts and challenges. As we speak, certain regions and countries in Africa remain in the grip of unrelenting wars, conflicts and clashes. China supports African countries in finding African solutions to African problems and supports regional and subregional organizations in their good offices. The Economic Community of West African States, the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), the Multinational Joint Task Force for combating Boko Haram, the Lake Chad Basin Commission and the Mano River Union, among others, have all undertaken robust endeavours to tackle regional challenges and made important contributions to international and regional peace and security. The international community must support the United Nations in securing the necessary financial support for relevant regional efforts. Since its inception, the China-United Nations Peace and Development Trust Fund has provided financial support to a growing number of peace and security programmes in Africa. Secondly, we must intensify efforts to more aggressively counter terrorist threats. This requires us to assist the countries of the region in beefing up their counter-terrorism and deradicalization capacities, as well as in tackling more prominent issues such as the movement of foreign terrorist fighters, the investigation of terrorist financing and the collusion between terrorist organizations and organized-crime networks. China has set up the China-Africa Peace and Security Fund to support Chinese-African cooperation in peace and security, peacekeeping and the maintenance of stability. The first consignment of aid materials, worth ¥200 million, has arrived in Africa to support the development of the African Standby Force and Africa’s capacity for immediate crisis response. In addition, we have provided ¥300 million in aid to counter-terrorism operations in the Sahel and the development of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. Thirdly, it is essential to accelerate development so as to eliminate extreme poverty and underdevelopment, which are the root causes of insecurity and instability. That entails continuing to fully back regional efforts towards economic and social development and assisting countries in the region to build up their governance capacity with more sufficient resources and means. It is also important to invest more in Africa, enhance trade and make an all-out effort to eliminate poverty, with a particular focus on creating educational and employment opportunities for youth. China is actively engaged in assisting countries in the region develop their infrastructure in order to increase connectivity. Moreover, efforts such as offering scholarships for study in China and establishing educational and training centres are under way to provide educational opportunities and vocational training to a vast number of African youth. China supports greater coordination across all United Nations agencies with a view to working in synergy. The country teams, the United Nations Development Programme and other entities should put forward their respective strengths and increase coordination and cooperation with the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel in order to jointly play a constructive part in regional peace and stability. China will continue to support the active work of Special Representative Chambas and his Office.
