Mr. Guterres (Timor-Leste): My Government
congratulates you, Madame, on your country's
assumption of the presidency of this Council. We have
no doubt that your experience and dedication will
guide the Council in its deliberations at times when
difficult decisions are required.

Most gratifying is the presence here today of the
Secretary-General and the Director-General of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, whose
participation underscores the importance of today's
deliberations, which could not have been held on a
better day - International Human Rights Day.

I would like to commend the Secretary-General
for his detailed report (S/2002/ 1300) on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. At the same time I wish
to thank Under-Secretary-General Oshima for his
introduction of the report and to welcome the important
work done by the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.

The report reflects the hard work of this Council
and the United Nations system and provides a clear
roadmap for addressing the challenges of our most
vulnerable populations. It addresses the important
issues of access, separation and the rule of law and
justice. In addition, the inclusion of issues such as
sexual exploitation and terrorism is both timely and
appropriate.

The Aide Memoire adopted by the Security
Council is an essential tool for designing and reviewing
peace operation mandates. We would encourage its
regular and consistent use for this purpose in the
future.

We are looking forward to the regional workshops
next year in the Pacific Rim/South-East Asia region.
The Government of Timor-Leste is fully committed to
participating in this important initiative.

The experience of my own young country
exemplifies the need to more effectively protect
civilians in conflict. Too many innocent people have
lost their lives in recent years due to violence and
starvation.

We thank the Secretary-General for drawing
attention to the importance of protecting civilians even
in times of transition. Cessation of hostilities, fragile
peace agreements and emerging democratic
governmental structures require the sustained focus of
the international community. Training local
government and law-enforcement officials in respect
for human rights and the rule of law, providing a secure
environment for democratic institutions to emerge and
flourish, disarming militias and arranging for the safe
return and reintegration of displaced people are
challenges that require the sustained effort of the
international community throughout the transition
period.

The report indicates that much needs to be done
to ensure effective protection for millions of civilians
affected by conflict. They are the ones who suffer the
most in times of conflict and war. It is the primary
responsibility of the State to protect its people. In this
context, Timor-Leste today, on the occasion of Human
Rights Day, ratified core human rights instruments and
optional protocols, including the International
Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All
Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families. With
this ratification, this Convention entered into force 12
years after it was approved.

Ratifying these treaties is one important step
towards building a culture of human rights.
Implementing them is a task that requires the continued
commitment and effort of the Government, non-
governmental organizations and civil society alike.

As the newest member of the United Nations,
Timor-Leste is strongly committed to the protection
and promotion of human rights and will do its utmost
to meet international human rights standards in its
laws, policies and practices. In this regard, to face the
challenges created by the unfortunate events of last
week, the Government has established a commission of
inquiry, with the participation of civil society
representatives. The results of the Commission's work
will serve to further strengthen our ability to build
conditions for peace and stability, a prerequisite for
nation-building and sustainable development.

The Government hopes that all international
stakeholders, including the United Nations and its
relevant agencies, will lend expertise and technical
assistance when necessary to the Government with a
view to disseminating the human rights conventions.
Such assistance is essential for recovery, reconstruction
and reconciliation and will thereby provide a solid
foundation as the nation commits to a culture of peace.

In conclusion, I would like to thank the Council
for its efforts in the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. We fully support and encourage the continued
efforts of the international community in addressing the
plight of all civilians - women, children and men -
who are victims of conflict the world over.

