The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Turkey.

We too wish to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Mahiga, for introducing
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/447). We
welcome Mr. Moses Wetangula, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Kenya, and thank him for his insightful
statement. We also welcome the Permanent
Representative of Somalia, Mr. Duale.

As others have emphasized, the challenges we
face in Somalia are great and daunting. The political
and security situation is critical. Terrorism, instability
and the precarious humanitarian situation continue to
cause grave concern. The Transitional Federal
Government (TFG) has a great many things to achieve.
For that, there is a need for a strong and determined
Government and functional institutions. Therefore, the
existing political disputes should be solved through
dialogue so that the transitional agenda can be
completed in a timely fashion.

We commend the crucial role played by the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) towards
achieving stability in Somalia. We thank all troop- and
police-contributing countries, especially Uganda and
Burundi. We also welcome the efforts of the
Inter-Governmental Authority on Development,
including its decision to deploy additional troops under
AMISOM.

AMISOM. should be fully supported, so that it
can effectively implement its mandate. Turkey shares
the Secretary-General's view that the support package
for AMISOM. should be identical to the support
provided to United Nations peacekeeping operations.
On the other hand, one should not expect AMISOM. to
provide security on its own. It is also of crucial
importance that the Somali security institutions be
strengthened.

There is no military solution to the Somali
question, and the only road to a peaceful future is
through dialogue. The TFG, which Turkey fully
supports, should continue to pursue assertively its
outreach policy vis-a-vis the opposition groups.
Likewise, the TFG has to appeal to the hearts and
minds of the Somali public so as to minimize the
adverse effects of the propaganda machine of radical
elements, which have their own agenda.

We strongly condemn the terrorist attacks in
Kampala and Mogadishu. We should not let radical
elements drive the Djibouti peace process.

Stability in Somalia can be consolidated only if
the gains in the political and security fields are
supported by reconstruction activities. The Istanbul
Conference on Somalia laid out a broad perspective in
that regard. The critical role played by Somalia's
neighbours in promoting peace, security and
development in Somalia and the region is undeniable.
By reaffirming the principles of good-neighbourly
relations and urging Somalia's partners to continue to
support efforts towards that end, the Istanbul
Conference also strongly emphasized that.

For the peace process to move forward in
Somalia, the active involvement and leadership of the
United Nations are crucial. In that regard, we welcome
the determination and tireless efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Mahiga,
to reinvigorate the process. We support him, and we are
ready to work and cooperate with him. The increased
presence of the United Nations in Somalia will no
doubt help achieve the targets that have been set. We
are encouraged by the strong commitment of the
Secretary-General to that matter. The mini-summit that
the Secretary-General will convene next week is a
timely initiative in that respect.

Finally, with regard to the fight against piracy, we
follow with satisfaction the work to date by the Contact
Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia. The issue is
also high on the agenda of the Security Council, which
very recently discussed the legal aspects of the issue
(see S/PV.6374). We look forward to the report of the
Secretary-General on piracy, which will be submitted
in October.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Tete
Antonio, Permanent Observer of the African Union to
the United Nations.
