Mr. Okuda (Japan): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Lamberto
Zannier, for his comprehensive briefing. I would also
like to extend a warm welcome to Foreign Minister
Jeremie of Serbia and Foreign Minister Hyseni of
Kosovo.
Japan highly values the contributions made by the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), the Kosovo Force and
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe on the ground to support a multi-ethnic,
democratic Kosovo and Western Balkan region. We
also appreciate the leadership of Mr. Zannier in
mediating the communication between Pristina and
Belgrade and between Pristina and the northern
provinces. Regarding the current situation concerning
the governing institutions in northern Kosovo, we
believe it is essential to avoid complications by
maintaining a dialogue with the Serb community. In
this context, we highly value Mr. Zannier's visit to
northern Kosovo and his dialogues with both Kosovo
Albanian and Kosovo Serb leaders to address practical
problems.

Establishing the rule of law across different
ethnicities is among the highest priorities in Kosovo, in
particular, in order to address such issues as organized
crime and corruption. In this area as well, the dialogue
between Pristina and Belgrade is essential. We
commend the role that both UNMIK and EULEX are
playing in this regard.

We also take note of the slight increase in returns
of internally displaced persons (IDPs). At the same
time, we are concerned about sporadic incidents
targeting minorities, which continue to present physical
and psychological obstacles to sustainable returns. We
urge further efforts and cooperation by all relevant
parties to promote the return of minorities. Japan will
continue to support the engagement of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in
IDP returns.

In enhancing stability and prosperity in the
Western Balkan region, advancing the European
perspective through regional cooperation is key. I share
the concerns of the Secretary-General, raised in his
report (S/2010/169) and urge all parties to show further
flexibility, so that their common interests can be
addressed, together with Kosovo's participation in
international frameworks.

Japan, as a proponent of human security, has
supported the efforts of international aid agencies, such
as the United Nations Development Programme,
towards peaceful inter-ethnic coexistence and
sustainable development. A human-centred approach is
particularly relevant in the northern provinces, with
due consideration given to reducing the level of
vulnerability among the population. We also have held
a number of bilateral consultations with Kosovo on
nation-building. We are encouraged by Kosovo's
progress in building its institutional capacities.

Japan remains committed to helping Kosovo to
develop as a vibrant, multi-ethnic and fully democratic
country, and to cooperating with Serbia and other
countries in the region to enhance the stability and
prosperity of the entire Western Balkan region,
including Kosovo.

