Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate on a
matter that is central to the mandate of the Security
Council. We welcome the opportunity to participate in
this debate, especially as it comes shortly after the
Review Conference on the International Criminal
Court, which was convened in Kampala some two
weeks ago. The Council may be pleased to know that
Botswana is strongly committed to ending impunity
and crimes against humanity and that we are one of the
major supporters of the International Criminal Court in
the discharge of its mandate. We derived guidance and
inspiration from the concept note (S/2010/322) and we
sincerely commend Mexico's presidency on that
initiative.

Article 1 of the Charter of the United Nations
recognizes that the collective measures employed by
the United Nations in the prevention and removal of
threats to peace should be underpinned by the
principles of justice and international law. In their
notable work United Nations Ideas That Changed the
World, Thomas Weiss and others list four critical areas
that have traditionally driven United Nations responses
to the challenges of war and armed conflict. Foremost
in that sequence is the notion of replacing war and
conflict with the rule of law and negotiations. The
other options include the use of preventive diplomacy
to forestall conflicts, striking a balance between
disarmament and development in order to effectively
dismantle the structural causes of conflict, and, lastly,
interposing international buffers with observers to keep
peace or in peacebuilding and peacekeeping
operations.

The creation of the United Nations and, with it,
the adoption of the Charter and the creation of the
principal organs, such as the Security Council, ushered
in a new and genuine dispensation in which States
could no longer resort to unilateral armed force in
pursuit of their national interests without providing
justification and legality for their actions. That is the
legal framework that exists and deserves to be
respected by all Member States, big and small, weak
and powerful.

However, there is a minority of those whose
attitude of taking advantage of the inadequacies of the
international judicial system and circumventing the
provisions of the Charter only succeeds in undermining
the very legal frameworks that they helped to create.

In order to strengthen the rule of law, we should
strive for the attainment of the highest ideals of the
Charter by doing more to cultivate the norms and
standards of international law. My delegation would be
more worried if many of us did not endeavour to resist
the temptation to undermine international law, which is
contributing so immensely to the promotion of the rule
of law and the development of international
jurisprudence. We need not be fearful of the law to the

10-4285]
extent that constructive enhancement of the various
provisions of international legal instruments is replaced
by a preoccupation with how best to unshackle the law.

It is clearly demonstrated that the sacrosanct
respect and adherence to the rule of law at both the
national and the international levels, as well as the
maintenance of peace and security, are mutually
reinforcing. Conversely, the collapse of national
institutions charged with the mandate of enacting
legislation and lack of respect for the rule of law and
enforcement are often a catalyst for the escalation and
sustenance of conflict, as well as the destruction of
socio-economic infrastructure.

The United Nations is the only multilateral
platform for the progressive development and
codification of international law. It should therefore
never tire in its noble efforts to strengthen the rule of
law. It should rather continue to consistently apply the
provisions of various conventions in order to safeguard
the clarion call of the Charter "to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war" by mobilizing the
collective will of the entire membership to maintain
international peace and security.

