Mr. She Okitundu (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): Thank you, Mr. President,
for giving me the floor once again. I should like also to
thank the Secretary-General, who found the time to
participate in today's discussions. Let me also thank all
Council members for their contributions to the
discussion on the report of the Secretary-General, and I
also thank the representatives of the European Union,
Namibia, Zambia, Mozambique and Zimbabwe for
their contributions.

I should like to make a few comments on four
points: the demilitarization of Kisangani; the problem
of human rights in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, as a follow-up to the statement made by the
representative of Bangladesh; the national dialogue;
and the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation or resettlement (DDRRR) process.

First, on the question of demilitarization, I should
like to thank all of members of the Council who
insisted on the imperative need to demilitarize the city
of Kisangani, in keeping with Security Council
resolution 1304 (2000) and its other relevant
resolutions. We believe that demilitarization is an
extremely important issue and that it has to be
implemented. To do so, as I said earlier, I think that the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
must urgently give some sort of deadline for the RCD
to demilitarize Kisangani. If it does not do so, those
Security Council resolutions will remain a dead letter.

On human rights issues, I should like to recall -
as is very clear from the report of the Secretary-
General - that the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has taken resolute action to
improve the human rights situation in our country. It is
important to recall - and various speakers stressed
this point - the difference between the situation in the
area controlled by the Government and the situation in
the occupied territories.

The Council knows full well that what is
happening in the occupied territories is extremely
serious. Massive violations of human rights are taking
place. But in the area controlled by the Government -
while it is true that there are some sources of concern,
which we have duly noted, pursuant to the report of the
Secretary-General - one cannot say that the human
rights situation in the area controlled by the
Government is catastrophic. Major steps have been
taken with regard, inter alia, to closing detention sites
that are not controlled by the judiciary, and we are
continuing with consistent efforts in this area.

There is, indeed, a problem regarding the death
penalty. We still have the death penalty in the area
controlled by the Government; that is true. But Joseph
Kabila, our head of State, upon his assumption of that
highest office last January, set up a strict moratorium
- which is still in force today - with regard to the
application of the death penalty. Since January this
year, there has been no capital punishment, and this
measure will remain in force until measures are taken
to abolish the death penalty.

There is indeed a problem with the military court,
which is a special court, because its rulings are final
and cannot be appealed. However, we are thinking
about reforming the army, and the court also will be
reformed to give defendants the right of appeal to a
higher court. I should like to reassure the Council in
this respect.

Concerning the national dialogue, I wish to stress
that all of the components of that dialogue are
determined to see it succeed. Though the Addis Ababa
meeting was not held as scheduled, it was not the fault
of those components. I do not believe that there is any
question about the determination to hold this dialogue.
It was not held simply because the facilitation did not
have sufficient means to convene the plenary, which is
the competent body to deal with substantive issues.

We are all pleased at the proposal made by the
Republic of South Africa to host the national dialogue,
because this will make it possible not only to resolve
the problem of participation, with respect to pending
questions, but also for the plenary to meet. Thus that
proposal resolves the financial difficulties. But we
believe that international community must remain fully
involved in order for the national dialogue to take
place. Therefore I wish to reassure all of those who are
concerned about what happened at Addis Ababa: the
expected results were not obtained simply because the
plenary was not able to meet. It was merely a physical
problem that made it impossible for the supreme body
of the national dialogue to meet.

I wish also to reassure the Council about the
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation or resettlement programme. My
Government pledges to respect its commitments
regarding that programme. We are cooperating closely
with MONUC, and, as I recalled earlier in my
statement, a MONUC team went to Kamina today. The
Government will cooperate fully with it so that the
programme can succeed.

As I also recalled earlier, we want to take away
any possible pretext for Rwanda to occupy our
country - an occupation that has lasted for three years
now. In the area that is controlled by the Government,
we will see to it that this programme is a success, so
that no pretext can be used by Rwanda not to withdraw
from our territory.

These are the comments I wanted to make
following this discussion. Once again, I should like to
thank you, Mr. President, as well as the entire Council
for having spent so much time on this issue.

