Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): The Security Council has before it a draft
resolution that deals with a number of issues relating to
the implementation of Security Council resolutions 986
(1995) and 1111 (1997). The main reason for the
appearance of this draft is the delay in the provision of oil
under the quota set for the first quarter, and this has given
rise to legitimate concern among members of the Council.

The essence of our approach is well known. The oil
export problem cannot be considered in isolation from the
delivery of humanitarian goods, and in fact this is the
major goal of resolutions 986 (1995) and 1111 (1997).
We find it unacceptable that there is a growing gap
between deliveries of Iraqi oil and the provision of
humanitarian supplies to Iraq under resolutions 986
(1995) and 1111 (1997).

The situation has in fact become very serious. By
the end of August, the medicine and other medical
supplies being delivered to Iraq amounted only to 9.5 per
cent of the target amount. In the areas of agricultural
products, water supplies, electrical energy and education,
when the Secretary-General's report was submitted, no
supplies at all had reached the country. All of this is
causing a worsening deterioration of the humanitarian
situation in Iraq.

We are concerned that for some months the
sanctions Committee has seen a trend of blocking medical
supplies and food contracts to meet very urgent needs.
This is being done on the basis of pretexts that have
nothing to do with the existing procedure in the sanctions
Committee. For example, any requests for supplies to Iraq
Security Council 3517th meeting
Fifty-second year 12 September 1997

that are produced in third countries are being blocked on
the arbitrary grounds that these humanitarian goods are
being used for dual purposes or are not of a humanitarian
nature, in spite of the fact that the goods in question are
included in the addendum to the distribution plan.

Sometimes, in spite of the procedure already agreed
upon, the relevant delegations are blocking such requests
without even giving any reasons. The Russian delegation
has always vigorously objected to such a practice, and
today we call upon all our partners in the Security Council
to strictly abide by the agreed procedure so that finally we
might be able to have a stable humanitarian resolution.

We have tried to balance all this so that the situation
regarding the implementation of resolutions 986 (1995) and
1111 (1997) could be reflected accurately and
comprehensively in today's draft resolution. But the
sponsors did not accept our efforts. We were prepared for
the draft resolution to be strictly technical. If the sponsors
wish to include explanations of the causes of the current
humanitarian crisis, however, their explanations should be
objective, not one-sided; they should include an honest
observation of the facts regarding how things stand in the
Committee established by resolution 66] (1990).

Our delegation is also somewhat disappointed that the
draft text was submitted for a vote rather hastily. We
decided not to vote against this draft resolution so as not to
create additional obstacles to speeding up oil exports for the
purpose of establishing a financial base for the purchase of
humanitarian goods.

Nonetheless, while noting that both sides bear
responsibility for the ongoing situation, we believe that it is
exceedingly important to remedy the situation in the
Committee on sanctions as regards the delivery of
humanitarian goods to Iraq. Unfortunately -- although
resolutions 986 (1995) and 1111 (1997) were adopted to
provide humanitarian supplies to the Iraqi population -
this most important aspect has not been taken into account
in the draft resolution.

I repeat, this aspect is not reflected in the draft
resolution, and for this reason we shall abstain in the
voting.

