Mr. Wagaba (Uganda): My delegation is pleased
to see you, Sir, presiding over this session of the
Council. We thank the Security Council for allowing
my delegation to address it concerning the important
issue of children and armed conflict. The fifth report of
the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict,
contained in document S/2005/72, has been studied
carefully by my delegation.

Paramount on the agenda of the Government of
Uganda is the promotion and protection of the rights of
children. Uganda is a party to all international
instruments related to children's rights.

Of particular concern to my delegation is the
mischaracterization contained in paragraphs 52 and 53
and annex II of the Secretary-General's report,
regarding Uganda. It is not the policy of the Uganda
People's Defence Forces, including the Local Defence
Units (LDUs), to recruit anyone under the age of 18
years. In fact, it is required by law that any recruits
into the military forces should be 18 years old or older.

The Uganda People's Defence Forces (UPDF)
and the Local Defence Units work openly with
UNICEF, Save the Children Denmark and other
relevant organizations to ensure that anyone below 18
years of age is not mistakenly recruited through
misrepresentation of age owing to lack of a birth
certificate. Any cases that arise lead immediately to
discharge from the military forces.

The UPDF is directly involved in rescuing
children who have been abducted by the so-called
Lord's Resistance Army (LRA). There is a mechanism
in place to reintegrate those children into society that
includes the payment of school fees for all students
whose parents are in camps for internally displaced
persons and the rehabilitation of infrastructure.

The battalion referred to in paragraph 53 of the
report of the Secretary-General is not being used for
the re-recruitment of LRA members, but as the first
point of security for those rescued by the UPDF from
the clutches of the LRA before they are re-integrated
into society. The camp is open for anyone to visit,
including the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, Mr. Olara
Otunnu.

It is crucial that the Special Representative in
particular undertake a comprehensive visit to northern
Uganda in order to see for himself the efforts being
undertaken to rescue, screen, rehabilitate and
reintegrate any rescued Ugandans in this regard. My
Permanent Representative and I visited the region last
month. We were able to see, and to learn at first hand,
the hardships caused to residents, especially women
and children, by the activities of the LRA. We were
also able to listen to their hopes and aspirations for a
better future. The Special Representative would find
such a visit highly instructive.

The consistent momentum and continued
effectiveness of the UPDF has, to a large extent,
contained the LRA, which is a source of unrest in
northern Uganda. Thanks to the cooperation of the
Government of the Sudan, the LRA is running out of
places to hide in southern Sudan and they are being
forced to give up their terrorist activities. As a result,
many former LRA rebel commanders have surrendered,
on the realization that the offer of dialogue by the
Government of Uganda is the best way for them to
resolve their differences. As a result, the operational
capacity of the LRA has been degraded tremendously.

Also thanks to the efforts of UPDF, the districts
of Lira and Soroti are now devoid of any LRA activity.
However, the LRA has used the opportunity for
dialogue in bad faith. By December 2004, the LRA was
using the ceasefire instituted by the Government of
Uganda to reorganize, retrieve hidden ammunition and
regain military momentum, thereby enabling it to
continue to carry out ambushes and attacks on camps
for internally displaced persons.

Whereas my delegation agrees that the LRA
should be named and sanctioned to the farthest extent
possible, annex II to the Secretary-General's report has
erred in lumping the UPDF and the Local Defence
Units together with the LRA, which is a terrorist
organization. That shows a lack of understanding of the
situation in northern Uganda, which has largely been
created by the refusal of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General to visit the region to get a first-
hand account of the situation.

Regarding the proposals for a plan of action to
establish a monitoring, reporting and compliance
mechanism for children and armed conflict, my
delegation welcomes the fact that the six types of grave
abuses on which international action is urgently
required have been clearly identified. Though
commendable, the efforts suggested for the gathering,
compiling and vetting of information to enhance the
coordination and effectiveness of the international
community need further refining in order to fully
contribute to the overall aim of safeguarding children
in armed conflict.
It is important for the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General to clearly indicate the point
during the preparation and submission of reports at
which he will consult Member States, including their
delegations in New York. It is our view that rigorous
and transparent consultations are crucial at all stages,
as they will enhance concise, objective and accurate
reporting. A formula should be devised to limit the
institutional spread of "destination for action" centres,
to avoid contradictory outcomes.

The Special Representative may also wish to
elaborate upon the criteria used to arrive at the
selection of regional groupings proposed to undertake
joint initiatives with the United Nations while leaving
out others. In that regard, the allocation of roles should
also be clearly explained, including the mandate
proposed for some regional organizations to take on an
international role with regard to areas that fall outside
their regional mandates.

The views of all stakeholders have to be
accommodated. Ad hoc briefings in that regard cannot
constitute a serious consultative exercise. The spirit of
the 1996 Graca Machel report should be emulated with
regard to transparency, objectivity and inclusiveness, to
avoid politicization of the process.

It is the hope of my delegation that the recent
findings of the Secretary-General regarding the
shortcomings of the Special Representative in
addressing issues related to children in armed conflict
will be addressed expeditiously and efficiently so as to
ensure that there is transparency, objectivity, accuracy
and professionalism.

