Mr. Dorda (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me at the outset to express my gratitude
and appreciation to you, Mr. President, for having
implemented the first provision of rule 48 of the
provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council
for the second time in one week, thereby enabling the
membership of the United Nations, on whose behalf
the Council speaks, to be present in the Council
Chamber while the Council carries out its work before
the eyes of the world, rather than behind closed doors,
as if it were scheming.

We are not, of course, surprised that you,
Mr. President, should have done so. Not only are you
greatly experienced, but you are, without doubt, the
unrivalled dean of the Council and the representative
who is most knowledgeable with regard to the rules,
whether written or unwritten. We learned about the
unwritten rules only after the end of the previous
international balance of power.

I should like first of all to make one observation
before moving on to the heart of the matter - although
this observation, too, goes to the heart of the matter.
The fact that the Council is considering this issue under
an agenda item that refers to the "Middle East"
prompts me to note that there is no such geographical
region. There is a region of the Far East and one of the
Near East, but there is no region called the "Middle
East". If we refer to the region in question as the
"Middle East", then where is the Near East? I hope
someone can enlighten me on that question. The truth
is that it was an invention, created in London with the
purpose of avoiding the need to use the word
"Palestine". "Palestine" was replaced with "Middle
East" - and these are the unfortunate consequences.

What I regret most of all is that the Arabs
themselves use that term very frequently; they have
been taken in by the trick. There is no region called the
Middle East, whether considered from a historical or a
geographical perspective. If anyone has proof of the
existence of such a region, I would be willing to listen.
Even political administrations and the foreign
ministries of certain States still refer to the region as
the "Near East". Some companies refer to the Near
East, banks refer to the region as the "Near East". The
Middle East does not exist; the only purpose of
inventing such an expression was to replace the word
"Palestine".

The question is that of Palestine, not of the
Middle East. This question has to do with the
occupation of Palestinian territory, the expulsion of its
people and their replacement by foreigners. This is a
problem of occupation, and it cannot be resolved unless
we look at it as such. Any other solution will not be
permanent and will never lead to peace. Even if such a
solution did achieve peace temporarily, it would not be
a permanent peace. That is a historical fact.

What has taken place in the past, and what is
taking place now, will not be prevented by mediation,
appeals or resolutions. It will require serious action by
the Security Council - action that lives up to its name.
Given the current international balance of power, the
Council has become incapable of facing up to such
problems.

The Palestinians are told that they must put a stop
to the terror; we can only respond by saying that that
demand must be addressed to the greatest terrorist
organization in the world: the Israeli army. The
Palestinians are defending themselves, their honour,
their territories and their property; they are defending
their right to live on their own territory. Palestinians
have not come from all over the world to carry out
terrorist acts on their own territory, where they
themselves live. The occupier has come to kill them, to
destroy their homes and to besiege them, cutting off
power, water and food.
Yet there are some within and outside this
Chamber who say that Mr. Arafat must make a greater
effort. What is left for Mr. Arafat to do? He lacks
electricity, water, food and medicine. He can no longer
do anything. Neither Arafat, nor anyone else - not
even prophets or angels, were they to appear again in
Palestine - can prevent someone from avenging the
murder of his father, his brother, his son, his mother, or
his grandparent, or the destruction of his home.

Moreover, Arafat's leadership is not in question
or the subject of any resolution. His leadership is
historic, to which he was elected. Did anyone ever
question the legitimacy of General De Gaulle when he
was fighting the occupation of France? Of course not,
because the rest of the free French Resistance chose
him to assume that role. When he entered Paris, he and
the other Resistance fighters were received as heroes.
Did anyone question the legitimacy of George
Washington when he acted against the colonialists to
liberate the United States of America? Of course not.

The same reasoning applies to Arafat's
leadership. His legitimacy is rooted in history; it is the
legitimacy of one who is liberating his country, exactly
as General De Gaulle and George Washington liberated
their countries from occupiers. Arafat, dead or alive,
will remain a hero in history. No one but President
Arafat and the Palestinian people has the right to do
anything about that. Although he led the Palestinian
revolution and established the liberation forces in
Palestine, today he is being called upon to make a
greater effort.

Now I should like to make another very important
point. Who in the region is calling for peace, and who
is calling for war? The Arabs are calling for peace; the
Muslims are the advocates of peace. To us, peace is one
of the attributes of God and one of his beautiful names.
That is why, when someone names a child Abdul-
Salam, it means "Servant of God, peace". A Muslim
does not attack others by words or actions; he harms no
one by words or actions. That is the meaning of Islam.
I refer the Council to all the Arab efforts and initiatives
to achieve peace. Likewise, I refer the Council to those
who have undermined those peace initiatives. I will not
state my country's opinion, but I will read from an
article by Uri Avneri, an Israeli journalist, that
appeared in the 13 March issue of Muslim
International, volume 52. I have an English version of
the article, and I will ask the Secretariat to distribute it
to the Council.

In the article, entitled "How Can the Saudi
Initiative be Undermined or Exploded?", Mr. Avneri
goes back through history and finds that Israel has
always destroyed peace initiatives in three stages. The
first stage is denial. Secondly, once the effort has been
denied, it is distorted; and thirdly, the initiative is
liquidated. That is how Sharon's Government is dealing
with the current initiative; it is the way that successive
Israeli Governments have undermined all peace efforts
for the past 53 years.

We should not doubt for a moment that all Israeli
Governments have been against peace. They have all
worked against it. Their first stage, denial, is designed
to diminish the importance of whatever initiative has
been introduced. Israel will say that the initiative
brings nothing new to the table - that it is only a
political trick to gain tactical advantage. If the
initiative has been made by an Arab, the Arab will be
accused of intending it only for the consumption of the
international community, not for that of his own
people. In a nutshell, such a peace initiative means that
the Arab in question is not to be taken seriously.

In using this strategy, Israel will concentrate on
one particular word, as we will show. Before the
October war of 1973, President Sadat made a
comprehensive peace offer, but Golda Meir rejected it
immediately, because her experts discovered that
Mr. Sadat had used the Arabic word for "peace" and
not the word for "conciliation". The price of that word
claimed the lives of thousands of Egyptian soldiers.

The same strategy is being applied to the Saudi
initiative. First of all, it has been said that Crown
Prince Abdullah spoke of that initiative with a United
States journalist but did not announce it to his own
people. When it was discovered that the Saudi and
British press had widely reported the initiative, a new
pretext was given: that the Saudis had submitted the
offer because they were no longer popular in the
United States in the light of angry American reaction to
the events of 11 September. Consequently, and I am
quoting Uri Avneri, "Crown Prince Abdullah was no
longer a true Zionist".

Then the Israelis will move to the second phase to
deftly circumvent the initiative. They will say that they
do not refuse the initiative, but welcome the positive
spirit in which it was offered, and then throw the ball
outside their court. It would then seem logical for them
to ask for a clarification of the offer. When there is a
difference between two peoples, they should meet to
discuss the matter and put an end to their differences.

This sounds very logical, but they are also trying
to destroy the offer at the same time. Every Arab offer
or initiative is based on the restoration of the territories
in return for the normalization of relations, but several
Arab offers have fallen into the same trap. Mr. Ben-
Gurion asked to meet with President Muhammad Najib
of Egypt and several Israeli ministers sought to meet
with President Hafez Assad. Only President Sadat was
clever enough to go to Jerusalem on his own initiative.

When the Security Council adopted resolution
242 (1967), it was rejected by the Israeli Government
and accepted only when acceptance could no longer be
avoided. The Israeli interpretation focused on the
definite article "the", which did not appear in the
English text calling for withdrawal from "occupied
territories", not "the occupied territories", unlike the
French text, which contained the definite article.
Unfortunately, the Russian language does not have
articles, definite or indefinite. The idea is to break the
spirit of the Arabs little by little, giving various
interpretations to any Arab offer and making conditions
unacceptable to the other party so that the offer dies a
slow death. That is what happened in Lausanne and to
most peace initiatives emanating from Europe and
America.

Following the first and second phases, the
initiative is killed by force of arms, as Sharon did in
the occupied Palestinian territories immediately after
the Arab summit in order to liquidate the offer entirely.
These are not my words, but those of Uri Avneri, a
Jewish Israeli author. The Israeli Government usually
employs two lethal weapons in its arsenal: the United
States Congress and the American press. These, too,
are the words of Uri Avneri, not mine. For instance,
United States Secretary of State William Rogers
suggested a peace plan involving Israel's withdrawal to
the lines of 1967, but Israel brought out its weapons to
quash the Rogers plan. Mr. Kissinger made his own
attempt, which was also aborted.

Again citing Uri Avneri, I ask: Who are those
calling for peace and who are those against it? We need
only read Mr. James Baker's book The Politics of
Diplomacy to learn how the occupation forces in
Palestine made life miserable for the Administration in
Washington. Another such book is entitled They Dare
to Speak Out. Those who favour peace would not
impose the conditions cited yesterday in Al-Ahram, a
moderate Egyptian newspaper, in which Mr. Sharon
was quoted as saying that Israel would not end its
operations until resistance was crushed, that the
refugees will not be allowed to return and that the
borders of 1967 will not be restored. What sort of
peace is it if the resistance is crushed and the refugees
cannot return? If we cannot restore the 1967 borders,
on what basis can negotiations be held? On what basis
can agreement be reached?

I should like to assure the Council that the Arabs
are the ones calling for peace. No one should believe
for one moment that the occupation forces in Palestine
desire or seek peace. They will destroy any peace offer,
as Uri Avneri has claimed. It is not true that there is a
democratic Government in Israel. It is a Government
passed down from one general to another. It is a
Government of generals and military commanders with
experience in only one arena - war, which they wage
tirelessly.

Now we come to the Security Council. What is
the role of the Security Council if it is indeed to be
considered a council for international security? Two
days ago, a demonstration was held in Rabat, Morocco,
in which the press reported 3 million people to have
participated. One female participant in that massive
demonstration was quoted on the Al-Jazeera network
as shouting:

"Down with international resolutions! Down with
international instruments! Down with the Security
Council!"

What could bring a Moroccan woman to say such
a thing? It was her understanding that the Council is
very quick to adopt resolutions under Chapter VII
when Muslims and Arabs are involved, but that
resolutions under Chapters VI and VII are never
adopted when Israel is involved. Indeed, the resolution
recently adopted is vacuous, mere words. A plain
statement of the President of the Security Council
would have been enough, as some have claimed. We
know the reason for this. Council members of the free
world defend liberty, but the Council is not even free to
adopt its own resolutions. It is subcontracted for the
occupation of Palestine. Cuba and Libya are truly free
because we express our real opinions here. We are the
true free people; we are the independent ones.

One million people also participated in a
demonstration in Yemen. Millions from the universities
in Cairo, Egypt, have also demonstrated. The artists of
Egypt have collaborated on a work of art that has taken
the Arab streets back to the early 1960s.
Demonstrations have erupted in Saudi Arabia, Oman,
Jordan, Iraq, Syria and elsewhere. If anything positive
has come from this horrible invasion, it is that the Arab
streets and cities have recovered their zeal and dignity.
Sooner or later, in days, months or years, what is
happening in Palestine will have repercussions on the
Arab positions. I say this now and the truth of my
words will emerge in the future.

The Security Council should attempt to salvage
some of its credibility - I do not say all its credibility,
as that would be difficult given the balance of power in
the world today. How can Chapter VII be applied
against Libya, the Sudan, Iraq, Iran and other countries
and not against those who are killing, destroying homes
and conducting assassinations on the streets of
Palestine with impunity? The events in East Timor
caught the Council's immediate attention. Is it not
interested in what is happening in Palestine? Is the
Council not moved by the killing of children; the
embargo of food assistance and medicine; attacks by
air, tanks and artillery; the arrest of people in their own
homes? Where are human rights? Are the Palestinians
and Arabs not human and therefore without rights? The
Council stands accused. Can it claim innocence? It is
no longer an international Security Council. How much
longer will the Council, which is responsible for
international peace and security, remain silent and fail
to deal with this issue as a matter of occupation?
Applying the model of South Africa would be the
solution and would allow this Council to recover its
credibility and dignity, part of it at least.

We care about the United Nations. We want to
strengthen and support the United Nations and the
Security Council. We call on the Council to play its
role and assume the responsibility conferred on it by
the Charter.

We agree with what has been said by Cuba
concerning double standards. This is true. My country
was the first in the second half of the twentieth century
to call for abolishing the right of veto. The veto is not a
right; it is a privilege. And that is what we have called
it. If the Council does not act quickly, I think that it
will regret it.

