Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
co-sponsored and voted in favor of resolution 2307
(2016), on the establishment and operation of the United
Nations political mission in the Republic of Colombia,
which complements resolution 2261 (2016). We did
so out of our conviction that the former constitutes a
fundamental element in the verification and monitoring
of the international community over the historic peace
process taking place in fraternal Colombia. I kindly as
that Ambassador Maria Emma Mejia Velez convey our
congratulations to her Government.

Today's unanimous adoption of the resolution took
place in an atmosphere of joy and hope following the
definitive, full and Final Agreement reached between
the Government of Colombia and Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia - Ejercito del Pueblo to
end once and for all the bloody conflict that brought
mourning to the Colombian people for over 50 years.
The commitment of the parties to ending the war and
building a stable and lasting peace has led to widespread
support and a feeling ofjoy in our region and among the
international community. We commend both parties on
that historic agreement.

For our country, it is extremely important that
Colombia successfully build a society of peace, for,
as the brothers we are, we have felt for and supported
the Colombian people throughout the terrible years
of violence. Our countries were created and forged
together under the leadership of the sword of the
Liberator Simon Bolivar. We were one country, and the
liberation armies crossed borders only to bring freedom
to the rest of South America.

On our own territory, we have given shelter to more
than 4 million Colombians who, product of the war
and its economic consequences, were forced to move.
Similarly, along the entire length of our long border of
over 2,000 kilometres, we have suffered the rigours of
violence and the existence of illegal structures to finance
and support the war in Colombia. Today our border area
is plagued by the phenomenon of paramilitarism, which
was created as an anti-insurgent strategy and must be
completely dismantled.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela feels
vindicated, along with Cuba, Chile and Norway, for
having participated as supporters and guarantors
of the complex and lengthy negotiation process that
culminated in the signed peace accords. We also greatly
appreciate the effort, participation and political support
of the Community of Latin American and Caribbean
States, which expressed its unanimous support for
the terms of the agreements and their willingness to
participate and support the work of the United Nations
political mission.

I would also like to mention and recognize President
Hugo Chavez Frias for his commitment and tireless
work for peace in Colombia. As a close associate of
his, I can attest to his efforts and constant concern for
peace in Colombia, as well as to the political work led
directly by him to approach and convince the parties as
to the need for peace.

The work ahead for the political mission in
supporting the parties in implementing the agreements
and in monitoring and verifying compliance is a
complex, and probably the most difficult task of all.
Hence the need for the United Nations to dedicate itself
as a whole - not only on aspects pertaining to financing
the mission along with the Colombian Government, but
above all in the extensive work relating to eradicating
the root causes of conflict and creating spaces for
former combatants and their bases of political support
to participate in political and economic life.

We must work intensely and come to grips with
the causes and characteristics of the conflict if we are
to counter them and go from a logic and dynamic of
intolerance and violence to one of inclusion, peace and
socialjustice. We must recall that the war was triggered
in part by the assassination of the popular leader Jorge
Elie'cer Gaitan and the Bogotazo riots, after which
broad sectors of the Colombian people were unable
to participate in the political process and advocate
for their economic and social aspirations, particularly
those concerning land access and peasant claims.

We are concerned about the persistence of violent
elements, which no doubt will be a problem the
political mission will face on the ground. Some of
these elements are national while others are local, such
as paramilitarism and drug trafficking, which are an
ongoing obstacle to peace. We also must be able to
counter the actions of warlords, who have a great deal
of economic and political clout in the country.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has
supported, supports and will continue to support all
efforts towards peace in Colombia. President Nicolas
Maduro has expressed that sentiment, and we are doing
so at the request of the Colombian Government. We
hope and trust that the success of the United Nations
political mission and the parties' adherence to the peace
agreements will blaze a path for other insurgent groups
to sign on to the peace process and the entire military
and war structure can begin to adapt to the new reality.

In order to build momentum for peace, it is essential
to reconsider Plan Colombia: Plan for Peace, Prosperity
and the Strengthening of the State , which would
result in a disproportionate foreign military presence
on Colombian soil. Our country, deeply respectful of
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Colombia,
as well as the decisions of its Government and people,
reiterates its offer to send at least 100 Venezuelan
observers, with excellent training and gender balance,
to be integrated into the United Nations political
mission. We are deeply committed to the success of the
mission and we have in-depth knowledge of the terrain
and characteristics of the conflict.

Finally, we hope that the entire people of Colombia
will support President Santos in this courageous
historic bid for peace. It is our wish that by 2 October,
peace and social justice will triumph over war.

