Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I would
like at the outset to thank Deputy Secretary-General
Jan Eliasson for his briefing, as well as Ambassador
Patriota, Chair ofthe Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).
I would also like to thank the Chilean presidency of the
Security Council for taking the initiative to convene
this important and welcome debate on a complex issue
to which we have not found a satisfactory response
despite the collective efforts we have made since 2005.

Ten years after the establishment of the
peacebuilding architecture, clear progress has been
made, on the one hand, towards better understanding of
the specific challenges facing post-conflict countries,
and on the other, towards better coordination of various
international efforts, particularly those of the United
Nations entities in the countries concerned. The report
of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding in the
aftermath of conflict (S/2014/694), which is the basis
for our discussion, cites numerous examples in which
the peacebuilding architecture has actually improved
situations.

Yet, progress can still be made in our collective
efforts. The capacities to mobilize long-term resources
and to coordinate different donors in support of
strategies defined together with the host States remain
a challenge for which we still need to find a satisfactory
solution. In the case ofcountries emerging from conflict
that relapse into critical situations, we see these as
failures that challenge us to do better.

In this regard, France supports the review of the
peacebuilding architecture to be carried out in 2015. The
review will be held together with the strategic review
of peacekeeping operations. That these two events will
be conducted concurrently is particularly appropriate.
In short, with the help of these two reviews, all
modalities of United Nations intervention in countries
in crisis or emerging from crisis will be critically
considered throughout the entire lifecycle of a conflict,
as the Deputy Secretary-General said earlier - from
conflict prevention to post-conflict stabilization, via
the peacekeeping and transition-management phases.
These beneficial exercises are welcome. In this context,
I would like to draw particular attention to three crucial
ideas.

First, there is a need to be firmly anchored in
the field and local conditions in order to provide an
appropriate response. We see it as very positive that
the method for reviewing peacebuilding uses country-
specific case studies. Similarly, France believes that
it is in the country-specific configurations of the
Peacebuilding Commission that the real work can be
accomplished, with the determined commitment of
ambassadors in the configurations that they chair
and in operational meetings on specific and concrete
issues that will enable follow-up of projects. While
organizational considerations are important, they must
not distract us from the heart of the matter - the work
to be done on the countries on the agenda.
Second is the issue of articulation among the
various missions and how they are sequenced. This
issue is at the heart and intersection of the two reviews
in progress. It is crucial. France thanks Japan for its
report on the lessons learned in the transitions between
missions. Our thinking and efforts in this area need to
be continued. This reflection on the sequencing and
prioritization of international action applies not only
to the succession of different missions, but also within
missions in the implementation of their mandates.
This is what France has done with its partners within
the framework of the phased approach mandated
for the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic.

Third and last is the issue of coherence of
international actions and the need to ensure a long-
term commitment in support of national processes.
Institutional reconstruction, restoring functioning
State structures throughout the territory, national
reconciliation, transitional justice, and economic
recovery and development are challenges that take
years or even decades to address. Managing these
emergencies is one thing, but meeting these long-term
challenges is another, and our progress in these areas
has been immense. In this regard, the involvement of
regional and subregional organizations in peacebuilding
is a major challenge.

In conclusion, France fully supportsAmbassador
Patriota's earlier comments advocating women's roles
as a factor for social stability and cohesion that needs
to be a critical pillar of the brainstorming under way.

