Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would like to thank Mr. Griffiths and Mr. Lowcock, as well as Ambassador King, for their briefings. I want to state on record, once again, that we fully support the United Nations- led process and the United Nations efforts to bring peace to Yemen. We once again take this opportunity to urge all the parties to engage in good faith and work closely with the United Nations to bring the conflict to a close. In that regard, we welcome the 16 February announcement of an initial agreement on an exchange of prisoners, and, as ever, its implementation is key. We heard from Mr. Griffiths about the need for violence and suffering to stop if peace is to thrive. The decrease in violence that began in October was welcomed by the international community and by Yemenis, but as the emergency Security Council meeting of 28 January acknowledged, the recent violence in Al-Jawf and Nihm is of very grave concern. Regardless of who started the violence, it is clear that the Houthis have sought to exploit the situation and that is unacceptable.Moreover, to pick up on something Mr. Lowcock said, the violence serves to underscore the fact that the conflict will continue until we can find a political solution. We therefore encourage the parties to redouble their efforts towards beginning political discussions. In order to ensure the effectiveness of the peace talks in Yemen, as well as the sustainability of the peace, we encourage the development of a context-specific approach to women's participation in the process, as called for in resolution 2493 (2019). I want to turn now to humanitarian access. We very much share the concerns that Mr. Lowcock outlined. His briefing on the reversal of the trend towards decreasing civilian casualties was sobering. We endorse his remarks on international humanitarian law, and I think that his warning about donors was also very salutary. The United Kingdom is increasingly concerned by access constraints and obstructions in Houthi-controlled areas in the north. Houthi restrictions have increased significantly over recent weeks, with increasingly severe intimidation of United Nations and non-governmental organization (NGO) humanitarian workers. In line with resolution 2451 (2018), humanitarian workers need to be able to conduct their work safely and without harm. Unless those restrictions and obstructions are lifted and intimidation ceases, there is a real risk that United Nations agencies and NGOs will not be able to deliver life-saving aid over the coming months. Urgent action is needed, and I also support what Mr. Lowcock said about the needs assessment. The Secretary-General's statement on 12 February reiterates the importance of the humanitarian operation. I want to place on record how grateful we are for the work that the United Nations is doing to ensure that vital humanitarian work can continue. In those increasingly difficult conditions, it is vital that we as the international community continue to support those efforts in a coordinated and coherent manner. I would also like to put on record our concerns about the Central Bank of Yemen and the fact that it will imminently run out of foreign currency reserves, which will cause major economic, humanitarian and political consequences in Yemen. Significant financial assistance, on a scale of $1 to $2 billion, is urgently needed to prevent that. We look to the Government of Yemen to urgently develop a credible plan that reassures potential donors of their investments in the Yemeni people. I would like to thank and pay tribute to the Panel of Experts for its tireless work over the last year and to say that the United Kingdom will work with others on the Council and the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014) to take forward its recommendations. The United Kingdom notes with concern the findings of the final report (see S/2019/83) of the Panel of Experts regarding weapons of Iranian origin in Yemen. We also recognize the Panel's findings on the Abgaiq Aramco attack - the Houthis simply did not have the capability to conduct such an attack. The report's findings on instances of intimidation and sexual violence against women in Houthi-controlled areas are also deeply troubling. That is unacceptable, and I hope that the Council will reiterate our condemnation of such actions today. We would also like to place on record our concerns about the FSO SAFER oil tanker and the vital necessity of dealing with the issue. We urge the Houthis to allow either the removal of the oil or a repair mission to proceed, so as not to hold the environment hostage. Continued Houthi inaction on the issue is nothing short of reckless.
