Mr. Farhfidi (Afghanistan): At the outset, I
would like to thank you, Mr. Minister, for coming here
from Oslo to preside over this meeting on Afghanistan.
We appreciate Norway's important humanitarian
assistance to Afghanistan during these difficult times.

I would like to thank you, Mr. President, and the
members of the Council, for having convened this
timely meeting on the situation in Afghanistan. In
addition, I express sincere thanks to those
representatives who expressed their sympathies for the
devastating earthquake that took place in the village of
Nahrin, located east of Baghlan and south of Kunduz.

I would also like to express my profound
appreciation to Secretary-General Kofi Annan for his
comprehensive report on Afghanistan dated 18 March
2002. We consider this report as reflecting the series of
positive developments that have taken place since the
demise of the Taliban and Al Qaeda.

Fortunately, in the recent report we do not see any
accounts indicating gross violation of human rights,
systematic massacre and deportation of the civilian
population based on ethnic origin. Rather, the recent
report sets out positive developments characterized by
the restoration of human rights, in particular the rights
of women, the reopening of educational institutions for
boys and girls, the return of women to the civil service,
and the continued efforts by the Afghan people, in
coordination with the international community, to
recover and to reconstruct Afghanistan's economic,
political and cultural infrastructure. Those are the
reasons why we consider that this report reflects the
optimism and hope of the Afghan people.

I would like to take this opportunity to highlight
the importance of the recent changes regarding the
activities of the United Nations in Afghanistan. We are
convinced that this new structure comes at a time when
the consolidation of peace and reconstruction is of the
utmost importance, given the current situation in
Afghanistan.

In this context, it is relevant to stress the tireless
and persistent efforts of Ambassador Lakhdar Brahimi,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, as
well as the two newly appointed deputies, Mr. Nigel
Fisher and Mr. Jean Arnault. We know both of them,
and we value their experience and ability to perform
their challenging assignments.

The formation of a national army and a police
force remains a vital priority for the Interim
Administration. The formation of a national army will
serve as a symbol of national unity. The Interim
Administration greatly appreciates the assistance of
Member States in implementing that objective.

I would like to reiterate that the Interim
Administration remains strictly committed to the
implementation of the landmark Agreement signed in
Bonn on 5 December 2001.

We are looking forward to convening of the Loya
Jirga on 22 June 2002, which will lead to the
establishment of the Transitional Authority.

With regard to the extension of the International
Security Assistance Force -ISAF -beyond the
capital, to which some delegates referred in today's
meeting, we consider it imperative that the views of the
Afghan Interim Administration should be sought.

In conclusion, I would like to make it clear that,
in any political gathering or meeting of Afghans with
regard to the future political destiny of Afghanistan,
including the Loya Jirga, there should be no place for
the Taliban and their supporters, whatever their
denomination. Those who were stooges of foreign
forces and brought havoc to the Afghan nation,
violated basic human rights and committed atrocities
against Afghans are considered as traitors and terrorists
who have harboured international terrorists. They
should not be entitled to be part of any political set-up
in Afghanistan.

Afghan authorities consider that the 18 March
2002 report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Afghanistan deserves to be endorsed by this Council.

