Mrs. Ribeiro Viotti (Brazil): I would like to
thank you for the invitation to address the Security
Council on the current situation in Guinea-Bissau and
to inform on the progress made by the Peacebuilding
Commission in support of peacebuilding efforts in that
country.

Following the recommendation of the Council,
the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission agreed to place the country on the
Commission's agenda. A country-specific configuration
for Guinea-Bissau was created, which I have the
honour to chair. The objective of our work is to assess
the main challenges and priorities for peacebuilding, in
close contact with the authorities of Guinea-Bissau as
well as to launch a strategic framework to address the
most critical peacebuilding issues in the country.

Soon after the establishment of the country-
specific configuration, I conducted an exploratory
mission to Guinea-Bissau. The field visit had the
objective of getting first-hand information on the
current situation in the country and to initiate a
dialogue with the Government and relevant
stakeholders on the priorities for peacebuilding.

The mission also aimed at explaining the purpose
and the process of the engagement of the Peacebuilding
Commission with the country and at ensuring that the
principle of country ownership is observed from the
very beginning of the process.

During my visit, I had a discussion with the
Prime Minister and met the Foreign Minister, the
Secretary of State for International Cooperation, the
Ministers of Finance, Economy, Justice, Interior, and
Defence and the Minister of the Presidency, the Army
Chief of Staff, representatives of civil society
organizations, members of the diplomatic community
resident in or accredited to Guinea-Bissau and the
United Nations country team.

I left the country with the impression that there
was a general expectation that the Peacebuilding
Commission can be a turning point in the political and
economic transition in Guinea-Bissau. In particular, the
Government was looking forward to engagement with
the Peacebuilding Commission as a catalyst for
increased international support and for sustained
international attention to assist the country in
consolidating peace and promoting development.

While in Bissau, I had the opportunity of
witnessing the distress and adverse living conditions of
the population, which threaten ongoing efforts to
sustain peace and stability. On the other hand, as many
authorities emphasized, the country has a great
potential and is confident that, with international
support, it will be able to attain political stability and
sustained economic growth.

After I reported the results of my visit, the
country-specific meeting on Guinea-Bissau had the
opportunity to undertake a discussion based on a
mapping of resources and gaps for peacebuilding in
Guinea-Bissau. This exercise proved to be extremely
useful in highlighting the various programmes
undertaken in the country and the situation of aid flows
as well as in identifying funding gaps within existing
strategies and challenges not covered by any existing
strategy.

The discussion was complemented by an
examination of the situation of Guinea-Bissau on the
basis of a background paper prepared by the
Peacebuilding Support Office, as well as by the
consideration of a draft outline for the strategic
framework for peacebuilding in Guinea-Bissau.

A high-level delegation of the Government of
Guinea-Bissau, headed by Prime Minister Martinho
N'Dafa Cabi, travelled to New York and made a
presentation to the Peacebuilding Commission on the
country's priorities and challenges for peacebuilding.
The Representative of the Secretary-General in
Guinea-Bissau, Mr. Shola Omoregie, also addressed
the meeting. The presence at United Nations
Headquarters of such a high-level delegation was a
clear demonstration of the importance that the
Government attaches to ongoing peacebuilding
initiatives and illustrated once again its willingness to
work together with the Commission towards
consolidating peace and stability.

On the day of the visit, the country-specific
meeting unanimously decided to advise the Secretary-
General to declare Guinea-Bissau eligible for support
from the United Nations Peacebuilding Fund. I
conveyed that decision to the Secretary-General, who,
in turn, officially announced the eligibility of Guinea-
Bissau for Peacebuilding Fund support. The declaration
of eligibility triggered the process of establishing a
national steering committee in Guinea-Bissau, which
will be in charge of analysing the specific projects to
be financed with resources from the Peacebuilding
Fund.

Following my field mission to Guinea-Bissau, the
presentation by the Prime Minister, the various
interactions with the Government and the preliminary
discussions in the Commission, the country-specific
meeting has been gaining a better understanding of the
priorities for peacebuilding.

The challenges in the country include the areas
identified by the Security Council, that is, building
governmental capacity, promoting public sector
reform, strengthening the rule of law, combating drug
trafficking, implementing security sector reform and
assisting the electoral process. Challenges also include
the recurrent problem of salary arrears, improving the
living conditions of the military, combating drug
trafficking and organised crime, promoting human
resources development and youth employment,
addressing the needs of the vulnerable groups,
rehabilitating the infrastructure, in particular the
energy sector, and adopting measures to jump-start the
revival of the economy.

In setting a strategic framework for
peacebuilding, the PBC will now define the specific
mix of measures and the sequencing of the actions it
will undertake within each of the priority areas to
support existing strategies and programmes, identify
gaps and generate synergies among programmes,
taking into account the progress achieved thus far in
each of the peacebuilding priority areas. It is widely
acknowledged that a key to addressing peacebuilding
challenges in the country is the need to strengthen the
Government's capacity to break the vicious circle in
which institutional, political and economic instability
are intricately linked.

The Peacebuilding Commission intends to tackle
peacebuilding in Guinea-Bissau through a two-track
approach, interweaving immediate projects and rapid
actions with medium- and long-term perspectives.
There is growing recognition that, given the daunting
array of challenges that Guinea-Bissau faces,
peacebuilding priorities should be ranked according to
the degree of urgency, importance and value added to
peace consolidation efforts.
The strategic framework will outline the
commitments of the Government of Guinea-Bissau and

those of the various stakeholders, including civil
society, the private sector, political parties, the United
Nations system, the members of the Peacebuilding
Commission, the international financial institutions,
bilateral and multilateral donors and regional and
subregional organizations. At the same time, it will
provide a basis for further engagement with the
country, a mechanism for effective coordination and a
means of marshalling additional resources, which are
so vitally needed.

As part of the process of developing the strategic
framework, the Peacebuilding Commission intends to
conduct a field mission to Guinea-Bissau, which will
take place in early April 2008. Previous experiences in
the Peacebuilding Commission have shown that field
trips are invaluable to getting a better understanding of
the country's challenges in the area of peacebuilding.

We trust that the Peacebuilding Commission will
be in a position to provide further advice on
peacebuilding priorities and challenges in Guinea-
Bissau in the coming months. We hope that, as our
work evolves, the Peacebuilding Commission will
make a difference in ensuring a brighter future of
political stability and economic prosperity for the
people of Guinea-Bissau.

