Mr. Vilovic' (Croatia): Croatia deeply appreciates
the personal participation of Deputy Prime Minister
Jose Guterres in our deliberations and would like to
thank both him and Special Representative Atul Khare
for their contributions in today's debate on Timor-
Leste.

Croatia aligns itself with the statement of the
European Union to be delivered later.

Croatia welcomes the Secretary-General's latest
progress report on Timor-Leste (S/2009/504),
presented by Special Representative Khare. It is a very
timely report, which comes on the tail of a very
important juncture in that country's history. The tenth
anniversary of Timor-Leste's historic vote for
independence on 30 August represented a significant
benchmark indicating how far the Timorese people
have come in such a short time. We also remember
those who lost their lives during the violence in the
aftermath of the 2006 crisis, including those serving in
the United Nations Mission there.

We also recognize the crucial contributions that
United Nations missions have made since the country's
independence, as well as the tireless efforts of the
respective special representatives and their teams in
supporting Timorese-led nation-building efforts. We
reaffirm our full support for the people of Timor-Leste
and urge them not waiver from their important
endeavours in the face of the current political,
institutional and socio-economic challenges.

We meet today, at a time when the security
situation in Timor-Leste has remained calm, to review
progress in critical areas of focus under the renewed
mandate of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT) since February this year. We
note the Secretary-General's assessment of continued
incremental progress in the four mandated priority
areas.

Ensuring the long-term security and stability of
Timor-Leste is contingent on national security
institutions functioning in a professional and
accountable manner. Croatia is therefore encouraged to
learn that during the reporting period that has been at
the forefront of the minds of the Timorese leadership.
We welcome their efforts for the institutional
strengthening of security institutions, enhancing
security-sector legal frameworks and stepping up
efforts to establish a national security policy.

The Timorese authorities should continue to take
full advantage of UNMIT's expertise while
undertaking that process. If designed and implemented
correctly, those reforms will allow for a comprehensive
overhaul of the security sector, shored up by requisite
civil oversight, the rule of law, transparency and
enhanced mechanisms of internal accountability for
both security institutions. It will further pave the way
for an integrated approach to security and defence
functions, while clearly defining meaningful roles for
both the National Police Force of Timor-Leste (PNTL)
and Falintil-Forcas de Defensa de Timor-Leste
(F-FDTL).

Croatia has listened with great interest to
Mr. Khare on the progress in the transfer of primary
policing responsibilities to the PNTL. While progress
has been made in the resumption of primary policing
responsibilities, it is important that that process
continue steadily to ensure continuing public
confidence in the current stable security situation.

As the situation evolves on the ground, Croatia
fully supports regular reviews of possible
configurations of the size of UNMIT's police
component, to ensure appropriate alignment of its
capabilities. In that connection we look forward to the
technical assessment mission visit to Timor-Leste in
the coming months and its findings thereafter.
However, at this crucial juncture, we believe that the
current engagement of UNMIT's police component
needs to be retained for the time being. It continues to
serve an important role in interim law enforcement
until the PNTL has been fully reconstituted. In
assuming an effective oversight role in districts already
transferred to the national police, UNMIT could ensure
that resumption of policing responsibilities by the
national police continues smoothly and without
incident.

We are encouraged by reports of progress
achieved in human rights areas, including systematic
strengthening oil the judicial system and enactment of
important legislation. We commend the decision by the
High-level Coordination Committee chaired by
President Ramos-Horta to conduct an independent
comprehensive needs assessment. That should open the
way for a coordinated and carefully considered
approach to justice sector reform and help prioritize
those areas requiring international assistance. We look
forward to those recommendations in the near future.

However, the long-term consolidation of peace in
Timor-Leste cannot take hold in the absence of a viable
environment in which there is a credible and
functioning judiciary and penal system and in which
the rule of law prevails.

The successful holding of local elections on
9 October represented another important benchmark in
the country's progress towards a culture of political
dialogue and democratic governance. We hope that the
people of Timor-Leste will use it as positive
momentum to further drive forward its democratic
process in which national dialogue is a central tenet.

Furthermore, Croatia commends the Timorese
leadership for their accomplishments to date towards
resolving an important residual challenge from the
2006 crisis, namely that of internally displaced persons
(IDPs). We particularly welcome the news that the
Government has closed the camps in Dili and Baucau.
Bearing in mind the serious socio-economic
challenges Timor-Leste faces today, it is essential for
the long-term consolidation of the country's peace and
stability that more concerted efforts are made by the
Government towards improving the quality of life for
all Timorese people. Such efforts must also include
durable solutions to alleviate potential destabilizing
situations after the IDP challenge has been resolved. In
that respect, perhaps there could be more focus on
integrating more peacebuilding efforts aimed at social
inclusion and cohesion for all Timorese people,
through long-term sustainable development.

The Secretary-General, in his latest progress
report, has highlighted the continued strength of the
resolve of the people of Timor-Leste to build a more
peaceful and stable future for themselves, especially
since the crisis of 2006 and the attacks in 2008. To that
end UNMIT has played a vital role in restoring and
maintaining stability and in the crucial areas of
security sector reform, democratic governance, rule of
law and socio-economic development.

However, given that significant residual
challenges from 2006 could pose serious risks to the
long-term stability and development of the country,
Croatia, like others, deems continued international
presence and assistance necessary for the immediate
period ahead. In that respect, the United Nations
presence, under UNMIT's capable stewardship, can
continue to play a critical role in providing assistance
to Timorese-led State-building efforts in the four
mandated priority areas.

Finally, as this was Special Representative
Khare's final briefing to the Council in his official
function, Croatia would like to take this opportunity to
thank him for all his tireless efforts and capable
leadership of the Mission. We wish him the very best in
his future endeavours.

