The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Burundi, the Central African
Republic, Chad, the Congo, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Denmark, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea,
Gabon and Japan, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to His Excellency Mr. Rodolphe Adada,
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Cooperation and
Francophonie of the Congo.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Adada
(Congo) took a seat at the side of the Council
Chamber.

The President (spoke in French): On behalf of
the Council, I extend a warm welcome to His
Excellency Mr. Agba Otikpo Mezode, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Central African Republic.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mezode
(Central African Republic) took a seat at the side
of the Council Chamber.


The President (spoke in French): On behalf of
the Council, I extend a warm welcome to His
Excellency Mr. Leonard She Okitundu, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. She
Okitundu (Democratic Republic of the Congo)
took a seat at the side of the Council Chamber.


The President (spoke in French): On behalf of
the Council, I extend a warm welcome to His
Excellency Mr. Santiago Nsobeya Efuman Nchama,
Minister for Foreign Affairs, International Cooperation
and Francophonie of Equatorial Guinea.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nsobeya
Efuman Nchama (Equatorial Guinea) took a seat
at the side of the Council Chamber.


The President (spoke in French): On behalf of
the Council, I extend a warm welcome to His
Excellency Mr. Jean Ping, Minister of State and
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Cooperation and
Francophonie of Gabon.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ping
(Gabon) took a seat at the side of the Council
Chamber.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nteturuye
(Burundi), Mr. Laotegguelnodji (Chad), Ms. Loj
(Denmark), Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) and
Mr. Motomura (Japan) took the seats reserved for them
at the side of the Council Chamber.


The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Tuliameni Kalomoh, Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs.

It is so decided.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Emmanuel Mbi,
Country Director for South-Central Africa and the
Great Lakes Region of the World Bank.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Emmanuel Mbi, Country Director for
South-Central Africa and the Great Lakes Region of
the World Bank, to take a seat at the Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Ms. Julia Taft,
Director for the Bureau for Crisis Prevention and
Recovery of the United Nations Development
Programme.

It is so decided.

I invite Ms. Julia Taft, Director of the Bureau for
Crisis Prevention and Recovery of the United Nations
Development Programme, to take a seat at the Council
table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Mr. Ivan Simonovic', President of the Economic and
Social Council.

It is so decided.

I invite His Excellency Mr. Ivan Simonovie,
President of the Economic and Social Council, to take
a seat at the Council table.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 21 October 2002 from the
Permanent Representative of Egypt to the United
Nations, which reads as follows:

"In my capacity as Chairman of the African
Group for the month of October 2002, I have the
honour to request an authorization for
Ambassador Amadou Kebe, Permanent Observer
of the African Union to the United Nations, to
intervene in the debate on 'Strengthening
cooperation between the United Nations system
and the Central African region in the maintenance
of peace and security' in the public meeting of
the Security Council to be held on 22 October
2002, in accordance with rule 39 of the
provisional rules of procedure of the Security
Council."

That letter has been published as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/2002/l 178.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Council agrees to extend an invitation to Mr. Amadou
Kebe'.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Amadou Kebe to take a seat at the
side of the Council Chamber.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 21 October 2002 from the
Permanent Representative of Cameroon to the United
Nations, which reads as follows:

"In accordance with General Assembly
resolution 55/161, of 12 December 2000, I have
the honour to request an authorization for
Ambassador Nelson Cosme, Deputy Secretary-
General of the Economic Community of Central
African States, to participate in the public
meeting of the Security Council to be held on
Tuesday, 22 October 2002 on 'Strengthening
cooperation between the United Nations system
and the Central African region in the maintenance
of peace and security', in accordance with rule 39
of the provisional rules of procedure of the
Security Council."

That letter will be published as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/2002/1181.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Council agrees to extend an invitation to Mr. Nelson
Cosme.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Nelson Cosme to take a seat at the
side of the Council Chamber.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them a letter
dated 21 October 2002 from the Permanent
Representative of Cameroon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
which has been published under the symbol
S/2002/ll79.

In the course of this meeting, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to give the floor first to
representatives of non-member States. If I hear no
objection, I shall consider that the Council agrees to
that proposal.

It is so decided.

I now give the floor to Mr. Tuliameni Kalomoh,
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs.


