Mr. Argiiello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all let me congratulate the United Kingdom
presidency on the way it has been guiding the Security
Council debate during the month of May. At the same
time, I thank you, Madam President, for the timely
convening of this open debate on a theme of great
importance at the present time, a theme on which your
country plays a leadership role.

My country considers that United Nations and, in
particular, the Security Council have a key
responsibility in the maintenance of international peace
and security. Likewise, the Organization has a crucial
role to play in post-conflict peacebuilding in laying the
foundation for sustainable peace and development.

One of the greatest challenges facing the
international community and the United Nations is to
support States in recovering from conflict and building
sustainable peace. An effective response by the
Organization requires the preparation of a broad,
coordinated strategy, based on identifying priorities
and setting specific goals and time frames. This task
requires many kinds of activities: political, security,
rule of law, humanitarian, development and the defence
of and respect for human rights.

In that stage of preparing a broad strategy and
identifying the priorities, we emphasize the importance
of national ownership: the participation and

responsibility of the authorities of the country
emerging from conflict, which should be involved
throughout the reconstruction process in order to
ensure an agreed response that can address the root
causes of a conflict with greater legitimacy and
effectiveness.

My country welcomes the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission as an advisory body on the
coordination of all international activities and
resources aimed at post-conflict stabilization. It plays a
crucial role in coordinating national authorities and all
other actors involved in reconstruction and
development, including United Nations bodies and
agencies, international financial institutions, civil
society and the private sector. We believe that the role
of the Peacebuilding Commission, the Peacebuilding
Support Office and the Peacebuilding Fund should be
enhanced.

My delegation also wishes to highlight the
important role of regional and subregional
organizations in the prevention, management and
resolution of conflicts, in accordance with Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations, and the need to
strengthen the capacities of regional arrangements in
helping countries to recover and rebuild after a
conflict.

I wish in conclusion to repeat once more what we
have said before in this Chamber: that Argentina is
convinced of the Organization's responsibility in
supporting countries recovering from conflict -
together with their national authorities and in
collaboration with regional arrangements and other
actors - in order to rebuild and strengthen their
institutions and to avoid forever the recurrence of a
conflict scenario.

