Mr. Trullols Yabra (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we thank Mr. Said Djinnit,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes region, for his briefing on the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2019/229). We also commend
his efforts and initiatives for peace and stability in the
Great Lakes region during his tenure.

The Dominican Republic commends the positive
processes that have taken place in the Great Lakes
region, in particular the peaceful holding ofpresidential,
legislative and provincial elections in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo; the peace agreement between
the Government of the Central African Republic and
14 armed groups, which was facilitated by the African
Union Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation; the
signing of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in South Sudan; and the outcome of the
East African Community summit, held in Arusha on
1 February, which recognizes the urgency of ensuring
a peaceful and inclusive political process towards
the holding of elections in 2020 in Burundi, in full
compliance with the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement for Burundi that was signed in 2000.

We also note the progress made in the strengthening
of the region's commitments, such as advances in
economic reintegration and judicial cooperation, the
repatriation of unarmed combatants and bilateral
collaboration among the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda and Uganda to address cross-border
security. We encourage the full implementation of
those agreements, the holding of future peaceful and
transparent elections and continued regional cooperation
to complete the repatriation of the remaining members
of armed groups.

We emphasize the role played by the African
Union, the Economic Community of Central African
States, the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) and the representatives of the Secretary-
General in the region, among others, for their efforts
and cooperation in the quest for a peaceful and stable
coexistence in the region.

Despite those positive developments, the
Dominican Republic is concerned about the fragile
security situation, especially in the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where armed
groups, such as the Allied Democratic Forces, have
intensified their attacks against civilians, the Forces
armees de la Republique democratique du Congo and
MONUSCO, resulting in the death of hundreds of
civilians, including women and children.

Such activities create insecurity and have a negative
impact on peace and stability across borders and
throughout the region. We therefore urge the affected
countries to combine their efforts to dismantle armed
groups; control illegal trafficking in natural resources,
which is the source of financing for armed groups,
and trafficking of illegal arms and ammunition; and
invest in development plans for the population, thereby
providing more opportunities for young people affected
by armed conflict and help them develop their skills
and meet the demands for labour by providing relevant
educational opportunities.

That climate of insecurity, among other factors,
adds to the worrying humanitarian situation in the Great
Lakes region, in particular the high number of displaced
persons in Burundi, the Central African Republic, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Sudan.
As the Secretary-General notes in his report, as of
31 December 2018, approximately 11.2 million people
had been forcibly displaced, including 7.2 million
internally displaced persons and more than 4 million
refugees and asylum-seekers.

Of equal concern is the growing Ebola outbreak
and its high risk of regional spread in the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In that regard,
we applaud the response mechanisms that have been
launched to eradicate the virus by Burundi, Rwanda,
South Sudan and Uganda, among others, and call for
increased funding for humanitarian assistance for those
in need.

The Dominican Republic condemns the violations
of human rights committed in countries of the region
as result of political processes, including the violent
repression of demonstrations; the use of force by police
and security forces; the prolonged detention of political
prisoners; murders and kidnappings; the destruction of
goods; the raping of civilians, including women and
children; and the climate of impunity. We therefore call
on the international, regional and national communities
to redouble their efforts to provide practical and
cooperative responses to bring the perpetrators
to justice.

To conclude, in addition to the situations I have
mentioned, the Great Lakes region faces other major
challenges, such as overcoming mistrust among some
States that are signatories to agreements and achieving
the compliance of Governments with the minimum
quota of 30 per cent of women's participation in 2020,
among others. In order to overcome existing challenges,
a common analysis of the problems and opportunities is
needed, focused on achieving joint regional solutions
through dialogue and cooperation and complying with
national, regional and international commitments
undertaken in support of peace, security and the
socioeconomic development of the Great Lakes region
and its peoples.

