Ms. Wolcott Sanders (United States of America): I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for
having convened this meeting today. I wish also to
thank the Secretary-General and Special
Representative Coomaraswamy, as well as UNICEF
Executive Director Ann Venamen and the non-
governmental organization representative for their
statements this morning and for the report on children
and armed conflict.

It is important that the United Nations, the
Security Council and our Governments keep the issue
of children and armed conflict in our focus,
particularly in the light of the alarming estimate that
some 300,000 children are today involved in more than
30 conflicts worldwide.

The Secretary-General's report describes the
terrible circumstances in which the use of child
soldiers continues and highlights its current issues of
concern: child victims in the Middle East and the Great
Lakes region of Africa.

The United States fully supports the request for
all parties listed in the annexes to the report to halt
recruitment and use of child soldiers. We believe that
the current plight of child soldiers is particularly dire
in Burma, the Sudan and parts of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and northern Uganda, where the
Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) operates.

According to some reports, Burma is thought to
have the largest number of child soldiers in the world.
Human Rights Watch has documented the widespread
forced recruitment of boys as young as 11 by Burma's
national army. Burma's military regime has
acknowledged the recruitment of child soldiers and
claims to have taken action against five officials
involved in the forced recruitment of child soldiers
since 2003 and to have set up a committee to prevent
the recruitment of child soldiers.

Nonetheless, evidence continues to emerge that
the practice of recruiting child soldiers has not ceased.
A September 2006 report issued by the Thailand-based
Human Rights Education Institute of Burma stated that
little had changed with regard to Burma's forced
recruitment of child soldiers and that the regime had
done little to protect children from being recruited into
the military. The Coalition to Stop the Use of Child
Soldiers estimated that 20 per cent of the Burmese
army and ethnic insurgency forces - about 90,000
persons - were under the age of 18. Child soldiers are
also used in ethnic armies. We encourage Burma's
neighbours to provide protection to any child soldiers
who desert the national or ethnic armies and to allow
international relief organizations, including the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
UNICEF, to provide humanitarian assistance to resettle
and reintegrate them into society. The military forces
of the Government of Burma also use the systematic
rape of women and girls, particularly of the Shan,
Karen, Karenni and other ethnic minorities, as an
instrument of armed conflict.

The United States encourages Members, parties,
States and international organizations to provide all
appropriate protection and assistance to victims of such
atrocities.

In the Sudan, Government forces and various
armed groups continue to recruit and use child soldiers
in armed conflict. In camps for internally displaced
persons (IDPs) in Darfur and in refugee camps in
neighbouring Chad, we have seen the tragic
recruitment of young men and boys by various parties
to the Darfur conflict. Also in Darfur, rape continues to
be used as a weapon of war against young women and
girls. The Government of the Sudan, which is a party to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the

Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Right of
the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflict, must accept responsibility for the widespread
problem of the recruitment and use of child soldiers
and take immediate steps to halt such practices.

The current negotiations between the Government
of Uganda and the Lord's Resistance Army seek an end
to the 20-year conflict, which has produced 2 million
internally displaced persons and seen roughly 25,000
children abducted by the LRA. Children abducted by
the LRA are often forced to participate in acts of
extreme violence, including beating or hacking to
death fellow child captives who had tried to escape.
Girls as young as 12 are given to commanders as
"wives". Some abducted children have managed to
escape, while others have died from disease,
mistreatment or combat wounds. Although child
abductions are down because of the decrease in LRA
activity in northern Uganda, many of the abductees
remain under the control of the LRA.

We also remain concerned about the sexual
exploitation and abuse committed by United Nations
peacekeeping personnel, a problem again cited in the
Secretary-General's report. We must redouble efforts to
apprise refugees and IDPs of their rights to insist that
all international organizations and non-governmental
organizations adhere to a common code of conduct and
to be vigilant in monitoring risk factors in order to end
the exploitation of vulnerable persons which continues
to take place in conflict and post-conflict settings. The
United Nations must also increase its efforts to
investigate and punish exploitation and abuse
perpetrated by United Nations peacekeepers.

The United States fully supports the following
measures: active monitoring of those Governments and
armed groups that have already been named in the
Secretary-General's report; direct dialogue involving
the Governments and armed groups concerned in order
to develop action plans to eliminate the use of child
soldiers; and continuing efforts aimed at halting the
sexual exploitation and abuse of vulnerable children.

The United States has contributed substantial
resources to international programmes aimed at
preventing the recruitment of children and at assisting
the reintegration of child ex-combatants into the
community. Since 2001 the United States has
contributed more than $34 million to prevent the
recruitment of child combatants and towards their
demobilization and reintegration.

We welcome the Secretary-General's report and
are reviewing its specific recommendations closely. We
look forward to working with other Council members
on this important subject.

