Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): Before I start, I
would like to acknowledge the presence in the Chamber
of the members of the Standing Committee on Foreign
Affairs of the Netherlands Parliament. Their attendance
today is a great honour for my delegation.

I would like to convey our particular gratitude to
Special Envoy Ismael Ould Cheikh Ahmed for his final
briefing to the Security Council, and especially for his
persistent efforts over the past three years in trying to
bring the parties together to solve this terrible conflict.
His words instil in us a powerful sense of urgency.

The human tragedy in Yemen, man-made and
entirely avoidable, is one of the largest food and health
crises the world has seen in decades. Today I will
focus on three issues, namely, the political process, the
humanitarian imperative and accountability.

First, regarding the political process, it is essential
that all parties seize this moment to turn the negative
trend of the past year around. As pointed out by the
Panel of Experts, there is a grave risk of fragmentation
in Yemen. If local grievances and regional divisions are
not addressed, a political agreement is unlikely to last.
Therefore, the political process must be an inclusive
one. It should include a broad range of Yemeni groups,
with the meaningful participation of women and youth.

That brings me to my second point, namely, the
humanitarian imperative. In the absence of a political
settlement, we draw the Council's attention to the
humanitarian crisis. The protection of civilians from the
armed conflict must be front and centre in our efforts.
We have consistently condemned all indiscriminate
attacks that have had a disastrous impact on the civilian
population, including the Houthi ballistic missiles
against the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. The people of
Yemen suffer from the incessant fighting, and, as least
as much, from the lack of food, water, sanitation, fuel
and access to health care. Ensuring safe and unimpeded
humanitarian access is not an act of mercy, it is an
obligation under international law.
We welcome the positive steps that have been
taken, including the installation of cranes at Hudeydah
port and the generous pledge of the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates to the
humanitarian response plan. Nonetheless, further steps
are still needed, such as full and sustained access for
all humanitarian and commercial shipments to all of
Yemen's ports and airports. The Yemeni people cannot
survive on humanitarian aid alone. Furthermore, all
parties should fully cooperate with the work of the
United Nations verification and inspection mechanism.
Fast clearing services for shipping companies
transporting commercial imports are pivotal. We call
on all member States to refrain from inspecting vessels
that have already been cleared by the mechanism.
We will continue to work with all our partners in
the Council to have those issues addressed in the
presidential statement to be made in the coming days.

Let me also take this opportunity to salute those
working both outside and inside of the country to
alleviate the suffering of the Yemeni population. The
humanitarian community works under very difficult
circumstances and it deserves our praise, gratitude
and support.

My third point is on the issue of accountability. In
recent months we have seen an increase in the number
of civilian casualties. The obligations of all parties
under international humanitarian law are very clear.
We once again urgently call on all parties to fully
respect international humanitarian law. Together we
must foster adherence to the law. The Group of Eminent
Experts on Yemen was mandated by the Human Rights
Council to carry out a comprehensive examination
of all alleged violations and abuses and to identify
those responsible. In that context, let me highlight
in particular the rampant gender-based violence, as
highlighted by Mr. Ging earlier. The Group of Experts
has begun its work, and should receive full support and
access from all parties to fulfil its mandate.

In conclusion, we again demand meaningful
political negotiations, humanitarian access and respect
for the law. My Minister for Foreign Affairs, Sigrid
Kaag, recently visited the region. She raised concerns
about these persistent issues with all counterparts,
thereby demonstrating our long-standing commitment
to the Yemeni people. This year the Kingdom of the
Netherlands marks 40 years of bilateral development
cooperation with Yemen. We are long-standing
partners. Therefore, Yemen remains a priority for us,
both inside and outside of the Council.
My Minister also received encouraging messages
suggesting that many parties are eager to engage
with the new Special Envoy, Mr. Martin Griffiths.
We welcome his appointment and assure him of our
full support. Let us give him sufficient time to build
on the work already done, talk to the parties and put
forward his initial ideas. The Council should then
consider further concrete steps on how to support his
efforts. Only when the parties show the courage and
leadership to make the necessary compromises and put
the interests of the Yemeni people before their own will
a sustainable political solution be possible.

