Mr. Mahamat (spoke in French): It is always a
fresh honour and a privilege for us to be invited to speak
before the Council. Allow me first of all to express our
gratitude to all the Member States represented here.

I am all the more pleased to address them in that
our meeting today is being held in the framework of the
presidency of the Council under the Federal Democratic
Republic of Ethiopia. I congratulate and warmly
thank His Excellency Mr. Hailemariam Desalegn,
Prime Minister of the Federal Democratic Republic
of Ethiopia, for initiating this debate on peacekeeping
operations and for having forged over many months,
along with all the other African members of the Council,
the salutary unity and consistency of our positions, as
well as for their outstanding advocacy work. We offer
them our profound gratitude in the name not only of
the African Union, but also and especially in that of the
peoples of our continent, which we always seek to place
at the heart of our action.

Today's debate gives us a new opportunity to take
stock of and to question our shared, real and good-faith
resolve to move forward on the question of the financing
of operations mandated or authorized by the African
Union through the contributions of the United Nations.
As we see it, swift and decisive progress on this issue
is crucial to bolstering the credibility of the partnership
between our two organizations. For let us not deceive
ourselves: our many meetings and exchanges at the
institutional level, however productive they may be, as
well as our declarations of principle, will have no effect
if they are not followed up by concrete decisions and
actions by all ofus.

In that regard, I would like to clearly reiterate
our resolute, ongoing determination to very quickly
arrive at a substantive draft resolution that recognizes
our contribution to the global peace and security
architecture and endorses the principle that African
Union peace-support operations that have the
endorsement of the Security Council could be supported
through United Nations assessed contributions. That is
a question ofjustice for us.

I often hear that the African Peace and Security
Architecture aims to provide African solutions for
African problems. However, that seems to me a narrow
interpretation of the thinking that inspired the very
doctrine that underlies the innovative tool that is our
Architecture. It seems clear to us that the problems in
Africa are not problems of Africans alone. Certainly,
the causes of those problems are not unique to Africa.
I think there is now a common understanding that
the consequences of the crises faced by the African
continent do not affectjust Africans.
It is because of the fact that, irrespective of their
causes or origins, the problems in Africa first and
foremost affect Africans themselves that the African
Union has always emphasized, and assumed, its
leadership in facing up to them. But we also underscore
that the complexity of the issues and crises involved is
such that no single organization can provide the full
range of responses required. It therefore seems to us to
be both fair and timely for the international community
to recognize, through concrete decisions, the efforts of
the African Union and its member States on this matter.
It is also important to stress that ad hoc arrangements
do not allow for lasting solutions.

In our View, a substantive draft resolution on the
issue of the financing, through assessed contributions,
of operations mandated or authorized by the African
Union that subsequently receive the endorsement of
the Security Council would not be a mechanism that
would systematically open up access to the financial
resources of the United Nations. It is understood
that the specific decisions to be taken on a case-by-
case basis by the Security Council and the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union on assigning the
mandates of the operations concerned will be subject
to a concerted and collaborative process of analysis,
evaluation, planning and reporting to be conducted by
our respective secretariats.

From our point of view, no relevant argument can
justify our common failings to agree, here and today, on
such a substantive draft resolution. Like all other similar
organizations, the African Union has had failures, but
it remains committed to addressing them. This is not
about our complying with a check-list imposed from the
outside. Rather, it is based on an ethical requirement
that we have set for ourselves, according to a time
frame we equally imposed on ourselves. This ethical
requirement has bearing not just on the strength of our
institutional credibility; above all, it has to do with
our people themselves, who are the very reason for the
existence of our organization.

For us, though, it is also about the need for a
convergence of views. Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations should enable regional organizations,
such as the African Union, to contribute fully to the
maintenance of international peace and security, in
view of their proximity to the field, their knowledge of
local dynamics and their capacities to respond quickly.
That would confer additional credibility upon the
African Union by virtue of the Security Council being
the embodiment of international legality.
Without delay, we must all equip ourselves with the
means to achieve that goal for the sake of our common
interests. We must avoid opting for the easy way out of
evoking possible failings on either sides in order not
to adopt a draft resolution wisely inspired by tragic
situations we experienced several decades ago - or
even more recently, as is the case of Mali or the Central
African Republic, where we all had to react to events,
whereas we could have shown more initiative.

The African Union's approach to the principle of
the use of assessed contributions should therefore not
be seen as a hand-out. It is not a question of charity, but
of fairness.

Let me say it again: our continental organization
remains determined to translate the commitments it has
freely embraced on financing and assuming a share of
its peace-support operations. Our efforts will continue
and intensify, regardless of the reluctance currently
displayed by a minority of actors. I believe that this is
a historical responsibility that everyone should bear as
appropriate.

I would like to conclude by urging the Council to
take decisions that encourage the outstanding progress
made by the African Union and its member States and
to pay tribute to the sacrifices made, especially when
such progress is mentioned here at the Organization.
The African Union must be given the right and the
capacity to improve and transform itself dynamically.

In addition, allow me to encourage the Council
to make a concrete and resolute commitment to the
strategic partnership between our two organizations by
adopting a substantive draft resolution on the issue of
financing peace-support operations. That would help us
to avoid validating the criticisms often levelled against
us by our real masters - the citizens of our member
States - for having spent years now making rhetorical
statements and engaging in bureaucratic processes that
quite frequently do not lead to the results expected
of us.

