Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): As this is the first
time I take the floor during this month, I would like
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council. I also thank
Bolivia for its presidency of the Council last month.

I would like to thank the High Representative for
her briefing. I think that it is clear that not enough
progress has been made. At one level that is not a
surprise, given the track record of the Syrian authorities.
But at another level it just beggars belief: chemical
weapons are universally prohibited weapons under
international law. Everybody on the Council, except
one member, stresses that and stresses the supreme
importance of upholding that prohibition. I think that
the interventions by Kuwait and France laid out very
well the historical place that chemical weapons hold in
global non-proliferation regimes.

What part of "these are prohibited weapons" do
Syria and Russia not understand? I think it is almost
absurd that we should have to rehearse each month
quite how terrible those weapons are. It really ought
to be globally recognized and upheld that we work
to strengthen the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and the Chemical Weapons
Convention and to make sure those weapons are never
used. That ought to be a universal good that everybody
in the United Nations ought to be able to subscribe to.
Future generations will judge us very harshly - but
will judge two countries particularly harshly - for
breaking that prohibition. As many speakers have said,
the OPCW is doing good work. It is mandated to do
that work. And the Conference of States Parties have
decided to strengthen the work that it does.

There was an alternative - to have a Security
Council mechanism - but that came to a grinding halt
with a Russian veto. Therefore, we must all support the
OPCW Director-General and his work to implement
the decision adopted at the special conference of the
States Parties held in June. For our part, the United
Kingdom looks forward to arrangements being swiftly
put in place so that the OPCW can begin its work on
attribution of chemical-weapons attacks in Syria.

We call on all States that will be meeting in The
Hague later this month to respect the decision, which
was taken by an overwhelming majority in June. We look
to all international partners to engage constructively in
discussions on the future work of the organization in
Syria and elsewhere. On the funding point, it is in all
our countries' interests for the OPCW to receive the
funding it needs to continue to uphold the global norms
against chemical weapons.

On other issues, Ijust want to endorse what others
have said about the importance of the political settlement
and of establishing the constitutional committee in line
with the Istanbul summit declaration, which we very
much welcomed at the time. And of course, on Idlib,
we want that agreement to hold. It is the key to so much
about the future of the people in Syria.

I want to conclude by addressing the allegations
about the White Helmets. We keep hearing those
allegations. Again, it beggars belief that we should have
to take the floor to defend some of the bravest volunteers
working in Syria. The Syrian civil defence have
confirmed that none of their volunteers were involved,
let alone killed, in the alleged incident referred to by
the Syrian authorities in their recent correspondence,
which is contrary to those authorities' fabrications.

Repeated allegations that the United Kingdom and
its allies are preparing a chemical-weapons attack are
malicious, absurd and they are simply an attempt to
distract and deflect attention from the real situation on
the ground in Syria, But I want to end by echoing what
the representative of France said, that we will respond
appropriately if there is a chemical-weapons attack.
And that attack will not come from us.

