Mr. Yel'chenko (Ukraine): We, too, are grateful
to Under-Secretary-General Guehenno for his
presentation. Only a few weeks ago, the Council heard
an open briefing on the general situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina by the High Representative, Wolfgang
Petritsch. At that meeting, my delegation presented in
full its assessment of the latest developments in
Bosnia. In View of that, I will confine my comments to
the few following points.

Ukraine welcomes the holding of general
elections in Bosnia and Herzegovina on 11 November
as a new and important event in the context of the
further development of democratic freedoms, political
pluralism and the building of common State institutions
in the country. Although we should not overestimate
the significance of these elections, it would be
incorrect to underestimate the results, too. We praise
the efforts of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe for assisting the people of
Bosnia to hold these elections in a free and democratic
manner. My country was pleased to learn that the
elections were well organized and proceeded smoothly,
with only a few minor incidents recorded.

My delegation would like to recognize the
constructive role played by the local police under the
supervision of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia
and Herzegovina in securing the elections in both
entities. At the same time, having heard the preliminary
reports about the results of the elections, we feel only
cautious optimism. Regrettably, the history of the years
after Dayton testifies to the fact that nationalist parties
in both entities have not always been known as the
strongest proponents of the implementation of the
Peace Agreement. We therefore share certain concerns
that their victory in the elections could impede further
efforts towards that end. At the same time, we believe
that no one can overrule the will of the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, which should be respected.

In this regard, in our view it is important for the
international community to send a clear message to the
winners of the 11 November elections, indicating that
their victory means, first and foremost, that they have
the additional responsibility for making further
progress in the pursuit of the Dayton process, in full
cooperation with the international community. In this
context, we have also taken note, with some concern,
of the reports on the holding by the Croatian
Democratic Union of a parallel referendum, which was
treated as illegal by the OSCE, on greater autonomy for
Bosnian Croats. In our View, such actions contradict
the spirit of Dayton and might not only break up the
Federation but also create an irreparable breach in the
whole process of national reconciliation in the country.
We are firmly convinced, therefore, that no excuses for
attempts to revise the Dayton Agreement should be
tolerated. The resolute stance of the High
Representative and the OSCE on this matter has our
full support.

My delegation also believes that the political
leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina should again be
called upon to redouble their efforts aimed at the full
implementation of the Dayton Peace Accords as soon
as possible, in order to change the culture of
dependency on the international community to a
culture of self-sustainability. Nonetheless, it is our
sincere hope that if that message is heard, the results of
the general elections held in Bosnia on 11 November
will contribute to the further stabilization of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and be conducive to the strengthening
of the new political environment brought about in the
whole region by the recent democratic changes in the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

For its part, Ukraine stands ready to continue to
contribute to the peace process in Bosnia through its
participation in the activities of the Peace
Implementation Council, the United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Security Council.

