Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this important meeting. We would also like to
thank our colleagues, who have clearly pointed out the
shortcomings that beset the report under consideration
(S/2017/904, annex).

I note in particular Mr. Mulet's statement in his
briefing to the effect that his mandate and that of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-
United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM)
to investigate the incident in Khan Shaykhun is not
a political matter. He said that it is not a political
issue. The strange contradiction is that, in that same
briefing, Mr. Mulet expressed his opinion that the use
of chemicals in Khan Shaykhun was an instance of
chemical terrorism.

My question to Mr. Mulet and the members of
the Council is: Since when is chemical terrorism
considered to be a strictly technical and non-political
issue? Saying that the JIM's mandate is a strictly
technical part of work to be undertaken in a complex
political atmosphere, as my dear friend the Ethiopian
Ambassador has said, is akin to some lazy students in
school saying that focusing on physical education alone
is enough to succeed in education, and that there is no
need to study the rest of the curriculum.

How can the head of the JIM. say that the
information concerning the use by terrorist groups of
chemical weapons and the smuggling of such weapons
through neighbouring States - which was information
submitted by my country's Government to him, to
the Fact-finding Mission before him, to the counter-
terrorism committees before that, to the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) before
that, and to the Security Council as a whole, in 130
letters on the use of chemical weapons and their
smuggling through neighbouring States by terrorist
groups in Syria - is a strictly technical matter? We
submitted 130 letters amounting to practically a book,
from 6 November 2012 to 6 November 2017 - five year
exactly. All of these letters concern the use of chemicals
by armed terrorist groups in my country. Then comes
Mr. Mulet to say that all the crimes that we sent him
information about, and that have killed thousands of
Syrians, are strictly a technical matter rather than a
political one. His briefing was completely devoid of
any understanding of the complex political scene in my
country. The Mechanism's mandate cannot be strictly
technical. That is not convincing proof.

Machiavelli - who was from your country,
Mr. President - said nearly 500 years ago, "Politics
have no relation to morals". This is what was said by
Machiavelli. I can almost see him today observing
the behaviour of the Governments of some States
that proclaim their morality and declare themselves
the guardians of respect for international law and the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, while
they themselves practice policies that belittle those
very same noble principles and misuse them in order
to further their destructive and interventionist agendas.
I can almost see Machiavelli here today, standing
and observing the behaviour of some United Nations
committees that are supposed to be neutral, professional
and credible, while their work and reports prove that
they are biased, politicized and immoral. They excel
in using false witnesses, sources they call "open" and
fabricated evidence.
That is the state of the Fact-finding Mission and
the Joint Investigative Mechanism, whose report we are
discussing today. I will prove to the Council right now,
with scientific and legal evidence, that the report is not
neutral or professional and that its wrongful accusations
against Syria are based on fabricated evidence and
manipulated information. It has used sly remarks and
ambiguous statements that no criminal report should
use in forming its allegations.

Let us refer to the report to count how many times
the report uses the words "likely" and "unlikely" in
discussing scientific evidence that must only be cited
with certainty. I will save the Council the effort.
Those two words "likely" and "unlikely" are used 32
times. Despite that fact, the JIM's leadership found no
problem in using the word "confident" in its conclusions
to point a finger of accusation at Syria regarding the
Khan Shaykhun incident, despite the fact that the
investigation was partial and ignored and manipulated
the three main pillars of any criminal investigation.In
that respect, I should like to make the following points.

First, paragraph 54 of the Mechanism's report
states that the Syrian Arab Republic has not provided
the Mechanism with the outcomes of the internal
investigation conducted by the Syrian national
committee. This is what the paragraph says, and in
that regard I would like to pose the following question
directly to Mr. Mulet, who is seated right next to
me, doodling. What are the documents that I myself
handed to him during the meeting we had in his office
on 16 August? Early on the morning of that day,
16 August, I met urgently with Mr. Mulet in his office
at my request, in order to provide him with a copy of the
Syrian national committee's report on its investigation
into the Khan Shaykhun incident. Ipersonally informed
him that he is the only United Nations official with a
copy of that report.

Second, on several occasions, the report states
that the Al-Nusra Front is primarily in control of the
city of Khan Shaykhun, including the crime scene.
The report therefore candidly states that the Al-Nusra
Front terrorists fabricated and transported the evidence
to Turkey; that the Al-Nusra terrorists allegedly sent
samples to the French, British, Turkish and American
intelligence services, and provided false witnesses in the
Turkish town of Gaziantep; and that the Al-Nusra Front
terrorists also staged and manipulated then concealed
the crime scene. In the light of such information, how
is it possible for the Mechanism's leadership to be sure
that the conclusions it has drawn, based on the so-
called the chain of custody, were not manipulated by
the Al-Nusra Front, which has been classified by the
Council as a terrorist organization? The Al-Nusra Front
is a terrorist organization and it has more credibility
with Mr. Mulet than the Syrian Government.

Third, paragraph 9 of annex II of the report notes
that, on 21 March, the Al-Nusra Front and its affiliate
groups launched an offensive against forces of the
Syrian Arab Republic in the direction of Hama city.
The report states that, by 3 April, the Syrian army
regained control of and moved deeper into areas that
had been lost. That means that it occurred until one day
before the Khan Shaykhun incident - just one day. My
question to everyone is this. If the Syrian army was
achieving decisive victories, as the report states, and
was at the gates of Khan Shaykhun, which was under
the control of the terrorist Al-Nusra Front, just one day
before the incident took place, why stage a crime with
such well-known repercussions? Why would chemical
agents be used? Who would truly benefit from it? The
only party that benefits is the terrorist Al-Nusra Front,
and the Governments of the States that level accusations
at the Syrian Government, whose goal is to obstruct the
progress of the Syrian army against terrorists who have
been genetically modified into moderate terrorists, as
their sponsors like to call them. Some believe that the
Al-Nusra Front is a moderate terrorist organization.

Fourth, why did the Fact-finding Mission and the
JIM. not visit the crime scene in Khan Shaykhun? Can a
crime be investigated remotely, like a PlaySation game,
without visiting the scene of the crime? Let us bear in
mind that, as stated by my colleague of the Russian
Federation, the United Nations Department of Safety
and Security confirmed the possibility of conducting
such a visit. In that regard, I would like to recall that
there is a pattern of not visiting the crime scene, which
is nothing new to the Mechanism. To date, the United
Nations has not acquiesced to the request made by the
Syrian Government on 22 June 2013 to investigate the
crime of the use by terrorist armed groups of chemical
weapons in Khan Al-Asal, despite the fact that former
Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, had sent
Mr. Sellstrom to investigate. Five years have passed - I
repeat, five years - and the Khan Al-Asal incident has
not been investigated.

Fifth, why did the Al-Nusra Front, which controls
Khan Shaykhun, rush to cover the crater with asphalt,
and why did it tamper with the crime scene? If the
sponsors of that terrorist organization had nothing to
hide, would it not have been better for them to facilitate
the investigation and prevent the crime scene from
being compromised?

Sixth, why did the JIM. not collect samples from
the Al-Shayrat air base, which the United States
Administration claimed was the launch point of the
chemical attack? It is an interesting paradox that
Mr. Mulet himself told me that he decided not to go
to Khan Shaykhun, and that it was not within the
Mechanism's mandate to take samples from the
Al-Shayrat air base. I ask the members ofthe Council an
important question: What could have caused Mr. Mulet
to make those serious decisions, which would affect
the credibility of the Mechanism's conclusions? All
of those questions would surely have caused Britain's
Alfred Hitchcock to be outraged.

Seventh, paragraph 30 of the report notes that the
Mechanism had received information about an aircraft
that was located 5 kilometres of Khan Shaykhun.
It states that the expert it consulted concluded that,
depending on a number of variables, such as altitude,
speed and flight path taken, it would be possible for
such an aerial bomb to be dropped on the town from
the aforementioned distance. Despite the fact that, from
a technical perspective, it is impossible for a Su-22 to
deliver a strike to the town, according to the flight path
determined by the Mechanism, the expert consulted
by the Mechanism used a conniving, misleading and
inconclusive expression. He stated that it would be
possible to deliver a strike - and here we go back to the
words "unlikely" and "likely" - and the Mechanism
rushed to adopt that conclusion. An expert stated that it
was possible, and the Mechanism immediately latched
onto that assertion without challenging it.

Eighth, paragraph 41 of the report states,

"The Mechanism also examined whether an
improvised explosive device could have caused
the crater. While that possibility could not be
completely ruled out...".

Would the Mechanism's leadership explain how it does
not dismiss the fact that the crater could have been
caused by an improvised explosive device, while also
stating that it is confident that the crater was caused
by the impact of an aerial bomb? How do we reconcile
those two assertions? On the one hand, they say that
the crater could have been caused by an improvised
explosive device, yet on the other they say that the
crater was caused by an aerial bomb.
Ninth, paragraph 45 of the report notes that some
of the evidence that was used to level accusations at
the Syrian Government were samples of a precursor
chemical, known as methylphosphonyl difluoride (DF),
from the original stock from the Syrian Arab Republic.
I ask the leadership of the Mechanism: Why does
it insist on misleading those who read the report by
giving the impression that that sample is as reliable as
a DNA sample, and that it can be manufactured only
by the Syrian Government? Any specialized Western
laboratory could manufacture such a sample. Are
Syrian scientists the only ones able to create the DF
precursor? Can it be manufactured only in Syria?

I would like to remind members of the Council
that the Syrian chemical stock was destroyed
on-board the United States vessel MV Cape Ray, in
the Mediterranean. It is therefore likely that the party
that destroyed the stock has kept part of it, because
they cannot manufacture what our scientists are able
to produce. That kind of DF is a strictly Syrian brand
that only Syrian scientists can manufacture. Americans
are unable to create anything like it, so they may have
kept part of the Syrian stock that they were tasked with
destroying in the Mediterranean. American scientists
learn from our scientists when it comes to chemistry.

Tenth, does the absence of a tailfin at the crime
scene, as stated in paragraph 58 ofthe report, not indicate
that a certain party manipulated the scene to create
the impression that an aerial bomb had been dropped?
The Mechanism itself has stated that "the absence of
a chain of custody relating to the munition remnants
diminishes their probative value" (S/2017/904, annex, para. 58). However, that did not prevent the Mechanism
from concluding that the incident was the result of an
aerial bomb.

Eleventh, from paragraphs 74 to 79 of the report,
the Mechanism notes that there is a conflict between
information and witness testimonies, as well as unusual
and inappropriate measures that were taken. I would
like to give just one example to demonstrate the degree
of manipulation regarding the incident. The report
states that

"In sample No. 13, the blood sample tested negative
for sarin or a sarin-like substance, while the urine
sample tested positive for the sarin degradation
product isopropyl methylphosphonate" (ibid., para. 78).

The report adds that
"Medical experts consulted by the Mechanism
indicated that the combination of the negative result
in the blood and the positive result in the urine was
impossible" (ibid).

However,theMechanisminsistedthatthe aforementioned
proves the use of sarin. It is scientifically impossible for
sarin to be absent from someone's blood and present in
that same person's urine - that is medically impossible.

Despite all of those contradictions, the report
acknowledges that the Mechanism's leadership did not
make any effort to uncover the reasons behind them,
even though the reason is quite clear - to manipulate
evidence and information, in order to make accusations
against the Syrian Government, as was the case with the
conclusions of the Mechanism's former leadership in
its third and fourth reports. Those reports' misleading
conclusions were used by the American administration
to attack Al-Shayrat air base.

I call on members of the Council to employ logic
and good judgment, and to seek clear and real answers
to the questions that I have just posed, which have
also been posed by other colleagues. Syria reaffirms
that it abides by the Convention on the Prohibition of
the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of
Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction. Since it
exceeded to the Convention in 2013, it has possessed
no banned toxic chemical supplies, as confirmed
by Ms. Sigrid Kaag, Head of the Joint Mission of
the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons and the United Nations for the Elimination
of the Chemical Weapons Programme of the Syrian
Arab Republic, in her report to the Council that was
submitted in June 2014 (S/2014/444, annex).

My country considers the use of chemical weapons
to be an immoral act that must be condemned, regardless
of where, when and under what conditions they are used.
This report's prefabricated conclusions are the final
nail in the coffin, which exposes the real motives of the
sponsors of terrorism. The degree that those sponsors
have manipulated reality and the facts in this report
is unprecedented, and far exceeds the manipulation
that this Chamber witnessed on 5 February 2003 (see S/PV.4701).

Such failed diplomacy is now being repeated in
another pathetic scene, reminding the world of the
fabricated claims that were made by Secretary of
State Powell in a meeting that I personally attended
in this very Chamber on 5 February 2003, when
Mr. Powell submitted evidence that he called "[f]
acts and conclusions based on solid intelligence"
(S/PV4701, p. 5). He used those words to justify his
country's aggression in Iraq, under the pretext that
Iraq possessed weapons of mass destruction. It is truly
bizarre that his colleague, Secretary of State Kerry,
returned to this Chamber on 27 September 2013 to use
that very same expression to mislead the international
community and to justify an aggression in Syria at the
time (see S/PV.7038). Secretary of State Kerry used
the same words as Secretary Powell. It seems that that
syndrome is the exclusive property of consecutive
United States administrations.

Allow me to now think out loud and seek an answer
to the question that concerns every Syrian. How long
will Syrians continue to suffer from the terrorism that
is being backed by Western Governments, which view
the United Nations and the Security Council only as
an iron fist to further their interests or commercial
enterprises and achieve their goals. Governments of the
force of law have committed every kind of unlawful act
against the Syrian people and continue to believe that
they can kill, destroy, deceive and prevaricate without
any judicial accountability.

What is the use of having our Organization if
the Governments of those States continue to use it to
bear false witness and shatter entire States, such as
Yugoslavia, Iraq and Libya; besiege, starve and kill
entire peoples, as in Palestine and Yemen; impose
illegal sanctions on countries, such as Cuba, Venezuela
and Iran; and bring a dirty terrorist war to my country,
Syria. The list goes on.

To conclude, the terrorist war that has targeted
Syria has cost its sponsoring Governments $137 billion
to date, a fact that was admitted by one of its agents,
former Prime Minister of Qatar Hamad bin Jassim bin
Jaber bin Muhammad Al-Thani. Just a few days ago,
he admitted to the media that the terrorist war was a
joint plan that united his country with Saudi Arabia,
Turkey, the United States, Israel and Jordan. For those
Governments, Syria and its people were simply prey to
a fighting pack of hyenas. In the words of Mr. Al-Thani
himself, "we fought over the prey and it ran away as we
fought over it".

The Syrian Arab Republic rejects the form
and content of the report of the Joint Investigative
Mechanism, because of the accusations it has made
regarding the painful incident in Khan Shaykhun. My
country will not allow its thousand-year-old civilization
to become a prey or target to the Governments that
sponsor terrorism. We will continue our war on

terrorism. We will rebuild our country. We will achieve
the ambitions of our citizens with our blood, sweat and
tears, and with the support of our friends who respect
international law and reject any breach ofthe Charter of
the United Nations. We will stand and fight the policies
ofdomination that support terrorism.

The meeting rose at 5.50 p.m.
