Mr. Skinner-Klee (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): We congratulate you, Madam President,
and your delegation on organizing this debate on the
protection of civilians, and we commend the fact that
your Minister for Foreign Affairs has been presiding
it. We also express our appreciation to the briefers for
their contributions.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered earlier on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

We note with concern that in armed conflicts,
combatants and civilians are dying from wounds that
would not have been fatal had they had access to medical
assistance, which they have the right to receive. To
address that, the Security Council adopted resolution
2286 (2016), which reaffirmed the responsibility of
parties involved in armed conflicts to comply fully with
the obligations under international humanitarian law
so as to ensure the unqualified respect and protection
of all humanitarian personnel exclusively involved
in medical missions, their means of transport and
equipment, hospitals and other health-care facilities.

However, we find it disturbing that violent acts
against such personnel and facilities continue to be
practiced by parties in conflict, especially terrorist
groups who carry out indiscriminate attacks against
hospitals, humanitarian convoys and infrastructure
used for medical care. Attacks against water supplies
as a tool of war are equally reprehensible, flying in the
face of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.

It is unacceptable that armed conflicts are on the
rise in urban areas, in which populations are at their
densest, thereby causing increased fatalities by the
indiscriminate use of artillery and aerial bombardment,
as well as by the use of improvised explosive devices
that considerably increase the lethal radius.

We also condemn the proliferation ofsmall arms and
light weapons, which continue to kill and injure many
people and often block humanitarian aid operations.
We therefore echo the call of the Secretary-General
to redouble our efforts to comply with international
humanitarian law and international human rights
law. We urge States to ratify the main international
instruments pertaining to weapons and ammunition,
such as the Arms Trade Treaty.

We underscore the importance of preventing the
displacement of people and of protecting humanitarian
and medical missions, as well as the civilian population.
We believe that it is important to ensure that all
international instruments and tools at the disposal
of the Security Council are put to use in combating
crimes in the fields we are discussing, and that they
contain tangible elements in the areas of deterrence,
accountability and justice. My delegation maintains
that the protection of civilians is a legal obligation.
We must, therefore, demand that members of security
forces, local militias or other armed groups who have
committed violations of international humanitarian law
and international human rights law be held to account.

We reaffirm that it is the primary responsibility of
troop- and police-contributing countries to investigate,
without delay, allegations of acts of violence against
civilians. In that regard, we underscore the importance
of the International Criminal Court. We advocate that
States ensure that their armed and security forces, in
accordance with their mandates, work to adopt practical
measures to protect the wounded and the sick, as well
as medical services, when planning and implementing
their operations. In that regard, we welcome the
recommendations of the Secretary-General to ensure
that the States Members of the United Nations and
the parties to conflict develop, implement and share
operational policies and measured practices so as to
improve respect for international law, with a view to
preventing harm to civilian populations.

Guatemala commends the fact that the report of
the Secretary-General advocates early warning and
action and stresses the close link between sustainable
peace and prevention. That concept is a game-changer
in meeting the challenges of peace and security,
development and human rights.

