Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): At the outset, allow me
to extend my sincere congratulations to you, Madam
President, on assuming the presidency of the Council
for this month and to highly commend the Lithuanian
presidency for convening this important meeting.

Croatia aligns itself with the statement that will
be delivered shortly by the observer of the European
Union. I should like to add the following in my national
capacity.

The fifteenth anniversary of the Security Council's
engagement on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict and the adoption of its landmark resolution 1265
(1999) provides us with the opportunity to take stock
of the efforts made so far and to reflect upon ongoing
and emerging concerns. This is also an opportunity
to stress once again that the protection of civilians
goes hand-in-hand with full respect for international
humanitarian and human rights law; one must not be
separated from the other.

The hundredth anniversary of the beginning of
the First World War is an occasion to reflect on the
profoundly changed nature of war, in which civilians
are increasingly becoming the primary target. In the
First World War the ratio between military deaths and
direct civilian deaths was 10 to 1. These days, civilian
casualties in conflict often surpass those on the military
side. Simply said, victims of modern armed conflict are
much more likely to be civilians than solders. Civilians
are regularly targeted and are subject to indiscriminate
attacks and other violations by parties to the conflict.
Because of all of that, today's topic is not only timely:
we must return to it over and over again when needed.

As stated in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2013/689), the current state of the protection of
civilians leaves little room for optimism. The conflict
in Syria represents a stark example - unfortunately
not the only one - of how devastating is the impact of
conflicts on civilians and how torn the fabric of civilian
society can become. It is a collective tragedy composed
of countless individual dramas and misery, so often lost
and forgotten in the tide of destruction.

Croatia, remembering too well the horrors of
war, strongly condemns the continued widespread,
systematic and gross violations of international human
rights and humanitarian law in Syria, including targeted
killings, arbitrary arrests, torture, sexual violence and
the use and recruitment of children to participate in
hostilities.

We are appalled by reports of rape and other
forms of sexual violence that are being used as
weapons of war, targeting in particular women and
girls. That is not isolated to a single conflict, nor can
it be regarded as collateral damage of war. It is of the
utmost importance that rape and other forms of sexual
Violence in conflict be recognized as war crimes and
crimes against humanity and fall under the competence
of the International Criminal Court (ICC). Against that
background, we fully welcome the further institutional
dialogue between the ICC and the Security Council.

While the increased use of sexual and gender-based
Violence as a war tactic has already been addressed in the
Security Council, most notably through its resolutions
1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008), it is undeniable that this
kind of violence continues to occur at an alarming
rate. It is therefore necessary for United Nations
peacekeeping operations to effectively address the
impact of armed conflict on women and children and
to support women's participation in conflict resolution
and peacebuilding as much as possible. Women should
also play an important role in peacekeeping missions in
order to enhance confidence-building with the targeted
communities.

With all the aforesaid in mind, Croatia joined
the United Kingdom's initiative on preventing sexual
violence in conflict and supported the elaboration of
an international protocol on the investigation and
documentation of rape and sexual violence in conflict.

The link between the protection of civilians and
peacekeeping operations is crucial. The safety and
security of civilians is critical for the legitimacy of
peacekeeping missions, which operate in complex and
challenging conditions. The success of a peacemaking
or peacekeeping mission will largely be judged upon
its ability to protect the most vulnerable parts of the
population.

One cannot thoroughly address today's topic
without mentioning the responsibility to protect - a
Vital part of the efforts needed to prevent suffering
and protect civilians from it. I should also like to use
this opportunity to stress that all Croatian civilian
and military personnel participating in international
missions and operations must go through rigorous
training. The Ministry of Defence and the Ministry
of the Interior, in their training centres, regularly
organize international predeployment courses for all
staff, including diplomats, which are selected to be
deployed in United Nations, European Union or NATO
missions or operations abroad. The Ministry of Defence
is also conducting a United Nations protection-of-
civilians course based on the official Department of
Peacekeeping Operations modules, while the Ministry
of the Interior's training is based on the United Nations
police officers course.

Croatia is firmly committed to the promotion and
protection of international humanitarian and human
rights law, as well as their vital function concerning the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. We strongly
urge all parties in conflict to respect international
obligations, bearing in mind that the State and local
authorities carry the primary responsibility for the
implementation of international humanitarian and
human rights law and have to be held accountable for
that.

Croatia firmly supports the recommendations from
the report of the Secretary-General, especially the
one on establishing a common United Nations system
systematically to record civilian casualties. We are of
the View that a close connection has to be achieved
between all the relevant actors - military troops on
the ground, fact-finding missions, commissions of
inquiry and the staff of United Nations peacekeeping
operations.

Finally, we welcome the adoption of presidential
statement S/PRST/2014/3 with the updated
aide-memoire on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict.
