Mr. Woldegerima (Ethiopia): We thank Under-
Secretary-General Lacroix for his comprehensive
briefing on the most recent political and security
situation in Mali. We also want to extend our
appreciation to the military and civilian personnel
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), who are
operating under difficult circumstances.

We welcome the successful holding of the
presidential elections in Mali, which culminated with
the re-election of President Boubacar Keita. We note
that the election was held in a peaceful manner and
without major incident, and we congratulate Mali for
achieving an important milestone in its governance
dispensations. The formation of the new Cabinet,
comprising one-third women, is a sign of the positive
response of the Government in meeting its commitment
with regard to the empowerment of women.

The role of MINUSMA continues to be very
important and its support of the electoral process,
in coordination with the African Union and other
international partners, is commendable. We also thank
the Mission for its support to the Malian defence and
security forces, including through increased patrols in
remote areas. We agree with Under-Secretary-General
Lacroix that the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation
in Mali remains very central, and we are encouraged by
the progress made with regard to its implementation,
including the nomination of interim authorities at the
district level, the creation of municipalities and the
adoption of the national security sector reform strategy.
We hope that the post-election period will witness more
invigorated efforts by the parties to ensure greater
peace and stability in the country.

The pact for peace, signed by the Government of
Mali and the United Nations in accordance with the
provisions of resolution 2423 (2018), is a step in the
right direction that we hope will help in accelerating
the implementation of the peace agreement.

Regarding the extension of State authority in the
north, the appointment of officials by the Government
as members of the interim administrations in the
majority of districts is a welcome development.
MINUSMA's support in the restoration and extension
of State authority in the northern and central parts of
the country remains vital, as is the capacity-building
supportbofthe Mission,togetherwiththe UnitedNations
Development Programme, in the implementation of the
national policy of preventing and countering violent
extremism and terrorism in Mali.

We join others in strongly condemning the terrorist
attacks against Malian defence and security forces, as
well as international forces. We are concerned by the
frequency of those attacks in central Mali, as expressed
by other delegations. That underscores the need for
the international community to continue supporting
the fight against terrorism and the stabilization efforts
in Mali.

The contribution of the Joint Force of the Group of
Five for the Sahel in returning peace and stability to
Mali and the region remains absolutely important. We
commend the Force for deploying all seven battalions
and its success in conducting several operations since
its establishment. To ensure that the operations of that
important regional force are effective and sustainable,
predictable financing remains critical, as identified by
the tripartite mechanism, comprising the Joint Force,
the United Nations and the European Union.

The deteriorating humanitarian situation, as a result
ofinsecurity in the northern and central regions, as well
as the impacts of poor rainfall in 2017, is also a matter
of concern. We hope that the international community
will enhance its support in filling the funding gap.

We are encouragedby the commitment of the regional
interim administrations, which are materializing several
projects targeting the improvement of the provision of
basic services and enhancing social cohesion in all five
northern regions, with funding from the Government.

The implementation of the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel remains absolutely
important, and we believe that there is need for
enhanced efforts in its implementation.

Finally, we support the proposal of France for a
press element at the end of this meeting.

