Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): Nigeria voted in favour of
the draft resolution contained in document S/2014/ 189
because it reflects the principles embodied in the
Charter of the United Nations, which obliges all States
to refrain in their international relations from the threat
or use of force against the territorial integrity or political
independence of any Member State. The United Nations
Charter also obliges States to settle their disputes by
peaceful means. All throughout the crisis in Ukraine,
Nigeria has consistently and unequivocally called on all
concerned to abide by those principles in the interests
of international peace and security.
The draft resolution, which is not a country-specific
draft resolution but one that underscores universally
agreed principles and the sanctity of international law,
also mentions the Budapest Memorandum of 1994,
which provides a framework within which the crisis
could be peacefully resolved. We have consistently
called for dialogue, mediation, restraint and an end to
hostile rhetoric. Therefore, Nigeria is fundamentally
opposed to the threat or use of force in settling
international disputes. The lessons of history are not
far-fetched, and we remain vigilant that the mistakes of
history not be repeated by those alive today.

Nigeria has consistently advocated for mediation
and the pacific settlement of disputes, including
territorial disputes. Our willing submission to the rule
of the International Court of Justice in our dispute with
the Republic of Cameroon should serve as a beacon and
an inspiration to law-abiding nations.

Nigeria is vehemently opposed to unilateral
secession or forceful excision of territory designed to
alter the configuration of States in their internationally
recognized boundaries. Standing on that fundamental
principle, Nigeria is opposed to any unilateral
declaration by a component part of a State that will alter
the configuration of the State to which it appropriately
belongs.

It is therefore needless to restate that the impending
referendum in Crimea is not in consonance with the
Constitution of Ukraine. The consequences of any
defiance are better imagined than described.

