Mr. Shearer: It is my pleasure to be present at the
Security Council today. There have been considerable
developments in South Sudan in the past months. I
would like to touch on those and to make a number of
observations about the opportunities and challenges
moving forward.

The peace agreement signed on 12 September
was brokered by the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), and in particular through the
commendable efforts of South Sudan, and it continues
to hold. It is also a testament to the efforts of the parties
that have built sufficient trust and confidence among
themselves and have committed to working together
towards durable peace.

Four positive changes are notable. First, the
opposition politicians from the different parties are
moving freely around Juba without hindrance and are
taking part in the various meetings as part of the peace
process. I would like to recognize the Government
for creating the space and the security conditions for
that to happen and to thank the opposition leaders for
having the courage to return and participate in the
peace process.

Secondly, there have been more than 71 meetings
and rapprochements held across the country where
Government and Sudan People's Liberation Army in
Opposition forces and politicians have met. Many have
been facilitated by the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS). The enthusiasm for peace among the
people is palpable.

Thirdly, overall levels of political violence have
diminished significantly. In blunt terms, many people
are alive today who might not have been without the
agreement having been signed. The exception is in
Central Equatoria, where the fighting close to Yei
between the forces of Thomas Cirillo and the South
Sudan People's Defence Forces has led to clashes. Once
again, the civilians in that area have borne the brunt,
with reports of killings, looting and sexual assaults.
Cirillo shows no sign of wanting to join the existing
peace process.

Fourth, for the first time in three years, people are
expressing a willingness to return home. An estimated
135,000 refugees have returned, in addition to many
internally displaced who have signalled that they want
to go home. So far, the actual numbers are relatively
small compared to the approximately 2.3 million people
who live as refugees and 1.9 million displaced inside
South Sudan - a figure that comprises nearly one
third of the population. But it reflects a trend of people
seeking to travel in the dry season, which is now, to be
home in time to plant crops in July.

That is the positive side. The significant challenge
now is to maintain the momentum of the peace process.
The timetable set out in the agreement is well behind
where it should be and many of the bodies set up
under it are still dealing with procedural rather than
substantive issues.

There are fundamental issues still to be resolved,
many of which were deferred to enable the peace
agreement to be signed. These include the resolution
of the boundaries and states issue and the formation
of a unified armed force to be deployed in Juba and all
major towns. The constitution-making process has also
faced challenges in this period.
The current phase of the peace process, the
pre-transitional government period, ends on 12 May.
From that point, the revitalized transitional government
is scheduled to take over and the Vice-Presidents,
including the First Vice-President, Riek Machar, should
have taken up their roles.

What does this mean? A peace process that falters
will generate frustration, anger and a possible return
to violence that could equal what occurred in 2013 and
2016. We cannot allow that to happen. There are some
who believe that a return to violence is inevitable. We
do not concur. The agreement has a broader buy-in from
parties than the 2015 agreement. It is widely embraced
by the population.

We, too, have our concerns about the peace process
but there is yet to be a perfect process. For our part, the
United Nations has focused attention and resources on
making it work and will continue to do so.

I want to stress that there is no alternative plan.
There is only this agreement and this path forward. For
it to have a chance to work, it needs to be supported.

A year ago, most of us, including myself, did not
believe that we would be at this point today. It has
confounded the critics. But we have arrived at this point
through the leadership and drive largely of IGAD.

A fully engaged IGAD, supported by the efforts
of the African Union, is absolutely critical. But the
months ahead will be as challenging as those before
it have been. I would welcome the urgent appointment
by IGAD of the new Chair of the Joint Monitoring
and Evaluation Commission to help steer the process
forward and overcome some of those challenges.

The United Nations has been working in partnership
with IGAD and the people of South Sudan throughout.
Through my good offices we have provided, and
will continue to provide, specific expertise, ideas
and opportunities to the process in order to maintain
confidence and trust and substantively move the peace
implementation forward. It is an area where we would
welcome a more explicit reference in our mandate to
our ability to play that role.

However, we must also acknowledge that the
suffering goes on. Five months of a more stable
environment cannot redress the levels of food insecurity
or the absence ofhealth or education services overnight.
Humanitarian assistance is still needed to bridge the
gap to self-reliance and to support those who want to
move home.
But we should remember that tens of thousands
of South Sudanese citizens, young and old, are alive
today because of the generosity of donor nations and
the heroic work of humanitarian agencies. The fact
that their country is supported by taxpayers around the
world is a reality that South Sudan's leaders often forget
or take for granted.

Last year, donor nations gave lifesaving support of
more than $1 billion - more than twice South Sudan's
State budget. That enabled humanitarian agencies to
deliver assistance to 5 million people, or approximately
83 per cent of those whom they had targeted. This
year's target is $1.5 billion to reach 5.7 million people.

Humanitarian agencies have largely been able to
move freely across South Sudan. However, in specific
areas, in places such as Yei, particularly where there is
conflict and where, as a result, civilians have been most
vulnerable, denials have occurred.

Governmental delays, including the processing of
shipments and the imposition of taxes, have also wasted
time and incurred costs in the past three months.

Peace saves lives. It also saves money. South
Sudan is a country of abundance where nobody should
be hungry.

I would argue that the humanitarian bill is
ultimately unsustainable. We have felt strongly the
need to switch approaches in the country, and so in
the past few months United Nations agencies and
UNMISS, backed by donors, have begun to focus more
on resilience, which fosters greater self-reliance within
communities in more stable areas where we can work.
There is a potential in those areas to move away from
purely humanitarian support.

Secondly, a trust fund has been established to
intervene in areas of ongoing conflict. It aims not only
to reconcile differences between warring communities
but also to bolster agreements with economic support
and services. In the Wau protection of civilians site,
for example, the Fertit community has wanted to move
back to their land, which they were forced to abandon.
A greater chance of success is likely for them if the
differences between them and Dinka cattle keepers in
the area can be reconciled and if the agreement reached
is anchored with support to housing, health services
and benefits for all communities.

With the peace deal, some displaced families are
choosing to return home and rebuild their lives. The
number of people living in protection of civilians
sites has dropped from about 205,000 to 193,000 in
just three months. In Wau, it has gone down to about
13,000. UNMISS supports the returns process. We
have undertaken frequent look-and-see trips where we
helicopter people to locations to assess for themselves
whether it is safe to go home. As a result, many decided
to leave. Hundreds have now left the Bor protection
of civilians site. While some were transported by
helicopter, most have been transported by barge.

Humanitarian agencies are currently programming
agricultural, education and health support in areas
expected to be of high return. UNMISS peacekeepers
are refocusing priorities from more static operations
around protection of Civilians site sites to patrolling
areas of anticipated return to increase confidence.

UNMISS is very mindful of its protection mandate.
Let me be absolutely clear - we will not push people
out of protection of civilians site sites against their
will. However, we will support those who want to leave
because not doing so means condemning them to a life
in a camp. Our actions will continue to be consistent
with international principles and humanitarian
non-governmental organization guidelines that returns
must be voluntary and dignified. The next three months
will be critical. After that time, the rainy season will
make land transport impossible in South Sudan, and
the window for planting crops will be lost, resulting in
another year's delay.

People tell us that a key reason why they are
reluctant to return home is, of course, security. Sexual
violence continues to cause immense harm to women
and girls across the country, most recently in northern
Unity, where the concentration of forces from all sides
of the conflict has led to horrific incidents. The violence
must end and the perpetrators must be held to account.
Ending impunity is a core function of the Government
and a vital part of the reconciliation and peace process.
It is the mandated role of UNMISS to actively deter and
prevent as many of these horrific crimes as possible,
as well as to monitor and report publicly on violations
of human rights, particularly where sexual violence is
concerned, as we did two and a halfweeks ago in Bentiu.

It is worth stating that we are also working with the
Governments to build the capacity of the justice system
to deal with these crimes. That includes operating a

mobile court system whereby prosecutors and judges
are being flown to hotspots like Bentiu and Malakal to
hear the cases. It has led to several dozen perpetrators
being tried and jailed. At one session in Bentiu, for
example, our legal team reported back to me that 49
women queued up in the sun to give evidence in a
pre-trial meeting against offenders who were about to
be tried. Their desire for justice and to end impunity
is inspiring.

In another case, four young men accused of gang
raping a 15-year-old swaggered into the court, where
they encountered their victim and witnesses. Their faces
fell as they realized that the survivor of their brutality
had the courage to testify against them and had the faith
that justice would prevail. They were all convicted, and
they were all sentenced to between three and twelve
years. Those are small steps, but they are important
ones. This month, a United Nations-supported special
court will open in Juba with jurisdiction over crimes of
sexual and gender-based violence.

In conclusion, there are just over two months left
of the pre-transitional period, and progress has been
slow. There is still much to be done. All of us - the
parties and stakeholders, but most of all the regional
partners - must drive the implementation forward and
ensure that it is adequately resourced. The Government
needs to play its part and contribute financially.

The peace agreement is far from perfect, but it is
the one that we have in front of us today and we are not
going to get another chance at it. The cost of failure is
unthinkable, so while responsibility lies primarily with
the parties to the conflict, it is also beholden on us all
to ensure that we make the necessary moves forward
together to make the agreement a reality for the sake of
the people of South Sudan.

