Mr. Ruiz Cabafias (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
This annual debate has been held since 2010, but
I believe, Sir, that today bears particular symbolic
importance as we celebrate the tenth anniversary of
presidential note S/2006/507, on the working methods
of the Security Council, also under the leadership of
your country, Japan.

The 2006 presidential note was the first step in
ensuring that the Organization's States Members could
make recommendations on the working methods,
practices and formats of the Security Council with a
view to effectively dealing with threats to international
peace and security. We realize that the working
methods of the Council are constantly changing. Proof
of that is that in 2010, also under Japan's presidency
and with Mexico as an elected member of the Council,
there was an important updating and broadening of the
earlier presidential note. Since that time, 13 additional
notes have been issued, covering various aspects of the
working methods of the Council. That is why Mexico
welcomes the proposal that the Council once again
update that note through the relevant working group,
keeping in mind our successes and, above all, our goals
and how we can reach them.

We have undoubtedly made progress in the past
decade. The participation of many Member States in
this open debate, as well as in other events, is a patent
manifestation of the Council's improved working
methods. Even if the pace of the improvements is
slower than many would like, there are unambiguous
indicators of the interest on the part of most to continue
working towards great transparency and accountability.
The holding of monthly meetings by some members of
the Council at the end of each presidency has enabled
the Council to increase the transparency it could not
achieve during its work. In the interest of transparency,
it is imperative for more and more countries to adopt
such an approach.
Similarly, public meetings, interactive informal
consultations and Arria Formula meetings are
mechanisms that have enabled greater interaction
between members of the Council and other Member
States, as well as other actors like civil society, and,
at the same time, have allowed us to contribute to
the transparency, legitimacy and effectiveness of
the Council.

Another recent and critical change was the early
election in June ofnew members ofthe Security Council,
consistent with the recommendations in presidential
note 507 and as reinforced by the presidential note
presented a few days ago (S/2016/6l9). That decision
will allow a significant period of transition between
incoming and outgoing members, as the former can
prepare ahead of time and attend, by invitation, Council
meetings starting in October, months before the start of
their term.

Finally, we believe that the flow of information to
non-member States of the Council regarding the items
underdiscussionintheChamberhasseenanimprovement
in recent years, in line with the recommendations in
presidential note 507. That has been possible thanks to
the commitment of some Council members, especially
elected members, to keep their colleagues informed,
and to the work of non-governmental organizations and
academia in analysing and disseminating information
relating to the Security Council.

At this moment ofreflection, I would point out some
elements that can and must continue to be improved.

First, it is essential for all members of the Council,
both permanent and non-permanent, to draft and
promote resolutions and statements concerning all
aspects germane to this organ. Despite some limited
progress in recent years, some draft resolutions are
still drafted exclusively by the permanent members, a
practice that must be avoided, as set forth in presidential
note S/2014/268 two years ago.

We welcome the fact that, for the first time ever,
the process of selecting the next Secretary-General will
be more transparent and inclusive, and in particular
that the General Assembly will play a major role. In a
few days, the straw poll to elect candidates will begin
in the Security Council. In that connection, I commend
efforts to submit more than one name to the General
Assembly in order to lend the selection of the next
Secretary-General a genuine air of democracy. It will
also be important to consider gender balance, as a quick
glance at the history of the Organization will reveal
that a woman has never been appointed to the position
of Secretary- General.

Another issue that must be considered is the use
of the veto power. For the past two years, Mexico and
France have promoted an initiative to voluntarily refrain
from its use in cases of mass atrocities. We believe that
that initiative is one of the most realistic short-term
options to reform the Security Council. Consequently,
we are grateful that approximately 100 countries have
decisively signed on to the initiative.

We also recognize the efforts and contributions
of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
Group, and in particular its code of conduct on the veto,
which is another related initiative. Similarly, on the
issues of accountability and the fight against impunity,
we reaffirm the importance of the principle that the
Council continue to be guided by clear, objective, and
non-politicized criteria in the submission of cases to
the International Criminal Court, in accordance with
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations. We
support the initiative to create a mechanism within
the Security Council to follow up on those referrals,
especially when the Court itself sends notification of a
lack of cooperation on the part of the State concerned.

Finally, a pending, but highly relevant, issue is the
adoption of the rules of procedure of the Council. More
than 70 years after its creation, the Council's rules
should cease to be provisional so that we can strengthen
the certainty of the Council's working methods.

After 10 years of discussion on working methods,
the adoption of more than a dozen documents and the
holding of several open debates, the progress achieved
should be celebrated. However, we must also reflect
on the reasons that the implementation of certain
recommendations has been prevented, and direct our
efforts towards ensuring compliance with them. It is
important to make new proposals, but it is also important
to accomplish what we have committed ourselves to.

I therefore welcome once again the efforts of Japan,
as champion of this initiative, as well as its work within
the framework of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Matters.

