Mr. Reyes Rodriguez (spoke in Spanish): We are
honoured to have the Eastern Republic of Uruguay
presiding over the Security Council this month, and it
is doubly pleasing that two countries of Latin America,
Uruguay and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,
will fulfil that task in 2016.

With 2015 now ended, the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, remains
deeply troubling. The acts of violence to which the
prevailing despair drives Palestinian youth continue,
and Israel, the occupying Power, continues to respond
with overwhelming and excessive force. And While
there are a host of challenges facing the region as well
as affecting many Member States outside it, the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict remains a top priority and should
not be relegated to secondary status by other, seemingly
more urgent, crises.

What many who talk, with good reason, of the
dangers of violent extremism are missing is the fact
that the unresolved question of Palestine is one of
the principal tools for extremist recruitment, and that
Israel's occupation of Palestine's lands and ill-treatment
of its people is one of the main reasons that idealistic
and impressionable young people are attracted to such
extreme and unforgivable forms of rebellion. If we, the
nations of the world, are fully committed to preventing
violent extremism within our own borders and fighting
it wherever it occurs, we must do all we can to find
a comprehensive, just, lasting and peaceful solution to
the question of Palestine that will enable the Palestinian
people to exercise their inalienable rights within a
sovereign country of their own, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, living side by side in peace with Israel.

The path to that solution is clear, and has been
for a long time. The terms of reference of the Madrid
Conference, including the principle of land for peace,
the Arab Peace Initiative, adopted by the League of
Arab States in 2002, and the Quartet road map for a
permanent two-State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, endorsed by the Security Council in 2003, form
the basis for it. They are accepted by the international
community as the best, indeed the only, way to arrive
at a peaceful settlement.

The situation on the ground today remains bleak,
and the temptation to give up - or at least to press
the pause button on the issue and for the time being to
deal with others - is great. Gaza is still under a near-
total blockade and its reconstruction is progressing far
too slowly. The Israeli settlement construction has not
stopped; Israeli settlers continue their extremist acts;
and the Israeli Government continues to apply a double
standard to the violence committed by Israelis against
Palestinians versus the Palestinians' struggles against
the Israeli occupation. Jerusalem remains a classic
tinderbox, one spark away from igniting a religious war
that could embroil the Israeli-Palestinian conflict in the
other regional conflagrations.

Yes, the situation does indeed seem bleak. But it
is at this moment - at a time when the Palestinian
people cannot envisage a viable future, when the Israeli
people have given up all hope ofa peace process, when
after more than 20 years of on-and-off negotiations no
mutual trust remains - it is precisely at this point that
we, the peoples of the world who have come together
at these United Nations, must step up and provide the
blueprint for a path forward. We must rekindle the
candle of hope and ensure that it is never extinguished.
That is our responsibility and we must not fail to carry
it out. Within the Organization, it is the Security
Council, as the organ to which the Charter assigned the
responsibility of maintaining international peace and
security, that must assume that responsibility and act
to promote the cause of peace for Palestine and Israel.

Over the past 12 months, there have been efforts and
discussions behind the scenes, but the time has come
to bring all of that out into the spotlight and onto the
Council floor. A resolution that sets clear parameters
and a time frame for ending the conflict would be the
appropriate step. The Palestinian people cannot wait
any longer. Every delay raises the risk that the damage
on the ground will become truly irreparable. If we
allow that to happen, we will not only have failed the
Palestinian people and their neighbours, but also the
nations of the world that have entrusted their peace and
security to us.

The Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People welcomes all the efforts
undertaken by the Council and its members, the Middle
East Quartet and all actors with a view to finding a
way out of the current situation and to resolving the
question of Palestine in accordance with the formula
of two States living side by side in peace and security.
The Committee will do its best to support those efforts
through its own work and reaffirms its commitment
to the principle of a peaceful resolution of the conflict
based on those premises.

Following the previous debate on the situation
in the Middle East in October 2015 (S/PV.7543), the
Committee organized events around the International
Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian People in
November. Together with the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, we convened a conference on the question
of Jerusalem and a civil society forum on the question
of Palestine, in Jakarta. One aspect that the two events
highlighted was the fact that the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict is not a religious one, and that anyone trying
to exploit it to ignite a religious confrontation is
misrepresenting the values of their own religion. These
two events reaffirmed our shared universal values of
peaceful coexistence among all peoples of the Earth.

In March in Amman, we will hold a round table
on legal issues to strengthen the capacities of the
State of Palestine to meet its obligations in light of its
recent accession to a series of international treaties and
conventions. Throughout the year, we will continue to
promote the realization of the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people and to support efforts to achieve
the two-State solution on the basis of the pre-1967
borders and a just resolution of all issues related to
the final status and mobilization of and assistance to
the Palestinian people, as mandated by the General
Assembly.

The Committee remains open to everyone 4
Government representatives, members of academia,
civil society - who wishes to join us in this noble task.

