Mr. Zarif: At the outset, I would like to express
my solidarity with the people and authorities of Serbia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia, who are facing an
unprecedented natural disaster caused by widespread
flooding. I also extend my heartfelt condolences to
those who have lost their beloved family members,
friends and colleagues as a result of that tragedy. I
hope that the current rescue operations and assistance,
including the efforts undertaken by the United Nations,
will help alleviate their plight.
Let me now turn to recent developments in Kosovo
and relations between Belgrade and Pristina. I should
like to note the continuing commitment demonstrated by
both sides to the European Union-led political dialogue.
During the reporting period, the pace ofimplementation
of last year's historic agreements was somewhat
affected by the holding of early parliamentary elections
in Serbia and the preparations for the forthcoming early
legislative elections in Kosovo. I congratulate Serbia on
the successful conduct of the elections, on 16 March,
and the formation of a new Government, on 27 April,
led by Prime Minister Aleksandar Vucie.

The Assembly of Kosovo, in an extraordinary
session held on 7 May, decided to dissolve itself with a
vote of more than two-thirds of its members, including
a majority of the representatives from the Kosovo
Serb and other non-majority communities. The new
elections for the Kosovo Assembly are scheduled to
be held on 8 June, less than two weeks from now. The
election campaign will start tomorrow, 28 May. The
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
will provide technical assistance in the preparation
and conduct of the elections. The European Union
will deploy an election observation mission. I take this
opportunity to call on all Kosovo residents, particularly
members of the Kosovo Serb community, to take part in
the forthcoming elections and exercise their democratic
franchise.

Despite a slower pace of implementation of the First
Agreement of Principles Governing the Normalization
of Relations of 19 April 2013, the parties have narrowed
their remaining differences, including on the structure
and staffing of the judiciary in northern Kosovo. An
additional indicator of progress is the operational
capability of the Kosovo Police in northern Kosovo.
The total number of former Serbian Interior Ministry
personnel integrated into the Kosovo Police under the
terms of the 19 April Agreement has now reached 284.
Other elements are continuing to be discussed between
technical representatives and experts from each side. It
is hoped that, once the forthcoming electoral process in
Kosovo is complete and the new Government is in place,
the dialogue will resume without delay and a crucial
pending matter - the establishment of the association/
community of Serb municipalities - will be tackled
expeditiously, along with other issues of mutual interest
and concern.

The Kosovo institutions have taken some important
decisions since my last briefing. On 22 April, the
Assembly of Kosovo ratified the exchange of letters
between the Kosovo authorities and the European
Union on the extension of the mandate of the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) until
15 June 2016 and on the creation of a special court in
relation to the allegations contained in the 2010 Council
of Europe report on inhumane treatment and illicit
trafficking of organs. The establishment of such a court
should help strengthen the rule of law in Kosovo and
ensure accountability.

On 6 March, the Kosovo authorities approved
recommendations resulting from the strategic security
sector review, including on the transformation of the
Kosovo Security Force into the Kosovo armed forces.
However, the Assembly of Kosovo has not taken a
conclusive decision in this regard. Discussions on the key
issues of electoral reform and extension of the provision
of reserved seats for ethnic minority communities in
the Kosovo Assembly have been deferred to the next
Assembly.

Over recent months, a great deal of efforts was
made to overcome challenges related to the finalization
of municipal assembly statutes of the four Serbian-
majority municipalities of northern Kosovo. On
15 May, the municipal assemblies in northern Kosovo
approved amendments to their statutes, bringing them
into compliance with relevant Kosovo legislation,
as required by the Ministry of Local Government
Administration. This is an important step forward in
the implementation of the 19 April 2013 Agreement
and the process of establishing the future association/
community of Serb-majority municipalities.

There were a series of violent incidents in northern
Kosovo, including an ambush on Kosovo police in
Zubin Potok on 31 March, which resulted in injuries to
three police officers, and an assault against EULEX in
the same municipality on 25 April, in which EULEX
vehicles were hit by bullets but fortunately no one was
injured. The fatal attack on EULEX on 19 September
of last year remains under investigation. We have
condemned such criminal attacks and have urged all
sides to strengthen their efforts to uphold law and order
and bring the perpetrators to justice.

In Pristina, on 20 May, three defendants charged
with war crimes in the case known as the Drenica
group escaped custody in a medical clinic where they
were receiving treatment. The individuals were among
the group of former members of the Kosovo Liberation
Army, whose trial began on 23 May in the Basic Court
of Mitrovica. Subsequently, a court order was issued for
their detention, and the individuals were apprehended
and sent to a high security prison.

We have persistently encouraged the various
communities in Kosovo to continue working towards
greater reconciliation and integration. Progress has
been noted on some important issues, such as missing
persons and the recognition of the survivors of sexual
violence during the conflict. We commend Ms. Atifete
Jahjaga for her leadership at the helm of Kosovo's
efforts to raise public awareness of such issues. In this
regard, we welcome the official launch, on 7 March,
of the national council for the survivors of sexual
violence related to the war, which we trust will focus
on the plight of all affected persons, regardless of their
ethnicity, religion or language.

With respect to missing persons, we welcome the
continued efforts of both the Pristina and Belgrade
delegations alike in the Working Group on Missing
Persons. Exhumation work at the mass grave site in
Raska, in south-central Serbia, has resumed under
the auspices of the Serbian Government, with the
involvement of international observers and Kosovo
representatives. We encourage all efforts to ensure
the transparency and professionalism of this work
and particularly welcome the inclusion of visits by the
family associations of missing persons to the site.

A common appreciation of the benefits of cultural
heritage for all communities in Kosovo will also be
an important step forward towards coexistence and
reconciliation among the communities. Despite the
efforts of the Kosovo authorities, regrettably, such
awareness has yet to reach adequate levels. Similarly,
efforts to promote inter-community reconciliation
should be significantly strengthened. This will also
contribute to further reducing ethnic-related incidents
and to accelerating the return of internally displaced
persons.

In the run-up to the elections, the issue of the
unfinished Serbian Orthodox Church structure on the
campus of the University of Pristina became a political
issue. Some Kosovo Albanian officials have referred to
this church as a "Milosevic-era monument", asserting
that it should be demolished for having allegedly
erected without the requisite building permits. An
unfortunate exchange of statements involving political
and religious leaders followed. We strongly encourage
the leaders in Kosovo communities, as well as the
leaders in Belgrade and Pristina, to take a constructive,
prudent and forward-looking approach in addressing
such a sensitive public issue.

Despite strong condemnation against participation
of Kosovo residents in foreign conflicts, including by
the Islamic Community of Kosovo, the matter remains a
concern. On 9 April, international attention was drawn
to reports of suicide bombing by a 22-year-old Kosovo
Albanian in Fallujah, Iraq. Several other young Kosovo
Albanians have been reported killed while fighting
in Syria and Iraq in recent months. We encourage
the Kosovo authorities to build on the measures they
have already taken in cooperation with international
stakeholders in order to ensure that such events cease
once and for all.

On 2 May, Kosovo concluded negotiations with
the European Commission on its Stabilization and
Association Agreement.The negotiations began last
October, and the Agreement should help Kosovo
advance its European integration agenda further. On
6 May, the European Commissioner for Enlargement
and European Neighbourhood Policy, Mr. Stefan Fiile,
visited Pristina, where he discussed with Kosovo
leaders key issues on the European Union-Kosovo
agenda, including the normalization process with
Belgrade, the rule of law and other areas that have
been identified for reform. A day before his visit to
Kosovo, Commissioner Fule was in Belgrade, just after
a visit by the European Union High Representative,
Ms. Catherine Ashton, to meet with Serbia's President
Tomislav Nikolic' and Prime Minister Vueie. Given that
dynamic, and the current dialogue process between
Belgrade and Pristina, it is apparent that the European
perspective will continue to be a key determinant
and incentive for Kosovo's political, institutional and
socioeconomic progress.

It is essential that Belgrade and Pristina stay on
track to achieve full implementation of the agreement
of 19 April 2013. Equally important are coordinated
efforts to make the best use of European and other
multilateral and bilateral assistance to local programmes
and projects in Kosovo, so that the people of Kosovo
can fully benefit and build a better life. In that regard,
the United Nations Interim Administration in Kosovo
(UNMIK) will continue to engage fully in Kosovo, in
cooperation and coordination with other international,
regional and local partners, within its status-neutral
framework, with the aim of making the best use of its
resources and relations with all communities.

I would like to conclude by thanking you,
Mr. President, and all the members of the Council for
their valuable engagement with both parties and their
continuing support for the work of UNMIK.

