Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
First, we thank France for having convened this
substantive debate and for having circulated the concept
note (S/2015/176, annex) to serve as a guide for our
discussions. Allow me also to greet the members of the
Security Council. We are also grateful for the briefings
by the Secretary-General and the other briefers, who
this morning enriched our perspective and deepened
our commitment to this debate.

We express our deep concern at the report of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
on the situation of human rights in Iraq in the light
of the abuses committed by the Islamic State of Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) and associated groups, which
confirms the commission of serious Violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law and
cases of extreme violence that constitute international
crimes of the utmost gravity.

On 13 March, in the Human Rights Council, my
country expressed its firm support for the declaration
entitled "Supporting the human rights of Christians
and other communities" proposed by Russia, Lebanon
and the Holy See, which recognizes the serious threat
to various religious communities in the Middle East,
particularly Christians, who have been displaced or
forced to leave their ancestral lands and are the victims
of acts of extreme Violence. The declaration calls on
the international community to support the deeply
rooted historical presence of all ethnic groups and
communities in the Middle East, in the face of the
serious threat from the Islamic State, Al-Qaida and
affiliated terrorist groups, which create the risk of
complete disappearance for the Christians. It also calls
on States to reaffirm their commitment to respecting
the right to freedom of religion.

Argentina rejects and continues to reject the
repeated Violations committed by ISIL against religious
and ethnic minorities, with their consequent negative
impacts on regional stability and international peace
and security. We reiterate our emphatic condemnation
of all terrorist acts carried out by that group, in all
their forms and manifestations, and express our deep
solidarity with the vulnerable civilian population, who
are the victims of the cruelty and barbarous actions of
this terrorist group and its associates.

We are speaking in this debate with a single voice
because it must be made clear that multilaterally and
in the context of regional, subregional and bilateral
relations, as well as in our domestic politics, our
legislation and our way of life as a society, my country
respects and honours the ethical and legal standards that
we View as universal and inalienable, which are also the
moral, ethical and legal basis of our Organization.

For instance, we fully respect the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, which states in article
2 that:

"Everyone is entitled to all the rights and
freedoms set forth in this Declaration, without
distinction of any kind";

in article 18 that:

"Everyone has the right to freedom of thought,
conscience and religion";

and in article 7 that:

"All are equal before the law and are entitled
without any discrimination to equal protection of
the law".
We also respect and abide by the principles
contained in the Durban Declaration and Programme
of Action, which recognizes in paragraph 8 that

"religion, spirituality and belief play a central role
in the lives of millions of women and men, and in
the way they live and treat other persons. Religion,
spirituality and belief may and can contribute to
the promotion of the inherent dignity and worth of
the human person and to the eradication of racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance".

We also agree with paragraph 9, which notes with
concern that

"racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and

related intolerance may be aggravated by, inter alia,

inequitable distribution of wealth, marginalization

and social exclusion",

and paragraph 10, which reaffirms that everyone is
entitled to all human rights.

In different parts of the world, the reprehensible
recurrence and gravity of the terrorist and other
degrading acts inspired by extremist fundamentalism
and the narratives of hatred that use religions and
beliefs as an excuse to justify the unjustifiable and
mask bloodthirsty power struggles, although they are
nothing new or exclusive to our times, represent one of
the most serious issues facing us in the present and in
future.

This is not only because these actions contravene
and violate the ethical principles and legal norms that
the entire international community has recognized
as valuable and necessary, but also because the
recognition of diversity and respect for differences is
a prerequisite for the advent of a fully human world,
since, as Pope Francis said, true peace calls for a world
in which we all feel free to express our concerns, needs,
aspirations and fears. But to that end, the most important
thing is that we all be prepared to accept one another
other, to respect legitimate differences and learn to live
as one single family with a common humanity. This is
not a naive utopia; it is an imperative responsibility and
a call to action.

We are not being overly simplistic; we agree with
the Special Rapporteur on freedom of religion or belief
that such acts of extreme sectarian violence are not
natural disasters or perennial religious antagonisms. As
Saint Jerome said, the corruption of the best is the worst
corruption. Indeed, this suits some people.

My delegation would like to highlight three issues.
First, we believe that serious crimes, crimes against
humanity and terrorist acts committed by groups
that base their actions on extremist fundamentalist
narratives of hatred, fallaciously attempting to use
religion to justify such heinous conduct, must be
absolutely condemned by the entire international
community, and its perpetrators cannot go unpunished.

Let me once again cite the words of Pope Francis,
who, when asked about the reprehensible attacks
against Charlie Hebdo carried out in your country,
Mr. President, said that one cannot kill in the name of
God, that killing in the name of God is an aberration.
Religion must be practiced with freedom, without
offending, without imposing and without killing. I
believe that this also goes for national and international
policy.

In this framework, we deem it necessary to
combat these most serious violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law within a strict
framework of legality, using the tools and mechanisms
available to this body, including sanctions and the
referral of cases to the International Criminal Court.
We fully agree with the recommendations made in the
report in that respect.

We believe that the measures that States adopt to
combat terrorist groups must fully respect international
law, especially international human rights law,
international humanitarian law and the right of refugees,
as well as the principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations.

Secondly, Argentina reaffirms that groups that
commit terrorist acts, hate crimes and crimes against
humanity cannot and must not be associated with a
given religion or religious community.

Thirdly and lastly, Argentina, as a member of
the Council for the past two years, repeatedly called
for and stressed the necessity of stopping the flow of
arms to all parties to the Syrian conflict. Once again
we would warn, not only on principle but also because
of empirical evidence, and at the risk of not being
heard, that if the flow of arms continues or, worse, if it
increases, either in the Middle East or any other region
in conflict, the consequences for human beings will be
even more devastating and cruel, and the possibility of
a lasting peace will become increasingly remote.

Like others who spoke earlier, we believe that the
emergence of ISIL and other extremist groups has
demonstrated what we are saying, because it is clearly
impossible to predict all ofthe repercussions ofa conflict
and the risks involved in creating and empowering
groups that, sooner or later, will be prepared to commit
the most heinous, cruel and degrading crimes.

Finally, we do not believe that a military solution
or the militarization of conflicts is the best or the only
way to achieve peace. The evidence bears me out. A
genuine, lasting peace can be achieved not by causing
more death and suffering but through societies that
are willing and able to remember, seek the truth and
ensure justice, and through an international community
that acts not in order to wreak new vengeance, but to
build inclusive societies in which human beings are not
wolves in disguise but diverse communities in which
we all are perceived as equal in dignity and rights, both
to ourselves and to one another.

The Argentine Republic reiterates its firm
conviction that only international cooperation can
effectively address the scourge of terrorism in all its
manifestations within a framework of absolute respect
for human rights and international law. We have hope
for and support the President of the General Assembly
and the Secretary-General's initiative to bring together
leaders of different religions and beliefs in a special
meeting at which all, believers and non-believers alike,
can work to promote a culture of peace, tolerance
and dignity for all. I know I took 14 minutes, but this
substantive debate to which we were invited enabled
me to exceed the time limit once again.

