Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): At the outset, I should like to welcome to our
meeting the Permanent Representative of Haiti to the
United Nations and ask him to convey to the people of
Haiti our wishes for peace and for their success. We are
also grateful to him for his kind words addressed to my
country.

The Russian Federation attaches great importance to
the success of the democratic transformations in Haiti. We
support the efforts by the legally elected President,
Mr. Rene Preval, and by the people and the Government of
Haiti, to strengthen democracy and the rule of law in their
country.

Russia has always taken the uniqueness of the Haitian
problem as a given. In essence, the events in Haiti did not
and do not threaten regional peace and security.
Nevertheless, the Security Council, to accommodate the
Government of Haiti and taking into account the
exceptional circumstances in that long-suffering tried
country, did agree to establish a United Nations peace-
keeping operation there.

Since then, the process of stabilizing the situation in
Haiti has been forging ahead. In this, the United Nations
Mission in Haiti (UNMIH) has been an enormous help:
the Mission's personnel deserve the highest praise.
Democratic elections have been successfully conducted
and there has been a peaceful transfer of power to the
new President, a fact which, incidentally, is welcomed in
the draft resolution before the Council today. UNMIH'S
fundamental goals had already been achieved by February
this year, and that is why we originally had it in mind to
wrap up UNMIH as soon as 29 February was past, which
the Council too had also earlier decided to do.

We are convinced that only a substantial
improvement in the social and economic situation in a
situation of national reconciliation can create the right
conditions for a democratic, stable and secure Haiti to
develop. In terms of outside support for these processes,
the deciding factor will be stimulating and coordinating
the efforts by the specialized agencies of the United
Nations, the international financial institutions and the
bilateral donors that are providing Haiti with the
assistance they have promised.

We do agree that, at this stage, it is also important
to provide support for the Haitian national police force
that has just been established, as described in detail by the
representative of Haiti today. Keeping personnel from the
United Nations civilian police in Haiti will help with this.

At the same time, it is no secret that we do have
doubts about the advisability of continuing the presence
in Haiti of a large United Nations military contingent.

We note with satisfaction that, during the work on
the draft resolution, the sponsors took many of our
amendments into account and planned for a significant cut
in the Mission and for a further review of personnel
numbers. However, the main thing is that the text clearly
and unambiguously states that what we have here is
absolutely the last extension for UNMIH.

The Council's appeal to all States to provide
appropriate support to the United Nations in fulfilling
UNMIH's mandate is of great significance. We expect
that the principle that peace-keeping operations are

 

financed partly on a voluntary basis will be given real
meaning through this, and that this will somewhat alleviate
the extremely difficult financial state of the Organization.

It is of particular importance that the members of the
Council supported Russia's proposal and reflected in the
draft resolution the need to shift the centre of gravity of the
international presence in Haiti towards solving Haiti's
extremely acute social and economic problems. Turning the
words in the Council's appeal into actual deeds by the
multilateral and bilateral donors would be the best kind of
support the Haitian people could have.

It is precisely on this point that we think that we
should concentrate, together with the Government of Haiti
and the friends of Haiti, especially Haiti's neighbours and
those other States with a direct interest in the region's well-
being.

Taking all these factors into account, we shall support
the draft resolution. We have a feeling of satisfaction
because, as a result of constructive and sometimes difficult
labour and by establishing an equilibrium between the
interests and positions of all the members of the Council,
we have succeeded in producing a consensus, generally
acceptable solution.

