Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria): Austria fully aligns
itself with the statement made by the representative of
Slovenia on behalf of the European Union. We would
like to make some additional comments.

We highly commend the Panamanian presidency
for holding this open debate on children and armed
conflict. We are also grateful to the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2007/757) and welcome his
recommendations.

As all speakers have stated, children are among
the most vulnerable groups in our societies. They are
the easiest prey for ruthless perpetrators; they are also
the key to the future of our societies. The way in which
children are treated in conflicts has fundamental
implications for society and for our self-conception as
human beings. We must therefore put an end to the acts
of those groups and individuals who systematically and
deliberately target and abuse children in situations of
armed conflict.

We highly appreciate the outstanding work of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy. Her efforts have made a
real difference for children on the ground. We also
support the important UNICEF initiatives to, inter alia,
follow up on the Paris Principles and Commitments.
The crucial role of non-governmental organizations
must also be highlighted. They are on the front lines in
supporting children and make a very special
contribution to the success of the monitoring and
reporting mechanism.

We now have a comprehensive set of instruments,
including Security Council resolutions, prohibiting and
criminalizing the recruitment and use of child soldiers
as well as other abuses of children in armed conflict.
The Security Council has been actively engaged in
addressing violations against children, in particular
through the establishment of the monitoring and
reporting mechanism pursuant to resolution 1612
(2005) and the creation of the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflicts, which, under France's
leadership, has greatly enhanced the Council's efforts.

However, despite all our efforts, there still is a
long list of perpetrators who for years have continued
to systematically commit serious violations against
children and have gone unpunished. That situation
demands further action by the Security Council.
Unfortunately, some of the existing mechanisms and
tools of the Council and of the Working Group have
been underutilized. We support the Secretary-General's
call for making full use of the available range of
measures in these cases, including the imposition of
targeted measures and the referral of violations against
children in armed conflict to the International Criminal
Court for investigation and prosecution. We also call
on Member States to strengthen the rule of law and to
fully utilize judicial mechanisms to bring to justice
perpetrators of violations against children.

We support the Secretary-General's
recommendation that equal weight be given to all
categories of grave violations against children. A
phased approach could be taken to make that
recommendation a reality. As a first step, the crime of
rape and grave sexual violence against children could
be added as an alternative gateway to trigger the
monitoring and reporting mechanism. Like the
recruitment of child soldiers, these crimes are
intentional acts. Parties to armed conflict can
reasonably be expected to take action against
perpetrators. Progress in the implementation of action
plans can be measured.

We are deeply shocked by the appalling level of
sexual and gender-based violence against children, as
documented in the Secretary-General's report. As has

been pointed out by all previous speakers, these acts
are horrendous crimes, and those responsible for
committing them must be brought to justice. For that
reason, Austria has increased its support for campaigns
against sexual violence and assistance programmes for
victims of such violence, in particular in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Children and armed conflict has been an issue of
critical importance and great concern for Austria for
many years. We have made the protection of children
in armed conflict a priority in our foreign and
development policy and will continue to do so in the
future.

