Mr. Miranda (Angola) (spoke in Portuguese," English text furnished by the delegation): Allow me
first to welcome France's initiative to convene this
high-level meeting of the Security Council to assess the
international community's efforts in the struggle
against terrorism.

They have been very strenuous efforts. The
adoption of Security Council resolution 1373 (2001)
demonstrates the international community's
determination to continue to work towards this
common objective: the fight against this scourge,
which does not respect borders and which represents a
serious threat to world peace in the twenty-first
century.

In our view, the results of the international
community's fight against terrorism have been positive,
thanks to the Security Council's leadership role and to
the prompt response of States, which took measures to
implement resolution 1373 (2001). We should
underscore the large number of States that sent national
reports to the Counter-Terrorism Committee and which

took practical measures to prevent and to fight terrorist
networks.

But success in the fight against terrorism requires
not only the adoption of domestic policies by States; it
must also and above all include regional and
international cooperation.

The African continent was a pioneer in the
adoption of measures against terrorist activities, which
ravaged many of our countries on countless occasions.
In 1999, the Organization of African Unity adopted a
Convention on the Prevention and Combating of
Terrorism.

Angola, a country which directly suffered
terrorism for so many years, is seriously engaged in the
struggle against that phenomenon, regardless of who is
behind it or where it occurs. As President J ose Eduardo
dos Santos stated, Angola condemns all forms of
political, religious and ethnic acts of radicalism and all
terrorist activities.

Preventing terrorism is a priority challenge for
my Government, particularly in this period of the
consolidation of peace and democracy in Angola. Of
course, an effective defence against terrorism requires,
first and foremost, a strong State that is politically
stable and able to fulfil its responsibilities as a member
of the international community.

Those have been the goals of the Angolan State,
as it spends a significant portion of its resources not
only to develop its capacity for the protection and
control of its air, land and maritime space - an
essential requirement to avoid the infiltration of
terrorist groups - but also to meet the fundamental
needs of the Angolan people, such as their well-being,
security and justice, thus strengthening the Angolan
social fabric and preventing the very roots of some
forms of terrorism.
Of course, at this stage, Angola is endeavouring
to provide relief from the suffering caused by 30 years
of war. That includes the resettlement of 3 million
displaced persons and more than 400,000 refugees, the
reintegration of thousands of former combatants and
the reconstruction of infrastructure. As a result, my
Government is not yet capable of contributing its full
share in the struggle against all forms of terrorism
without the assistance of the international community.
In that regard, very soon, Angola will be welcoming a
technical assistance mission from the United Nations
Centre for International Crime Prevention.

In Southern Africa, Angola was an early promoter
of a meeting of our regional integration organization,
the Southern Africa Development Community, to
coordinate a prevention and combat strategy against
terrorist activities in our region. That strategy relates to
the very nature of terrorism in the region and its impact
on States. It also includes measures to impede
movements of the people and funds of terrorist
networks; to prevent potential attacks such as those that
occurred recently in Nairobi, Dar Es Salaam and
Mombasa; and to increase information exchange and
training for immigration, customs, police and civil
aviation personnel, among others.

Nevertheless, the implementation of some of
those measures requires international assistance,
including the provision of equipment, the training of
specialists and financial support.

At the same time, we stress the urgent need for an
international convention on terrorism providing a
universally acceptable definition of that scourge.

Beyond the mere adoption of measures to
prevent, combat and disassemble terrorist networks,
great attention must given to the objectives and
motivations of those groups. We believe that it is not
very helpful to attribute terrorist acts simply to a wish
to kill and destroy. We must also focus on identifying
the true purposes of terrorism and thereby make our
methods to combat it more effective.

(spoke in French)

In conclusion, I should like to welcome the
efforts made by the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
whose report was introduced earlier by its Chairman,
the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom. I
also wish very warmly to welcome the statement made
by the Secretary-General, who has given us a
comprehensive and realistic picture of the efforts that
need to be made by the entire international community
to make the fight against terrorism a worldwide reality.

