Mr. Keating (New Zealand): My congratulations go
to you, Mr. President, and also to Ambassador
Al-Khussaiby, the President of the Council last month.

It will come as no surprise to anybody in this room
that my delegation endorses 100 per cent the proposals
put forward this morning by Ambassador Cerdenas, on
behalf of a large number of countries.

 

I will not repeat any of the points made by
Ambassador Cerdenas, but I do want to say a few words
about the reasons why we have been disappointed at the
outcome of last year's presidential statement, of 4
November, and also a few words in response to some of the
concerns that have been expressed by previous speakers
here this morning.

The new procedures that were put in place last year
were widely welcomed. Some of the meetings which have
been held under these new procedures have clearly
demonstrated the benefit and the need for better
consultation, and in that regard we would like to warmly
commend some of the Council members for trying to make
the new arrangements work. But we fear that for the most
part Council members and the Secretariat have treated the
meetings as essentially briefing sessions for the non-
members. In general, Council members have seen no need
to speak; some do not even attend. In reality, the process
has been consultative only in name.

The practice, therefore, does not match up to the
expectations raised by the 4 November 1994 presidential
statement. I would also recall that that statement
foreshadowed an expected schedule of consultative
meetings at the beginning of each month. Unfortunately,
only pro forma references appear in the Council's tentative
programme of work. We do not feel that this is sufficient.
Similarly, there were to be background papers circulated,
indicating the topics to be covered, and they were to be
circulated well in advance of each meeting with the troop
contributors. This does not happen. Most meetings, as many
have commented this morning, take place at very short
notice; they are unstructured and have no discernible
outcome. Under these circumstances, it would be surprising
if any reports received by the Council President, who is
required to report back to the Council on these
consultations, could be very informative. Indeed, as the
representative of the United States mentioned this morning,
this is another element of the November 1994 statement
which is observed more often in the lapse.

In the light of this experience, therefore, New Zealand
considers it is timely for the Council to live up to its
undertaking to reopen this matter and to pursue enhanced
arrangements in open dialogue with troop contributors. We
welcome this first step today in a formal Council meeting,
and we would propose that the next step should be for the
Council to agree that an informal joint working group
should be established, involving the members of the
Council and those troop contributors who wish to
participate in informal discussions of how best to ensure
progress on this issue. We believe that this is a procedural
issue - not a matter of substance - and one on which
it would be appropriate to take an innovative approach.
We note from the statements made in the Security
Council today, in the plenary General Assembly and in
the debate on peace-keeping operations in the Fourth
Committee that a serious review of this sort would be
widely welcomed. It would demonstrate the Council's
awareness of its responsibilities towards Member States
and, equally, it would show that the Council can take a
lead in the search for improved effectiveness, efficiency
and reform. Such a lead would be a critical contribution
from the Council as we all deliberate in this anniversary
year on wider United Nations reform.

I would like at this point to make a few brief
comments about some of the reservations which have
been raised in the debate so far this morning.

First, I noted the concern expressed by the
representative of France about establishing new separate
groups of Member States. That, of course, is a valid
concern. It would be more valid, however, if Article 44
of the Charter did not already recognize the existence of
a particular group of Member States that can and does
make special contributions to international peace and
security.

Secondly, the Permanent Representative of France
recalled France's proposal for further orientation
meetings. New Zealand was the first member of the
Council to support France's initiative in this respect. And
we do strongly urge that this practice be reinvigorated in
the new year. But it seems to me that that practice is
precisely one which provides an opportunity to participate
for those Members of the United Nations that have no
other opportunity to make a contribution. There is a
special contribution that can be made by troop
contributors.

The representative of France also expressed concern
about the prerogatives of the Secretary-General.

I think it needs to be said that there is a very
important issue here. Where we have genuine peace-
keeping operations in a benign environment, the
traditional peace-keeping model, it is true that the
Member States have little need to participate, and little
interest in participating, in the day-to-day running of the
peace-keeping operation - and that is as it should be.
But the situation, as several colleagues have indicated this
morning, can be, and is, very different where peace-

 

keeping forces are inserted into a situation of active
hostilities. The cases of Somalia, of Bosnia, of Rwanda,
have all been cited by various members of the Council, and
we all know that the practical reality is that where peace-
keeping forces are engaged in a situation where there is
active hostility, the Governments of Member States regard
themselves as being very much accountable to their
parliaments for what happens in the day-to-day operations
of those peace-keeping situations.

There are two ways of involving representatives of
Member States in such important decisions that need to be
taken, decisions that are often of great moment and
consequence both for the peace-keeping operation itself and
for the lives of the soldiers on the ground. One is that they
be taken behind the scenes through informal, non-existent,
non-institutional processes. The other is that they be taken
in a clearly open and transparent process that involves all
of those who have serious interests engaged, and that is the
Security Council, which has the final responsibility to
decide, and the troop-contributing countries, which have a
responsibility to have and to contribute input to that
decision.

From what we have seen in Somalia, from what we
have seen in Bosnia and from my own personal experience
as President of the Security Council in April of last year
during the crisis in Rwanda, when I convened meetings of
troop contributors on a daily basis simply to ensure that we
actually had an operation that would continue, it seems to
me that it has been critically demonstrated that the Member
States that are troop contributors do make the difference
between the success or non-existence of a peace-keeping
operation, and that structured consultations with those troop
contributors are of critical importance. It seems to me that
this is a classic example of how it should be continued in
the future.

I should like to conclude by offering a few thoughts
about what I believe is a long and respectable tradition of
concern for participation by troop contributors in decisions.
I have heard the reservations raised about
institutionalization or the establishment of new institutions
for participation in this regard. I think that I recall that as
far back as 1215 a very important event took place. The
Magna Carta is best remembered as a compact that began
the evolution of parliamentary democracy. But, while all
that is true, it seems to me that in 1215 the most important
common element among the barons who gathered at
Runnymede on the banks of the Thames was that they were
troop contributors and that they wanted an institution in
which they could participate in decisions about the
deployment of their troops.

I can imagine that in that very difficult situation
King John, who had a royal court that may be compared
to this Council, made all the same argument as some have
made today: that there should be no new institution or no
new subsidiary organ. He would have argued that his
operational effectiveness would have been impaired. He
would have argued that his Royal Council would not have
been able to respond quickly if it had to stop and consult
with the troop contributors. But King John was swimming
against the tide of history, and we feel that the same
historical tide is flowing very strongly here in the United
Nations at the end of this century and that it is time for
change and time for genuine, substantive change.

In making this somewhat flippant comment, I do not
want to paint any members of the Council - and
certainly not you, Mr. President - in the role of Bad
King John, so I take this opportunity to wish you and all
of the members of the Council a happy Christmas and a
peaceful New Year.

