Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): At the outset, Mr. President,
I would like to wish you and your team every success in
presiding over the Security Council during the month of
August. Rest assured that you can count on Indonesia's
full support. Your presence here and your leadership
of today's open debate demonstrates Poland's strong
commitment to child protection in armed conflict.

I wish also to congratulate the Peruvian delegation
on its successful presidency during the month of July.

We thank Special Representative Virginia Gamba,
Executive Director Henrietta Fore, Ms. Mariatu Kamara
and Mr. Peter Awan for their very comprehensive and
eye-opening presentations.

Child protection has been an integral part of
Indonesia's policy and sets the tone for our stance in
condemning the six grave violations against children in
armed conflict. On that note, we are deeply concerned
by the scale and severity of violations in 2018, notably
the record high number of casualties as a result of
killing and maiming, the continued fighting between
parties and new conflict dynamics.

Allow me to elaborate on three pertinent points.

First and foremost, I stress the importance of
reintegration efforts for all children formerly associated
with armed groups so as to allow them to be reunited
with their families or caregivers and go back to their
normal lives; the intensification of efforts by the

Security Council to address the root causes of conflict
and prevent former child soldiers from being recruited
again; and the fight against impunity for armed groups
that unlawfully use children for military purposes. At
this point, the reintegration process should be seen
through the lens of conflict prevention.

Children associated with armed groups are usually
stigmatized as immoral and dangerous, and this leads to
my second point: that we should invest in extra efforts
to engage such children who are facing social ostracism
and help them find a constructive role in society.
Mental-health and psychosocial supports that involve
the local community are essential for an effective
reintegration programme, including in ensuring access
to quality education.

In this regard, we commend UNICEF, the Office
of the Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict, the relevant non-governmental organizations
and personnel on the ground for their significant
contribution to facilitating the transition of former
child soldiers to a normal life.
Thirdly, we deem vital strategic partnerships
between national authorities and personnel on
the ground - peacekeepers and humanitarian
workers - to multiply child-protection efforts. Such
partnerships are of crucial importance to ensuring the
delivery of humanitarian assistance. Any shrinking
of such assistance would translate into widespread
insecurity. We therefore emphasize the merit of
enhancing tailored and context-specific peacekeeping
approaches, including through pre-deployment training
on child protection.

For peacekeepers, child-protection capacity
is crucial to conducting dialogue on action plans,
the release and reintegration of children and the
strengthening of monitoring mechanisms.

In practice, the child-rights-based approach should
be pursued without sacrificing the safety and security
ofpersonnel on the ground, taking into account possible
asymmetrical threats in connection with child soldiers.

The best interests of children must be given
primary consideration in all actions without exception.
Children have the right to be protected from violence
wherever they live, especially those in situations of
armed conflict. Our approach should be clear and
constructive: to find the best, tailor-made solution to
prevent and end grave violations against children in
each conflict situation.

Let us translate our words into action for the best
interests of our children. They are our future.

