Indonesia would like to thank Ms. Stephanie Williams, the Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Libya, for her briefing. We thank also Ambassador Juergen Schulz, Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya, for delivering the Committee's thirty-eighth periodic report to the Council. Today's meeting marks the second Ramadan since the new conflict in Libya started. Libyans are deprived of being able to celebrate the holy month in peace and are currently at risk of celebrating another Eid al-Fitr in terror. We share the concern of the Secretary-General, as stated in his most recent report (S/2020/360), that any further escalation of violence will risk reversing the fragile progress that has been achieved and further complicate the achievement of a peaceful resolution for Libya. The Council's engagement on Libya has been long and winding. We do not need more empty narratives that have zero impact on those who are fighting on the ground and those fuelling the conflict, including by violating the arms embargo. Our term as an elected member of the Council is brief, and what we do right now will be recorded in history. At the end of the day, the ultimate question will be, how many lives have we saved? On that note, let me focus on the following points. First, we need to focus our efforts on saving the people of Libya. That includes those who are particularly vulnerable: women, children and migrants. Unfortunately, even amid the global call for a ceasefire, attacks against civilians and civilian facilities persist. Attacks against health facilities will severely impact Libya's ability to fight the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic at the time they need it most. In the first quarter of 2020, the number of civilian casualties in Libya increased by 45 per cent compared with the last quarter of 2019, amounting to at least 131 civilian casualties. These attacks must stop. We call on all parties to fully respect international humanitarian law and take measures to protect all civilians. We also call for an expansion of humanitarian corridors during Ramadan and the COVID-19 pandemic so as to provide the space needed for humanitarian workers to reach those in need. We need to continue on the path of political dialogue, since there can never be a military solution in Libya. We join the Secretary-General's call for all parties to continue communication and move forward with the draft ceasefire agreement produced by the 5+5 Joint Military Commission. We continue to support the work of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) and call for the immediate appointment of its new Special Representative of the Secretary-General. Secondly, we continue to support the role of its neighbours and of regional organizations, including the African Union and the League of Arab States, in assisting Libya. To that end, we echo the appreciation expressed by the Secretary- General to the Government of Tunisia and Nepal in supporting UNSMIL's operation. Thirdly, Indonesia supports all international efforts to bring lasting peace to Libya. Nevertheless, it is important to align such efforts with existing international tracks, including resolution 2491 (2019). We continue to observe the continuation of the Berlin Conference and its follow-up, as well as all regional efforts for Libya. Finally, we do not need any further reminder that the actions of the international community must be aligned with the sole purpose of saving lives and providing lasting peace.
