Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Let start by thanking the
Russian presidency for convening this important debate.
We also thank the Secretary-General for his insightful
and frank briefing on the situation in the Middle East.

As our Swedish colleague reminded us just a short
while ago, the region has historically been the cradle of
civilization. But today the Middle East is in deep turmoil.
The geostrategic landscape of the region is dominated
by a complex interplay of multiple and intersecting
fault lines. Competing interests and divergences among
major regional Powers have further fuelled instability
and pushed the region into a vortex of turmoil and
violence. Reconciliation among the major regional
Powers is necessary to address the growing tensions
and turmoil. Already, a combustible mix has been
exacerbated by big-Power rivalries, raising the danger
of wider conflict, with far-reaching consequences.

As rightly noted in the concept note (S/2018/524, annex), the situation necessitates a comprehensive
approach to effectively address the many
challenges - an approach that takes into account
the underlying regional and historical contexts of
each conflict and that is consistent with the norms of
international law. Anything less would not work, for
we know all too well that unilateral measures driven
by narrow interests and false assumptions have brought
only greater suffering to the people of the region.

Worryingly, instead of abandoning those flawed
policies, attempts are still being made by some external
actors to shape the region according to their own
political preferences. Nowhere is that unfortunate
spectacle more apparent than in Palestine. The two-
State solution is tragically being dismantled in full
sight of the international community. The latest report
of the Secretary-General (S/2018/6l4) also attests to a
familiar pattern of systematic abuse of Palestinians at
the hands of the illegal Israeli occupation.

Inaction by the Security Council is also continuing
to worsen the situation in Palestine. As the Palestinians
observed their Great Return March, the killing fields
of Gaza were drenched in the blood of over 130
innocent Palestinians. Yet the Security Council stood
as a bystander to the plight of those long-suffering
Palestinian people. That represented a dereliction by
the Council of its primary responsibility of maintaining
international peace and security. For the Palestinian
issue is not a by-product of conflict in the Middle East,
it is the primary source of instability in the region.
On 13 June, the General Assembly was called upon to
reaffirm to the Palestinians their right to safety and
protection - a right expressly recognized by several
Security Council resolutions - which the Council had
failed to endorse on 1 June.

Our discussion on the protection of civilians is not
taking place in isolation; it is a fundamental tenet of
the prevention-centric and rights-oriented work that
we carry out at the United Nations. It is therefore no
coincidence that the General Assembly is, at this very
moment, also holding a formal plenary meeting on
the responsibility to protect (see A/72/PV.100). Our
words during this debate will be weighed against the
actions that we take for the protection needs of all
civilian populations, including the people of Palestine.
We must not allow the plight of the Palestinian people
to be betrayed at the altar of narrow and myopic
political interests.

The raging fires of conflict across the region show
no signs of abating. Amid this pervasive gloom, the
successful conduct of the parliamentary elections in
Iraq last month marks a new chapter in Iraqi democracy.
It also serves as a successful model of inclusive and
representative political participation.

As the conflict in Syria enters its eighth year, the
need for an intra-Syrian process ofpolitical engagement
is as urgent and important as ever. As much as progress
may be slow, every step forward on that path is a gain
for peace in the country.

The grim situation in Yemen also necessitates a
political outcome. The search for a political solution
must be accelerated. Over 22 million people in
the country are in need of immediate and urgent
humanitarian assistance. That fact alone reinforces the
need for such a political settlement.

The edifice of peace cannot be built without the
foundation of justice. We cannot expect some to
reap the dividends of peace when others are forcibly
deprived of the fruits ofjustice. As self-evident as it is,
that fallacy remains at the core of the instability in the
region, for peace is surely not a zero-sum game. We are
all insecure if some of us are vulnerable. The road to
peace in the Middle East lies in ajust and fair settlement
of the Palestinian issue. That is an objective reality, not
a partisan assessment. The test of our commitment to
peace in the region lies in that acknowledgment and our
ability to act on it. It is time to stand up and be counted.

