Mr. van den Berg (Netherlands): I have the
honour to take the floor on behalf of the European
Union (EU). The candidate countries Bulgaria,
Romania, Turkey and Croatia, the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Serbia and
Montenegro and the European Free Trade Association
(EFTA) countries Iceland and Norway, members of the
European Economic Area, align themselves with this
declaration.

The EU welcomes the recent adoption of Security
Council resolution 1566 (2004). The Chairman of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) pointed out very
rightly that this resolution clearly prioritizes the main
tasks of the Committee.

First, resolution 1566 (2004) calls for a more
coordinated approach and closer cooperation between
the CTC and other United Nations bodies. The EU
welcomes the further strengthening of cooperation, not
only between the Security Council committees dealing
with counter-terrorism, but also with other parts of the
United Nations system involved in counter-terrorism,
such as the Terrorism Prevention Branch of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the General
Assembly's Sixth Committee in its codification efforts
on this matter, in particular on the draft convention
against nuclear terrorism. The EU hopes for this draft
convention's early conclusion. Furthermore, the EU
welcomes the working group to be established under
resolution 1566 (2004) as a useful tool in the efforts to
strengthen United Nations action against terrorism. The
EU will take an active interest in the work of the
group, and would welcome information about - and
possibilities to discuss - its programme of work.

Secondly, the CTC must more actively and
effectively strengthen practical cooperation with
international, regional and subregional organizations in
all areas related to resolution 1373 (2001). In this
regard, the EU welcomes that the CTC will prepare, in
consultation with the relevant international, regional
and subregional organizations and United Nations
bodies, a set of best practices to assist States in
implementing the provisions of resolution 1373 (2001)
related to the financing of terrorism.

The EU will stand ready for close cooperation
with the CTC and wants to reiterate that the European
Council wholly supports the goal of fully and
universally implementing resolution 1373 (2001). In its
Declaration on Combating Terrorism of 25 March
2004, the European Council emphasized the
importance of developing technical assistance
strategies to enhance the counter-terrorist capacity of
third countries. In the same declaration, the European
Council also agreed on the establishment of the post of
the EU counter-terrorism coordinator. This coordinator
is working to promote greater cooperation between the
various EU counter-terrorism initiatives, policies and
activities.

In our external policies, we emphasize the
importance of ratifying, without reservation, and
effectively implementing the relevant international
conventions and protocols related to terrorism and
preventing the financing of terrorism. We also
emphasize addressing other factors that may contribute
to the fight against terrorism, such as non-proliferation
and arms control, as well as continued efforts in lifting
the veil of so-called charitable institutions.

As a third priority for the CTC, the Chairman
mentioned the importance of speeding up the
revitalization process on the basis of the organizational
plan of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED). First and foremost, the European
Union would like to welcome the Security Council's
endorsement of the organizational plan for the CT ED.
We are of the opinion that the establishment of the
Directorate will be an effective way to enhance the
Committee's ability to monitor the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001) and effectively continue the
capacity-building work in which it is engaged. We
welcome the Council's request in resolution 1566
(2004) that the Secretary-General take, as a matter of
urgency, appropriate steps to make the CTED fully
operational.

With regard to this new CTED, the EU would like
to reiterate its wish to see a human rights expert
included in the Directorate. We understand this is the
intention of the Executive Director and we commend
him for this. We furthermore attach importance to
cooperation between the Executive Directorate and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights (OHCHR). The EU has a long-standing
position that counter-terrorism activities must at all
times be undertaken with full respect for obligations
under international law, in particular human rights,
international humanitarian and refugee law.

As a fourth priority, the Chairman mentioned that
the CTC must step up its efforts to develop direct
dialogue and information exchange with Member
States on resolution 1373 (2001) and the facilitation of
technical assistance, in particular through the practical
organization of initial visits to States with their
consent. In this context, the European Union supports a
more proactive role of the CTC. We would welcome
more direct dialogue and information exchange with
the States in need of assistance and the donor
community, including close dialogue and cooperation
with the Counter-Terrorism Action Group of the Group
of Eight.

In addition, the European Union would like to
point out that the submission of reports by Member
States remains an essential working tool for the CTC.
Therefore, the European Union would like to call upon
all States that did not submit their reports on time to do
so as soon as possible.
Lastly, the European Union has taken note of the
Committee's efforts to integrate analysis and
assessment of each country's assistance and other
needs into the report-reviewing process.

The European Union is of the opinion that the
Chairman very pertinently addressed the priorities of
the CTC in his briefing on the Committee's programme
of work.

I should like to conclude by reiterating that the
European Union and its member States remain strongly
committed to our common goal: the full and universal
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).

