Mr. Menkerios: I am grateful for the opportunity
to introduce the latest progress report of the Secretary-
General on Somalia (S/2008/709), which provides an
update on the political, security and humanitarian
developments in Somalia and the Djibouti peace
process, including the agreement on establishing a
unity Government and a cessation of hostilities
agreement. The report also describes the status of
planning for an international stabilization force, as well
08-6107]
as actions in support of Security Council resolutions
1816 (2008) and 1838 (2008) on combating piracy. The
report speaks for itself. Therefore, for the sake of
brevity, I shall not go into its content. Permit me,
however, to turn to events that took place after the
issuance of the report.

Following the signing of the cessation of
hostilities agreement in Djibouti between the
Transitional Federal Government (TFG) and the
Alliance for the Re-Liberation of Somalia (ARS) on
26 October, which was part of the ongoing
implementation of the Djibouti agreement, two other
important events took place during this month. First,
on 4 November, the United Nations Political Office for
Somalia (UNPOS) facilitated the travel of the ARS
Chairman, Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed, to Somalia to
mobilize popular support for the Djibouti process.
Sheikh Sharif visited the cities of Beletweyne and
Jowhar, in south-central Somalia, on what was his first
visit to the region since the deployment of Ethiopian
forces in late 2006. He was well received by the public,
indicating that the Djibouti faction of the ARS
continues to enjoy a significant following in south-
central Somalia.

Secondly, the withdrawal of Ethiopian forces
from locations in Beletweyne and Mogadishu
commenced on 17 November, as agreed in the
Cessation of Hostilities Agreement. The Ethiopian
command handed over its main base in Mogadishu, at
the former Ministry of Defence, to the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) in a smooth transfer of
control. Furthermore, field commanders of both TFG
and ARS forces are currently engaged in organizing
their forces for the implementation of the Agreement.
The United Nations is facilitating a workshop this
week for TFG and ARS delegates to discuss details of
the implementation of the Cessation of Hostilities
Agreement, as well as advancing arrangements for the
creation of joint forces with a troop strength of 10,000.

Hard-line groups, including Al-Shabaab, continue
to expand their operations within south-central
Somalia. Disparate militia groups, united in their
determination to fight the TFG and the Ethiopian
forces, have gained military control in strategic areas
in the Lower Juba and Lower Shebelle regions,
including the port city of Merka, where TFG authority
is absent. They are also continuing their sporadic
attacks in Mogadishu. That is exacerbating the
08-6107]
difficulties already faced in delivering much-needed
humanitarian assistance.

The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) reports that, in October, more than
37,000 people were displaced from Mogadishu as a
result of insecurity. Two major non-governmental
organizations suspended all their programming in
south-central Somalia following a statement issued on
3 October by Al-Shabaab calling for the agencies to
cease operations in areas under its control. The
suspension of those activities has affected nearly
1 million Somalis in need of food aid.

The agreement on political cooperation signed by
the parties on 25 October has given the peace process
renewed impetus. It calls for the formation of a broad-
based Parliament and unity Government that brings the
ARS into the transitional institutions. Various reports
indicate that the agreement was received with wide
support inside Somalia. A subgroup of the High-Level
Committee is working on the details of that agreement.
It is expected that the next round of meetings, planned
to take place from 23 to 25 November, will make
significant progress in that respect.

As stated in the Secretary-General's report, the
Intergovernmental Authority for Development (IGAD)
held a special summit of heads of State or Government
on Somalia on 29 October, following the signing of the
security and political agreement in Djibouti. IGAD
leaders agreed that the Djibouti talks remained critical
to bringing peace and stability to Somalia and that their
initiative should be viewed as complementary to the
Djibouti process and its implementation. That principle
was further reinforced by an Extraordinary Meeting of
the IGAD Council of Ministers in Addis Ababa on
18 November, which underscored the urgent need to
move towards the establishment the unity Government.

Tensions remain between President Yusuf and
Prime Minister Hussein, with little prospects for
reconciliation between the two leaders. The two-week
time frame to form a new Cabinet articulated by the
IGAD summit on 29 October was not honoured.
Subsequently, President Yusuf cast doubts over his full
agreement with the IGAD communique, stating to
Somali members of Parliament that the agreement was
not binding in his view.

The President and the Prime Minister traded
accusations in public as the deadline for resolving the
crisis by 13 November approached and each began to
3
garner support from members of Parliament. The
IGAD Extraordinary Meeting of the Council of
Ministers, held in Addis Ababa on 18 November,
decided to impose targeted sanctions, such as travel
bans and assets freezes, on any Somali, inside the
country or abroad, deemed to be obstructing peace. It
further threatened to withdraw recognition from leaders
who are not cooperating with the peace process. IGAD
urged the Security Council to consider doing the same.

The next step in resolving the stalemate will rest
with the Transitional Federal Parliament, to whom
Prime Minister Hussein intends to submit the names of
the new members of the Cabinet for approval. IGAD
has urged members of Parliament to return from Kenya
to Baidoa, where the majority remained since the
IGAD summit in October, to vote on the new Cabinet.
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Ould
Abdallah has met with both leaders on several
occasions, calling for restraint on both sides and urging
reconciliation.

The scourge of piracy continues to ravage the
waters off the Somali coast. It is closely linked to the
state of insecurity inside Somalia and the absence of
any effective form of law and order. As stated in the
progress report, the Transitional Federal Government
has taken steps to coordinate its efforts with the
international community to eradicate acts of piracy and
armed robbery at sea. Whereas international efforts to
reduce the vulnerability of vessels crossing the area
have also intensified over the same period, recent
events demonstrate the considerable capacity of pirates
to hijack vessels and the need to establish appropriate
legal mechanisms to hold accountable those
responsible for such acts.

UNPOS continues to advance preparations for an
international conference on assistance to Somalia, to be
held in the first quarter of 2009. The conference will
focus on concrete ways to enhance the implementation
of the Djibouti agreement on the ground. Three
thematic areas are currently being developed for wider
consultations with Somali parties and relevant
international partners, focusing on political, security
and peace support. A high-level steering group under
UNPOS leadership will be established in December to
oversee preparations and advocacy efforts.

The situation in Somalia remains volatile and the
Djibouti process has yet to deliver the improvement in
security that we are all working for. We must therefore
persevere in our common efforts and ensure sustained
support to the peace process.

