Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): We welcome the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq to this meeting. We
thank Mr. Warren Sach, representative from the United
Nations to the International Advisory and Monitoring
Board (IAMB) and Under-Secretary-General Ibrahim
Gambari for their briefings, and you, Mr. President, for
the briefing on the activities of the Multinational Force
in Iraq (MNF-I).

We welcome the progress that has been made by
the Iraqi authorities in addressing the security
situation, as reported by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs. However, we are concerned because the
current security situation in Iraq remains fragile. We
reiterate that any solution to the conflict in Iraq must
be all-inclusive, focusing on the political process and
national reconciliation as well as constructive dialogue
with all neighbouring States. We therefore commend
Iraqi and regional leaders for their intensified efforts to
improve regional security. My delegation supported the
adoption of resolution 1790 (2007), renewing the
mandate of the MNF-I, because the Iraqi Government
is of the view that its continued presence will be
necessary for security. We note the Iraqi Government's
expectation that this could be the final mandate
renewal of the MNF-I.

South Africa welcomes the adoption of resolution
1790 (2007), which extends the mandate of the IAMB.
However, we remain concerned at the repeated findings
by the independent auditors that serious irregularities
with regard to the disbursement of funds from the
Development Fund for Iraq and oversight over all sales
and contracts have not been acted upon. The latest
judgment by the IAMB, issued on 2 June 2008, notes
that all bartering "could be construed as a violation of
the UN Security Council Resolution 1483". We
reiterate that paragraph 14 of resolution 1483 (2003)
states that the IAMB was set up to ensure the
Development Fund for Iraq is

"used in a transparent manner to meet the
humanitarian needs of the Iraqi people, for the
economic reconstruction and repair of Iraq's
infrastructure, for the continued disarmament of
Iraq, and for the costs of Iraqi civilian
administration, and for other purposes benefiting
the people of Iraq".

It should also be noted that the IAMB and its
independent auditors have been allowed to scrutinize
only a small sample of foreign contracts with post-war
Iraq. In that regard, we note with concern some reports
suggesting that as much as $23 billion may have been
lost, stolen or not properly accounted for in post-war
Iraq. Clearly, the Security Council would be derelict in
its duties if it did not immediately follow up on a
potential scandal of such magnitude. We expect those
responsible to be held accountable for their actions.

I should like to conclude by reiterating that,
notwithstanding the events that led to the current
situation, the Security Council has a responsibility to
ensure that the powers it granted to the Multinational
Force are exercised in a manner consistent with the
decisions of the Council, that Iraq's national resources
and the funds in the Development Fund for Iraq are
used for the benefit of the Iraqi people, and that
international law and human rights are upheld and
respected by all parties.

