Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): Portugal fully associates
itself with the statement that will be delivered by Finland
on behalf of the European Union.

The establishment of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) is the
culmination of a process of self-determination for which
the people of East Timor and Portugal have fought very
hard and for so long. That is why we are extremely
pleased that the people of East T imor have been able to
express their will freely, albeit under extremely difficult
circumstances, and can now start the challenging task of
building their own country. In fact, the establishment of
UNTAET is the best tribute the United Nations could pay
to the suffering and courage of those East Timorese who
have struggled and died for their cause.

Allow me here to pay a special tribute to the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, for his important and
inspirational role in moving the process of
self-determination in East Timor towards its necessary
conclusion.

In establishing the Transitional Administration, due
consideration must be paid to the overwhelming and
unequivocal decision taken by the East Timorese to rule
themselves. A successful Transitional Administration will
require the closest contact and constant coordination
between UNTAET and the East Timorese leadership,
who, in the final analysis, will have to rule their own
country.

Portugal agrees entirely with the Secretary-General
when he states,

"In all elements of the functioning of the
governance and public administration elements of
UNTAET, the United Nations will work on the basis
of the principles of participation and capacity-

 

building. This will involve assigning East Timorese to
positions within the transitional administrative
structures to be established." (8/1999/1024, para. 47)

We sincerely hope that this will allow for the development
of a cadre of well-trained East Timorese capable of
performing the administrative and public service functions
necessary to support an independent East Timor. This is
fundamental and will certainly be one of the elements that
will in the future be used to judge the success of this
operation and the capacity of the Organization to conduct
similar exercises.

East Timor is a Non-Self-Governing Territory whose
privileges and rights accorded to it by Article 73 of the
Charter have been denied. This situation has to be reversed
now.

In this context, we would like to express our support
for the draft resolution to be adopted today, since it
contains what we consider to be the basic requirements for
a successful operation and will set down the foundations for
an independent East Timor.

For its part, Portugal will continue to work together
with the Secretariat to put in place on the ground an
efficient and effective mechanism of coordination that will
reflect its unique legal and political responsibilities.

To this end, and as he requested, we have already
expressed in writing to the Secretary-General our readiness
to support, within our capabilities, each and every
component of UNTAET, both in terms of human and
material resources.

Portugal has identified a number of areas to which it
intends to make specific contributions, as requested by the
United Nations. Since 27 September, the Portuguese
Government has expressed its readiness to contribute
assessment teams to restore basic services in a number of
key sectors. I would like to recall that Portugal has already
contributed to the various trust funds established to support
operations in East Timor and to various humanitarian
assistance initiatives.

In this respect I must single out Australia's courageous
leadership of the International Force, East Timor
(INTERFET), and the outstanding financial contribution of
Japan, without which the successful transition of East
Timor would have been much more arduous.

Our gratitude also goes out to all others who have
contributed to the success of INTERFET, as well as to
the Security Council, which enabled the establishment of
that operation and, now, of UNTAET.

Notwithstanding the remarkable advances the process
of self-determination in East Timor has experienced over
the last few months, it still faces enormous difficulties on
the long road ahead. The guiding lights for the months to
come remain the New York Agreement of 5 May between
Indonesia and Portugal and the relevant resolutions of this
body and the General Assembly. In this context, we
welcome the implementation by the Indonesian People's
Consultative Assembly of article 6 of that Agreement by
unanimously taking the necessary steps to terminate its de
facto links with East Timor. We trust that the newly
elected Government of Indonesia will fully assume
Indonesia's responsibilities in the next stage of this
process.

However, we must remain vigilant. We must ensure
that not only the letter but also the spirit of the
Agreement and of the resolutions is complied with in
practice. To this end, it is absolutely necessary that the
Security Council, first, guarantee that a rapid and
effective transfer of power between INTERFET and
UNTAET takes place without disruption on the ground.

Secondly, the Council must guarantee that the
territorial integrity of East Timor is fully respected.

Thirdly, the Council must guarantee that
humanitarian assistance is distributed to all those in need
without delay, both in East Timor and Indonesia. This
means, of course, free and unimpeded access for all the
humanitarian organizations that will have to conduct those
operations.

Fourthly, the Council must ensure that the security
and safety of refugees in West Timor and other parts of
Indonesia is guaranteed in accordance with international
humanitarian law, and that all refugees who wish to do so
are allowed to return to East Timor as soon as possible,
as established by the proposal presented by the
Government of Indonesia.

Fifthly, the Council must ensure that Indonesia
guarantees that the territory of West Timor is not allowed
to be used by its so-called militias as a platform to
destabilize East Timor. In this regard, allow me to call the
Council's attention to the latest report of INTERFET, in
which it is clearly stated that elements of the Indonesian

 

security forces continue to support the militias and that the
latter have made threats to INTERFET and stated their
intention of controlling the western regencies. These are
worrying developments, and at this moment, when the
Security Council is considering a draft resolution of historic
importance, we think it useful to recall Article 25 of the
Charter of the United Nations, which states that resolutions
of the Security Council are legally binding on all Member
States.

Establishing UNTAET is a fundamental step in the
right direction. The creation of a multidisciplinary force
which includes elements from virtually all main agencies of
the United Nations family is, to us, the right approach. We
sincerely hope that the concerted action of the international
community will help turn East Timor into a beacon of
democracy, rule of law, respect for human rights, tolerance
and prosperity in the region. Of course, for this to be
achieved it must count on the unwavering support of all
Timorese, regardless of their political opinions, in their
cooperation with the United Nations.

In this regard, we consider extremely encouraging the
exemplary and responsible manner in which Mr. Xanana
Gusmao and the National Council of Timorese Resistance
(CNRT) have responded to the crisis. In fact, without the
remarkable restraint displayed by the East Timorese
leadership and the degree of social organization it provided
to the population, the consequences of the crisis would have
been graver still.

I cannot end without expressing the profound
appreciation of the Portuguese Government for the
extraordinary work performed by the personnel of the
United Nations Mission in East Timor (UNAMET) under
the most difficult and stressful of circumstances, in
particular the skilled leadership of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ian Martin.
Their courage and determination at the risk of their own
lives are examples to us all.

I must also reiterate our sincere appreciation for the
work carried out by the Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Jamsheed Marker, and his Deputy,
Mr. Francesc Vendrell.

We look forward to helping East Timor become a land
of life, not of death; of hope, not of despair; of the future,
not of the past. The United Nations has a crucial part to
play in this process of transformation. Our vision of East
Timor is one of an independent country at peace with itself
and its neighbours, and fully integrated into its region. As
always, Portugal stands ready to support this common
endeavour.

