President Fernandez (spoke in Spanish): I have
come with several certainties and several doubts to
participate in this meeting of the Council. I came of
course to vote in favour of resolution 2178 (2014),
which we have just discussed, but also to decisively
and definitively condemn terrorism. My country, the
Argentine Republic, and the United States of America
are the only two countries on the American continent
to have been the object of savage terrorist attacks. In
1992, the Israeli Embassy in Buenos Aires was blown
up, and in 1994 we had the bombing of the Argentine
Jewish Mutual Association (AMIA) headquarters.

That leads me to raise a number of questions.
With everything that is taking place, this phenomenon
that has just appeared, the Islamic State of Iraq and
the Sham (ISIS), was unknown last year. In 1994, it
was said in my country and the world that Hizbullah
had been responsible for bombing AMIA, yet today
Hizbullah is a political party in Lebanon. In 2006, a
special prosecutorial unit was created at the initiative
of former President Ne'stor Kirchner to investigate the
1994 attack. I repeat, the 1994 attack. In other words,
this year marks 20 years since the AMIA attack and the
perpetrators still have not been brought to justice.

After the investigation was conducted, the trial

judge decided to indict eight Iranian citizens who live in
Tehran. After that, between 2007 and 2012, first former
President Nestor Kirchner and then I repeatedly asked
the Islamic Republic of Iran, at every meeting of the
United Nations, to allow us to question the accused. We
even offered alternatives sites, as in the Lockerbie case,
such as a third country where they could be questioned.
Finally, in 2012, the Iranian Chancery proposed abilateral
meeting, and in 2013 a memorandum of understanding
was drawn up to establish judicial cooperation between
both countries on the condition that the Iranian citizens
could be questioned directly by our judge, because
there is no provision in the Argentine legal system for
trial in absentia. The accused must be questioned and
tried in conformity with our Constitution and with
respect for their basic rights. Once that agreement had
been signed, community organizations that had always
insisted that we reach an agreement with the Islamic
Republic of Iran accused us of collaborating with the
Iranians. That led me to wonder whether, when they
sought our help in securing the cooperation of the
Iranian State, they really wanted our assistance or were
looking for a casus belli.

The same holds true in this country, where the
so-called vulture funds undertook an extraordinary
lobbying effort before the American Congress. That
can be verified on the web, where the vulture funds
posted photographs of me and Mr. Ahmadinejad, the
President ofa so-called Islamist terrorist State until last
year, and condemned us for signing a memorandum of
understanding on legal cooperation.

With surprise - not disgust, because nothing that
leads to dialogue can be bad - we learned that, over
the weekend, the Secretary of State of this country met
with his Iranian counterpart in a well-known hotel in
this city to discuss the problem of ISIS and to see what
level of cooperation or progress could be made on the
nuclear issue. Now we know that ISIS is Sunni and those
who govern Iran are Shia. And suddenly I observe a far
friendlier discourse between the two countries, one of
which had been, as recently as last year, accusing us of
consorting with terrorists.

There is nothing wrong with dialogue. We welcome
it. Dialogue among nations is always good. But I still
have certain questions regarding the 1994 attack
and the Al-Qaida attack on the Twin Towers, which
was conceived and carried out by Osama bin Laden,
who did not exactly appear like a mushroom after
rain. Osama Bin Laden was trained by the Taliban to
confront Russia during the Cold War. As I like to say,
Afghanistan is the one country from which no one but
Alexander the Great has gotten out alive. Later there
was the emergence of the famous Arab Spring, in
which everyone was apparently a freedom fighter and
following which new democracies were going to arise.
As it turns out, many of those freedom fighters were
fundamentalists who had received military training,
and who today are fighting under ISIS and recruiting
young people.

I should like to highlight for the Council that I
also have been threatened by ISIS personally, and my
country's law-enforcement authorities are investigating.
I do not really believe that ISIS is very concerned
about the President of the Argentine Republic - I
honestly believe that. The reasons they have given for
threatening me are because of my friendship with Pope
Francis and the fact that I recognize and advocate for
two States, the State of Palestine and the State of Israel,
living peaceably side by side.

I have jotted down some questions that have
occurred to me. In the midst of all this, along came
Saddam Hussein with chemical weapons in Iraq, and a
war was waged against him. We were eventually rid of
Saddam Hussein, but then the situation in Iraq became
increasingly complicated. It seems the world is itself
getting more and more complicated. Although under
the scenario we faced last year it seemed that the most
important thing was Iran and its nuclear threat, that
now seems not to be the case i with ISIS seemingly
having taken its place. We do not know who buys the oil
from these new terrorists, nor who sells them weapons
or trains them. But they obviously have financial
resources. They have weapons. They have means of
dissemination that are really cinematographic. That
leads me to wonder about what is happening, and
basically about what we must do to effectively combat
terrorism. As to a military response, no one doubts that
one has to defend oneself in the face of aggression.
But it is also clear that the way in which we have been
fighting terrorism has been inadequate. The situation is
becoming more complicated all the time, and there are
ever more increasingly violent and powerful groups.

Logic dictates that ifI were looking into a given
methodology to address a problem and, rather than
disappearing or diminishing, the problem grew and
became worse, then I at least would need to revise my
approach because something was not working well. I
am not saying that I have the revealed truth about what
we need to do, nor that I have any absolute certainty
about how we have to do it. What I do know, however, is
that there is an old saying in my country: "The only thing
that one cannot do with cannibals is to eat them up".

It seems to me that it is more important that we
understand that in the logic of terrorism the aim is to
achieve a reaction equivalent in violence and in attack to
justify this continuous blood debt: for every one killed,
they kill two, for every two, three, and for every three,
four. Moreover, this is taking place in the context of
the Middle East, where the State of Palestine is still not
recognized, where we have seen the disproportionate
use of force against the civilian population in Palestine
and where we have not seen fall any of the leaders who
launched rockets at the other side. On the contrary, we

have seen innocent children, women and the elderly
die. That continues to increasingly fuel these groups.

Frankly speaking, beyond resolution 2178 (2014),
which we agree with, voted for and want to help
implement, I think it would be false and cynical of me
to tell the Council that we have the right methods. I
think the situation in the Middle East absolutely tends
towards becoming more complicated.

Last November in St. Petersburg - less than a
year ago - as a member of the Group of 20 we were
contemplating the possibility that the great enemy was
in fact the Government of Syria, and that those who
were fighting Syria were freedom fighters. We have now
found out that many of those same freedom fighters are
now part of ISIS. Who was it, then, who were nurturing
the opposition, giving them weapons and resources as
freedom fighters? I therefore think we - and certainly
those who have much more information available to
them than I do as President of Argentina - need to
reconsider a lot of things.

Members will know that my country does not
produce or sell weapons. We have to buy oil, as we lack
energy resources - although we have a large deposit
that in the future will turn us into major producers.
I do not know whether that is a good thing or not, as
countries that do have oil and gas also seem to have
major problems. But the truth is that we are a country
that does not produce weapons, we are a country that
buys energy, and we are a country that does not have
all the intelligence that the great Powers have. But I
often think that, in addition to having information, it
is necessary to understand what is happening in each
society and in each population, to try to see what the
most appropriate tools are to seriously combat terrorism.
It would not be unusual at all if in the coming year
ISIS disappeared and some other group with another
strange name and with still more virulent and violent
propensities came into being - and, ultimately, we did
nothing but expound on it.

In conclusion, I believe that respect for human
rights is a key issue in this struggle. I say that from
the perspective of a country that suffered from a
genocidal dictatorship unprecedented in history. But
also unprecedented was the justice carried out. There
was no need for a Nuremberg tribunal or to judge the
dictators at the Court in The Hague. Argentina's own
judicial system tried and convicted those who had
been responsible - including for the deaths of French
citizens, such as the French nuns, and the Swedish
women who were also disappeared. I therefore think
we have some precedent to be able to talk about the
need for this struggle to be carried out within a legal
framework that includes respect for human rights, so
that we do not continue feeding the beast in a perpetual
cycle.

