Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): I have had the
honour to chair the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) since the beginning of 2011. It
gives me great pleasure to brief the Security Council
on the work of the Committee since the previous
briefing, held in November last year (see S/PV.6658).

The Committee continues to be guided in its work
by the relevant Security Council resolutions, especially
resolutions 1373 (2001), 1624 (2005) and 1963 (2010),
and to play a critical role in promoting and facilitating
their implementation.

I would like to highlight here the publication in
January of the global survey of the implementation of
resolution 1624 (2005) by Member States, prepared by
the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED) pursuant to the provisions of
resolution 1963 (2010). As members will recall,
resolution 1624 (2005) addresses the critical but
complex issues of prohibiting incitement to commit
acts of terrorism and countering incitement motivated
by extremism and intolerance, including through the
promotion of dialogue and understanding among
civilizations.

The survey considers the status of
implementation of the resolution by geographical
region and by theme, identifies gaps in implementation,
and suggests new, practical approaches to achieving the
goals set forth in the resolution. In particular, the
survey highlights the human rights challenges involved
in seeking to prevent genuine incitement while not
infringing upon the fundamental rights to freedom of
expression and freedom of belief. The survey notes the
need to pay more attention, within a human rights
framework, to Internet and other social-media content
that is considered to be incitement. It also highlights
the importance of giving victims of terrorism, and civil
society more generally, a role in efforts to counter
incitement motivated by extremism and intolerance.

The elements of this year's programme of work
include organizing another special meeting, open to the
wider membership, that will focus on the key aspects
of the Committee's implementation of its mandate. The
special meeting will provide a further opportunity for
Counter-Terrorism Committee members and the rest of
the United Nations membership to discuss counter-
terrorism issues of priority concern. The Committee
has not yet agreed on the agenda or timing for the
special meeting.

The Committee is also scheduled to conduct an
interim review of CTED by 30 June, in accordance
with resolution 1963 (2010). The Committee will also
explore the possibility of collaborating with the Inter-
Parliamentary Union, identifying available practices,
elements and good standards that could help Member
States to develop their respective comprehensive and
integrated counter-terrorism strategies in accordance
with resolution 1963 (2010), and will focus on further
improving the format of the global surveys on the
implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624
(2005). The Committee is also in the process of
reviewing the format of the preliminary implementation
assessment in order to enhance its usefulness as a
diagnostic tool. In that regard, all United Nations
Member States have their own preliminary
implementation assessments, and the stocktaking of
their country counter-terrorism profiles is being carried
out by CTED.

The Committee continues to focus on region-
specific discussions and on issues identified in the
12-33504
2011 global survey. The Committee also continues to
organize and participate in discussions and workshops
on thematic issues. Some of the major issues
considered by the Committee during the past six
months include countering incitement to terrorism by
preventing the subversion of educational, cultural and
religious institutions; terrorism prevention and
countering incitement to terrorism through the Internet;
and preventing the abuse of non-profit organizations
for terrorism-financing purposes. The Committee also
held a discussion on developments in the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) in West
Africa.

As part of its efforts to enhance its interaction
with international and regional organizations and
United Nations entities, the Committee has also heard
briefings on counter-terrorism by Mr. Alexey Kuzyura,
Chairperson of the Working Group of the Meeting of
Heads of Special Services, Security Agencies and Law
Enforcement Organizations on counter-terrorism; by
the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation Counter-
Terrorism Task Force; and the Asia/Pacific Group on
Money Laundering.

CTED has also been active in conducting a
number of workshops on specific topics aimed at a
specific regional audience. Important workshops
organized during this period include the subregional
workshop for South and South-East Asian States on
controlling the physical cross-border transportation of
cash and bearer-negotiable instruments, held in Kuala
Lumpur, Malaysia, in November 2011; the first of a
series of around six regional workshops and
consultations on the implementation of resolution 1624
(2005), held for East African States in Nairobi in late
November 2011; the third regional workshop on
protecting the non-profit sector from abuse by terrorist
financers, held in Nairobi for countries of East Africa
in late February; and the fifth regional workshop for
police officers and prosecutors of South Asia, held in
March in New Delhi.

Major forthcoming events include a regional
workshop on controlling the cross-border movement of
bearer-negotiable instruments, scheduled for 14 to
19 May in Tonga; the third seminar for counter-
terrorism practitioners, scheduled for June in Algiers;
the regional workshop on the implementation of
resolution 1624 (2005), scheduled for July in Morocco;
and the sixth regional workshop for police officers,
prosecutors and judges in South Asia on effectively
countering terrorism, scheduled for later this year in
Islamabad.

In addition, the Committee and CTED continue to
enhance their ongoing dialogue with Member States,
donors and beneficiaries on the facilitation of technical
assistance for capacity-building at the national and
subregional levels. Furthermore, the Committee and
CTED will continue to pay close attention to the
question of respect for human rights and the rule of law
in the counter-terrorism measures taken by States, in
accordance with the relevant mandates conferred by
the Security Council.

During the reporting period, the Committee and
CTED organized a briefing for the wider membership
on recent developments in their work. Member States
were also invited to a regional presentation on
developments in the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001) in West Africa, held on the same occasion. The
Committee and CTED continue to work closely with
the relevant working groups of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force, United Nations Centre for
Counter-Terrorism and the Global Counter-Terrorism
Forum in order to support, coordinate and complement
one another's counter-terrorism endeavours. I attach
high priority to enhancing transparency and public
outreach and to strengthening cooperation with
international, regional and subregional organizations in
the work of the Committee.

In conclusion, the Committee will continue to
play a critical role in the global fight against terrorism
and strive to do so in a more strategic and transparent
manner so that it can more effectively contribute to the
global counter-terrorism effort within the scope of its
mandate. I would like to conclude by expressing my
sincere appreciation to Mr. Mike Smith, Executive
Director of CTED, and to his team for their excellent
work on the Committee's behalf, and to thank the
Secretariat for its continued support.

I would now like to make a brief statement in my
national capacity.

The Committees established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), 1373 (2001)
and 1540 (2004) should continue to further strengthen
their ongoing efforts in the fight against terrorism.
India fully supports all efforts that strengthen
international and regional cooperation and, most
importantly, help ensure the effective implementation
of relevant Security Council resolutions, including
1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005), and a comprehensive
and integrated implementation of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.

The outcome document adopted by the Counter-
Terrorism Committee at its special meeting, held on
28 September 2011, is a major landmark in providing
strategic direction to the work of the Committee aimed
at strengthening the capacity of States in their counter-
terrorism efforts. It raises the benchmark in the fight
against terrorism to a higher level. It urges all Member
States to ensure zero tolerance towards terrorism and to
take urgent action to prevent and combat terrorism in
all its forms and manifestations through the full and
effective implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) and
other relevant international instruments. We urge all
United Nations Member States to strive to implement
that approach in their counter-terrorism efforts.

Since the splitting of the 1267 sanctions regime
in June 2011, it has been a challenging period for the
1267 Committee and the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011) in adjusting to the
revised mandates. The Monitoring Team needs to put
greater focus on comprehensively and objectively
examining the linkages between Al-Qaida and the
Taliban, which pose a serious threat to international
peace and security.

It is critical that all sanctions regimes established
by the Security Council ensure swift, fair and
transparent procedures in their decision-making. The
processes of listing and de-listing need to be guided by
the same set of principles: fairness, credibility and
transparency.

Concerning the 1540 Committee, India fully
shares international concerns over the serious threat
posed by nuclear terrorism and clandestine
proliferation to international security. We are fully
cognizant of the catastrophic dangers that transfers of
weapons of mass destruction (WMD) to non-State
actors and terrorists could entail. The international
community must join hands to eliminate the risks
relating to sensitive materials and technologies falling
into the hands of terrorists and non-State actors. The
international response to the threat needs to be national,
as well as multilateral and global. India has an
unwavering commitment to global efforts for
preventing the proliferation of WMDs and their means
of delivery. We support the work of the 1540
Committee in accordance with its mandate. We propose
to host a workshop of the Committee later this year.

In conclusion, we need greater international,
regional and subregional cooperation in our counter-
terrorism efforts. International cooperation and
concerted action against terrorists and their sponsors,
including the complete dismantling of terrorist safe
havens, sanctuaries, training grounds and financial and
ideological support structures are critical imperatives
for defeating the scourge of terrorism.

Our collective endeavour should be to enhance
coherence and synergy among different counter-
terrorism structures that are dealing with the issue of
terrorism within the United Nations. In this context, we
welcome the recent initiative of the Secretary-General
for Member States to consider the creation of the post
of United Nations counter-terrorism coordinator, and
express our willingness to fully engage in all
deliberations aimed at further improving the cross-
institutional coherence and effectiveness of United
Nations counter-terrorism efforts. We need to bear in
mind that success in the implementation of counter-
terrorism measures not only requires the fullest
cooperative and collective effort by all Member States,
but also their fullest participation in processes that
affect the collective security of all the nations equally.

