Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation would like to thank the Secretary-
General for once again submitting a report on Africa and
for the statement he made this morning. I would also like
to thank Mr. Salim A. Salim, Secretary-General of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) and the
representative of Algeria, whose President is the current
Chairman of the OAU, for attending today's meeting and
for their statements.

At the same time, we would like to express our
appreciation to you, Mr. Wim Kok, the Prime Minister of
the Netherlands, for having come here to preside over
today's meeting, and to the Permanent Mission of the
Netherlands for its efforts in arranging this meeting.

We also welcome the presence at today's meeting of
Ministers from many countries.

The Secretary-General's report on Africa last year
had strong repercussions in the international community,
arousing the concern and drawing the attention of
countries around the world and relevant international
organizations, especially United Nations bodies, to the
question of Africa. Last year, the Security Council held
an open debate devoted to this issue, established an ad
hoc Working Group and adopted a number of resolutions
and presidential statements. Today, it is of great
significance that we are here once again to discuss the
situation in Africa and to deliberate on the progress report
prepared by the Secretary-General.

We appreciate the Secretary-General's report, which
presents in meticulous detail and with incisive analysis
the plans laid down, the work done and the achievements
made by the United Nations system over the past year in
accordance with the Secretary-General's recommendations
in his previous report. We take this opportunity to thank
the Secretary-General and the relevant United Nations
bodies for their efforts to resolve the problems of Africa.

In the year since the Secretary-General's last report
on Africa was issued, the African continent has

 

experienced relative overall stability, continued economic
growth, further progress in the democratization process and
increased respect for human rights. Peace agreements were
signed by the parties to the conflicts in Sierra Leone and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. These are all
positive developments. However, we must not fail to see at
the same time that the African continent is still the least
developed region of the world, overwhelmed by recurrent
conflicts and huge numbers of refugees. The conflicts are
deep-rooted and their causes include internal and external
factors alike. The African issues do not lend themselves to
easy solutions and represent a daunting challenge to the
international community. I should now like to make a few
observations on how the international community should
proceed on this question.

First, the international community should pay adequate
attention to Africa from a strategic vantage point. There are
more than 50 countries on the African continent. They
compromise approximately half the membership of the
Non-Aligned Movement and nearly one third of United
Nations membership. They are an important force for world
peace. Africa has a time-honoured history and rich culture.
The African people are hard-working and intelligent. The
continent is brimming with vitality. With its vast area and
abundant resources, Africa is a huge market with unlimited
economic potential. It is an integral part of world economic
development. With the acceleration of globalization, the
interests of countries around the world are linked more
closely than ever. Without stability and prosperity on the
African continent, there will be no peace or development in
the world. Thus, to ensure world peace and development,
it is vital to help African countries maintain stability and
pursue development. The international community should
treat Africa as an equal development partner and give
energetic support and assistance to African countries in
their endeavours.

Secondly, the international community should create
a favourable external environment for Africa so that it may
enjoy stability and sustained development. Towards this
end, we call for the early establishment of a just and
reasonable new international political and economic order.
Currently, a small number of big and rich countries
monopolize world affairs and dominate the international
political and economic order. This state of affairs, which
runs contrary to the prevalent forces of our times -
multipolarization and globalization - does not reflect the
needs of developing countries or help their development.
For too long, Africa has been denied due concern and
attention in international affairs and relegated to the lowest
level of the international division of labour. Worse still,
buffeted by the waves of globalization, Africa is in
danger of being marginalized. If this situation is not
reversed, there will be no peace or development in Africa
to talk about.

Thirdly, the international community should respect
the choices made by African countries themselves. The
world is diverse, particularly on the African continent.
Due to varying national conditions, similar issues may
have different manifestations in different countries and at
different times. Therefore, solutions should be tailor-made
instead of uniform. The African people themselves best
understand their situation and real needs. Only they can
choose their path of development in the light of their
specific situation. In its efforts to help Africa, the
international community must take into account the
specific conditions and needs of the African countries and
peoples. Uniform models imposed from without do not
necessarily fit the actual conditions of the African
countries. The imposition of one set model and the
attachment of political conditions to assistance would not
really help African countries to escape their predicament.

Fourthly, the international community should give
vigorous support to the efforts of regional organizations
in Africa. In recent decades, regional organizations in
Africa, such as the OAU, have played fundamental and
important roles in safeguarding peace and stability on the
continent and promoting regional cooperation and
development. At its thirty-fifth Summit, held in Algeria
this year, the OAU reiterated the important principles of
the African charter and adopted a series of resolutions to
settle regional conflicts and to promote economic
cooperation in Africa. This reflected the high hopes of
African States for unity and renewal. It was an important
event in OAU history.

In recent years, such regional organizations as the
Economic Community of West African States, the
Southern African Development Community and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development have
become increasingly active. Committed to settling
conflicts and pushing for economic integration in their
respective regions, they have scored stunning successes.
Their work enjoys the wide support of African countries
and peoples and testifies to the strong desire of African
countries to join forces in the pursuit of self-reliance and
renewal. The international community should spare no
effort in supporting such endeavours on the part of
African countries. In this connection, we call on the
international community further to support and cooperate
with regional organizations in conflict prevention and

 

settlement and to provide necessary assistance in cash and
in kind, without political conditions, to security and
peacekeeping mechanisms in Africa.

Fifthly, the international community should take
concrete and meaningful action to help African countries in
their development endeavours. Africa is entering a new
historical period characterized by the desire for peace and
the pursuit of growth and progress. More than ever, it needs
the support and assistance of the international community.
We call on countries around the world, especially
developed countries, to help Africa by making good on
their commitments to providing official development aid,
reducing the debt burden of African countries and
withdrawing some of their own trade barriers. Moreover,
the United Nations agencies and the Bretton Woods
institutions should all play even more active roles. We
believe that the Secretary-General's progress report should
not be taken as a signal to end the implementation of his
recommendations. On the contrary, it marks the beginning
of the long road that the international community will have
to travel.

China has always given high priority to the issues of
Africa, supported Africa and had friendly relations and
close cooperation with the vast number of African
countries. China is heartened to see the positive
developments in recent years on the African continent and
is disturbed by the continuing chaos and conflicts. We are
deeply concerned by the damage done to African countries
and the sufferings of the African people in conflicts, and
we sympathize with them. We call upon the conflicting
parties in Africa to put the fundamental interest of their
country and people above everything else, and to work to
solve their disputes and settle their conflicts through
peaceful negotiations and other political means, in the spirit
of African unity, so that peace and stability will be brought
to the African continent soon.

China has always supported the legitimate demands
and reasonable propositions of the African countries, as
well as their efforts for the maintenance of political stability
and the promotion of economic growth. We have
participated actively in discussions at the United Nations on
the question of Africa and pushed for the settlement of hot-
spot issues; we have supported United Nations
peacekeeping missions in Africa and participated in some
of them. At the same time, we are committed to
strengthening our economic cooperation and trade relations
with African countries, and we have offered various kinds
of assistance to African countries, without attaching any
conditions. In the ever-changing world, we are willing to
work together with African countries to search for new
ways and areas for cooperation so as to inject new vitality
into our friendly relations.

Africa is a continent of hope. We firmly believe that,
with the African countries making their own efforts and
the international community offering necessary assistance,
this continent will surely see an ultimate realization of
peace, stability and sustained development. We hope that
the international community and the African people will
work in concert, grasp the opportunities, face up to the
challenges and stride hand in hand towards the beautiful
future of Africa in the new millennium.

