Mr. Lavald (Norway): As stated in the Secretary-
General's report on children and armed conflict
(S/2003/1053), important advances have been made in
the efforts to ensure more effective protection of
children exposed to armed conflict in the course of the
past few years. Yet, the reality on the ground is that, in
many conflict situations worldwide, children continue
to be abused on a massive and appalling scale.

Against that backdrop, we welcome the increased
attention being paid to children's rights and the
situation of children in conflicts. In our View, it is
especially important that the challenge of protecting
civilians in armed conflict, in particular children, takes
its rightful place as an integral part of all relevant
matters dealt with by the Security Council. We
welcome the progressive engagement of the Council.
The four resolutions devoted to the issue of war-
affected children are milestones in our efforts to
safeguard children's rights in armed conflict, and we
must ensure their effective follow-up and
implementation.

We are deeply concerned about the situation in
northern Uganda, where children are being abducted
and recruited as soldiers in large numbers. Our hope is
that a peace agreement between the Sudanese
Government and the Sudan People's Liberation
Movement may open a window of opportunity to solve
this issue. We commend and support recent initiatives
by the Emergency Relief Coordinator to bring the
situation in northern Uganda to the attention of the
international community.

Many children who have experienced armed
conflict have been traumatized emotionally and
physically. Not least girls, who are especially
vulnerable to sexual and gender-based violence. We
must therefore take special account of children's needs
in peace operations and negotiations. The rehabilitation
of war-affected children through trauma counselling,
health services and schooling is important in terms of
providing a future for those children. In Norway's
view, it is therefore important to actively support
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programmes that address those challenges.

Experience has shown that education, as a
fundamental element in children's development, can
prevent children from being used for fighting or other
military purposes. We are pleased to note that DDR
programmes have become an integral part of
peacekeeping operations, but we are concerned that the
specific needs of child soldiers have not yet been
sufficiently addressed within the overall planning and
implementation of those programmes. We therefore
welcome the suggestion for an assessment of best
practices, as referred to in the Secretary-General's
report.

We also welcome the inclusion of child protection
advisers in the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone,
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United Nations
Mission in Cote d'Ivoire and the United Nations
Mission in Angola. It is important that we now assess
the working methods and the efforts made by those
advisers in order to maximize the effect derived from
best practices. Based on that assessment we should
consider the inclusion of child protection advisers in all
peacekeeping operations.

We welcome as highly appropriate the practice of
listing parties to armed conflict that recruit or use
children in situations of armed conflict. We call for the
list to be updated and circulated regularly. We are also
of the opinion that one should consider expanding the
list to cover other forms of egregious violations and
abuses against children in situations of armed conflict.

The widespread availability of modern
lightweight weapons enables children to become
efficient soldiers in combat. We must therefore
redouble our efforts to establish more efficient
mechanisms to reduce easy access to small arms.

Those who are responsible for exploiting children
during conflict should not enjoy impunity. The Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court classifies
the enlistment and use of children under age 15 in
hostilities, international attacks on hospitals and
schools, rape and other grave acts of sexual violence
against children as war crimes. We urge those States
that have not yet done so to ratify the Rome Statute at
the earliest possible date.

The best way of protecting children is to prevent
armed conflict from breaking out in the first place.
That will require fundamental social change in many
countries. It will require action against poverty, a
breeding ground for human rights violations, that also
gives rise to conflicts and child abuse. Conflicts, in
turn, reinforce poverty. Therefore, we must intensify
our efforts to invest in conflict prevention,
humanitarian assistance, peace-building and long-term
development cooperation. In short, we must make sure
that children in conflict areas have a viable alternative
to military life.

