Ms. King (Australia): I would like to thank
President Meron and President Joensen and Prosecutor
Brammertz and Prosecutor Jallow for their thoughtful
and informative briefings. I would like to acknowledge
their commitment to the cause of international criminal
justice. Their effective leadership of the Tribunals that
we are discussing today makes a critical contribution
to that cause.

This meeting provides us with a timely opportunity
to reaffirm the international community's support for
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) and for the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals and to acknowledge
their vital contribution to international criminal
accountability.

Established in response to some of the worst
atrocities the international community had witnessed
since the Second World War, both the ICTY and the
ICTR were products ofa firm conviction, on behalfofthe
Council and also the broader international community,
that perpetrators of serious international crimes must
be held to account for their actions, regardless of rank
or position.

Over the past 20 years, the ICTY and ICTR have
played a historic role in the fight against impunity, as
was recognized by the Council in resolution 2150 (2014),
adopted by consensus in April. The groundbreaking
jurisprudence produced by the ICTY and the ICTR
has been particularly significant, including its
contribution to the understanding of sexual Violence
under international criminal law. Both the ICTY and
ICTR recognize that sexual violence can constitute
war crimes, crimes against humanity and a constituted
act of genocide. That has had a lasting impact on
understandings of and responses to sexual violence
in situations of armed conflict. We also commend the
efforts of both Tribunals to share lessons learned and
best practices in the investigation and prosecution of
serious international crimes with national authorities
and the broader international community, including the
International Criminal Court.

We welcome the progress reported this morning
towards completion of the Tribunals' mandates,
including President Joensen's advice that the huge task
oftransferring the ICTR's archives to the Mechanism is
on track to be completed by the end of this year and that
only one appeal in the Nyiramasuhuko er al. ("Butare")
case is likely to extend into 2015. Similarly, we welcome
President Meron's advice on the delivery of two ICTY
Appeals Chamber judgements earlier this year and
we note his advice of expected delays in some other
appeals. We appreciate the ongoing crucial support for
the Tribunals from the Governments of the Netherlands
and Tanzania and note that the agreement between the
United Nations and Tanzania for the Arusha branch
of the Mechanism's headquarters has just entered into
force.

We share the ICTR's concern about the lack of
progress with relocating the nine acquitted and three
convicted and released persons still residing in safe
houses in Arusha. We appreciate the concerted efforts
of the President and Registrar to reach out to States
to assist. We urge all Member States to cooperate
with the ICTR on that matter and we support further
consideration of how the Council can best support the
ICTR's efforts. Like others, we highlight the Council's
renewed call in resolution 2150 (2014) for Member
States to intensify cooperation with the Mechanism and
with the Rwanda authorities to apprehend the remaining
nine ICTR fugitives.

Notwithstanding the progress reported today, it is
clear that the Tribunals will need to continue working
beyond 2014, with some very important cases still before
the ICTY. The continued support and cooperation of
the international community, including by ensuring
that the Tribunals have adequate resources, is essential
to ensuring that the Tribunals can achieve the goals
the Council has set for them and to secure their lasting
legacy.

The Tribunals established by the Security Council
we are discussing here today have been instrumental in
the recovery process, following the devastating events in
19905 in both the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda. They
demonstrate that the Council's role in ending impunity,
including through its power to refer situations to the
International Criminal Court, is crucial. The current
commemoration of the twentieth anniversary of the
Rwandan genocide must remain foremost in our minds
as we consider and respond to the crises we face today.
The devastating impact of the genocide should serve as
a continual reminder of the consequences we may face
ifthe Council fails to act to prevent mass atrocities. As
we have heard this morning, ensuring accountability
is a key element in restoring peace and stability. It is
therefore clear that justice and accountability must play
a central role in the Council's work.

Tragically, the Council's recent failure to exercise
that responsibility in relation to Syria shows that
we are not applying the clear lessons of history
either consistently or justly. When presented with
evidence that mass atrocities are being committed,
the international community must unite in its message
to those responsible that they will be held to account.
More importantly, the Council has the authority to
ensure that to be the case, and it should live up to its
responsibility to use that authority.

