Mr. Al-Hadidi (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I wish to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I wish you success in carrying out your
task. I would also like to thank the Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation, Ambassador
Lavrov, for his skilful and successful stewardship of
the Council in the past month, especially given the
great turmoil in the Middle East.

About two weeks ago, a the Security Council
adopted resolution 1405 (2002) regarding the situation
in the occupied Palestinian territories, especially the
tragic humanitarian situation in Jenin, which was
precipitated by Israel's serious breach of international
humanitarian law, including the Geneva Convention
Relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Times
of War and other instruments relative to conditions of
military occupation. That resolution was adopted not in
a vacuum. Rather, it was passed against the backdrop
of the overwhelming images, seen by the entire world,
of widespread physical destruction and massive killing
that did not discriminate between children, the elderly,
civilian women and men and combatants.

As members may recall, the Security Council
requested the Secretary-General to gather accurate
information regarding the events that took place in the
Jenin refugee camp through a fact-finding team. That
request came after assurances by the Government of
Israel that it had nothing to hide and that it would
welcome any fact-finding mission established by the
Secretary-General to ascertain exactly what happened
there.

We thank the Secretary-General for shouldering
his responsibilities and for his painstaking efforts to
put together a team whose members are well-known for
their integrity, impartiality and expertise in this regard.
The Secretary-General also set out parameters for the
team's work, in accordance with the mandate given by
the Security Council and in keeping with international
fact-finding mechanisms.

Despite the tremendous amount of preparatory
work done by the Secretary-General and intensive
diplomatic contacts with the Israeli leadership, it has
been clear from the beginning that Israel had no
intention of cooperating with that team or of
facilitating its work. Israel has set conditions and
thrown up various obstacles that make clear the
following.

First, Israel does not want to see an impartial and
accurate report describing exactly what happened in the
Jenin refugee camp, because such a report would make
the Israeli army, soldiers and officers accountable to
the international community for their criminal acts.
Israel would be held accountable under international
legal systems for having acted in contravention of
mandatory international legal standards, including
those governing armed conflict and human rights.

Secondly, it was Israel's intent - if it failed to
set conditions on the composition and the work of the
team - to abort the mission, despite the repercussions
and implications of Israel's rejection of the mission.
That rejection has included blocking the
implementation of a Security Council resolution
sponsored by the United States that supported the fact-
finding mission.

The Council has before it a letter from the
Secretary-General in which he makes clear that, as a
result of the position of the Israeli Government, he has
been unable to complete the task entrusted to him. The
Secretary-General advises the Council, at the end of his
letter, that, in the absence of a fact-finding mission, a
shadow of doubt will continue to exist with respect to
what really happened in Jenin.

The Government of the Hashemite Kingdom of
Jordan supports the efforts of the Secretary-General to
implement resolution 1405 (2002) and endorses the
contents of his letter to the Council with respect to the
reasons that forced him to disband the fact-finding
mission. We agree with his views on the need to pursue
efforts related to sending such a mission to Jenin.

We therefore call on the Security Council to fulfil
its responsibilities and to respect its own resolutions.
We call on it also not to reverse itself in the face of
blatant Israeli intransigence and to refrain from
shirking its international obligations, thus projecting
the image that Israel and its institutions are above the
law.

It is our hope that the Council will realize that the
entire world is aware that it is applying a double
standard. Indeed, on the one hand the Council tolerates
Israel's flouting of its resolutions, while on the other
demanding - as it has done for more than 11 years -
that Iraq respect them, using force against it and
maintaining the harshest economic sanctions in recent
history against that country.

Today the credibility of the Council is at stake.
The Government of Jordan calls on the Council to
adopt a resolution supporting the Secretary-General's
efforts to see that a fact-finding mission to Jenin is
carried out in order to determine what really happened
there. We maintain that this approach is the only way to
preserve the dignity of the Council in the face of
Israel's continuing rejection of its resolutions.

