Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I thank Under-
Secretary-General Le Roy and the Chairman of the
Secretary-General's Panel on the Referenda in the
Sudan, His Excellency President Benjamin Mkapa, for
their comprehensive briefings. I also thank the
representatives of the Government of the Sudan,
Mr. Mutrif Siddiq, and of the Sudan People's
Liberation Movement, Mr. Pagan Amum, for their
statements.

The full implementation of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement (CPA) remains key to peace and
stability in the Sudan and the whole region. There have
been important achievements since the signing of the
CPA, and we commend the parties on those aspects of
the Agreement that have been implemented to date.
Uganda welcomes the commitments made by the
parties to resolve the outstanding issues. It is essential
that those issues - especially Abyei - be resolved for
the sake of peace, security and stability in the Sudan.

One issue that requires continued leadership is
ensuring that the referendum in Southern Sudan is held
on time and is conducted in a free and fair atmosphere
and that the outcome credible and respected. We
welcome the continued commitments expressed by the
parties to holding the referendum and to respecting the
results.

We welcome the successful conclusion of voter
registration on 8 December. We were encouraged by
the high turnout of eligible voters for registration. We
encourage the Referendum Commission to ensure that
other steps in the process are carried out in a timely
and transparent manner.

Uganda considers it essential that a workable
agreement be reached on post-referendum
arrangements. In that regard, we commend the African
Union High-Level Implementation Panel, under the
chairmanship of His Excellency President Mbeki, for
its work. The Panel's facilitation of the negotiations
remains important for their successful and timely
completion.

The support of the international community
remains crucial during this period. The region is
committed to supporting the parties. The recent summit
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), held on 23 November in Addis Ababa,
reiterated the commitment of IGAD member States to
support the full implementation of the CPA, but it also
emphasized the need for continued support of the
Sudan during the post-referendum period for peace,
stability, democracy and development in the Sudan.

Finally, Uganda appreciates the work of the
Secretary-General's Panel on Referenda in the Sudan,
led by President Mkapa, and we also commend the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan for the good work
done in the Sudan.

