Mr. Fonseca (Brazil): I wish to associate my
delegation with the deeply felt sentiment of sympathy and
condolences that you, Mr. President, have expressed to the
families of the United Nations personnel lost in the tragic
accident that occurred in Kosovo.

I wish to thank the Members of the Bosnian
Presidency for their presence here today and for the
statements we have heard in this historic meeting of the
Security Council. Let me also join other delegations in
expressing our appreciation to the delegation of Slovenia
for convening this meeting. We welcome your presence
today, Mr. President, which shows not only the
engagement of Slovenia on this issue, but also the
permanent dedication of Slovenian diplomacy to the cause
of peace and stability in the international order.

It is indeed very useful for the United Nations
membership to engage in a debate that clearly shows that
this Organization continues to be interested in the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In recent weeks the
Council has heard briefings on Bosnia by the Secretary-
General, his Special Representative and the High
Representative. They have all indicated that the situation
in Bosnia is still very difficult.

Despite all obstacles, the Council has insisted that
everything must be done not to allow the progress already
achieved to be reversed. It is important to note that much
of what has already been achieved in Bosnia counted on
the indispensable support of the Presidency. I will not
refer to specific achievements. Suffice it to stress that the
present status of Bosnia as a sovereign State relies very
much on the Presidency - as the representation of
Bosnia's diversity - to consolidate self-sustaining
stability.

The Presidency's commitment to the Dayton/Paris
Peace Accords and to the functioning of State institutions
should also be commended. When the international
community looks for indigenous moral and political
authority in Bosnia to build a truly democratic and
multicultural society, it is to the Presidency that it turns.
This brings to the Presidency not only a special place in
the history of its country, but also an enormous
responsibility.

The Secretary-General reported weeks ago an
improvement in the level of understanding among
Bosnian leaders, and the mere presence of the Members
of the Presidency here is in itself progress that deserves
to be registered.

But still much remains to be done. This open format
helps confirm that the United Nations is concerned with
the implementation of the Peace Agreements. Here I wish
to put on record a word of recognition for the work of
Ambassador Holbrooke with regard to Bosnia. His
dedication and personal efforts in helping build a viable
future for Bosnia are beginning to bear fruits.

 

Brazil hopes that United Nations efforts in Bosnia will
be matched by a demonstration of political will by the
leadership of all ethnic communities in Bosnia. It is thus
essential that the people of Bosnia, inspired by their
leaders, do their part in speeding up the transformation of
the country.

It is important that we do not overlook the words of
the High Representative concerning the existence of a
culture of dependency in Bosnia. In this regard, we
recognize the importance of the concept of ownership, and
we hope that it will be fully incorporated by the Bosnian
leaders.

The international community is very much involved in
Bosnia, but it cannot bear the responsibility for all the
country's affairs. We are sure that the Bosnian leaders and
the people of Bosnia will put the collective interest first,
displaying behaviour and responsibility compatible with
their ambitions of building a State out of a divided country.
In this respect, the adoption of the New York Declaration
can be seen as yet another milestone on the road towards
consolidation of a truly single State with common
institutions. The creation of a State border service will
definitely help consolidate the notion of statehood.

Economic recovery is another foundation of the road
that will lead Bosnia progressively closer to an irreversible
and self-sustaining peace. Stability is essential to creating
an environment conducive to private investment.

In conclusion, I would echo the prevailing feeling that
this debate bears a message of perseverance and
determination. We share in the appeals made today for the
leaders to redouble their efforts in order to create a viable
society based on multi-ethnicity and diversity. It is our
conviction that only by the continued and unshaken
commitment to the cause of tolerance will the ideals of a
prosperous and peaceful Bosnia prevail.

