Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): My delegation too
wishes to thank Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe
for presenting the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2008/628). We also thank the Permanent
Representative of Brazil, Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti,
for briefing the Council on recent developments as
they relate to the activities of the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNOGBIS) and of the country-specific configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission.

South Africa is pleased that, despite the recent
political developments in Guinea-Bissau - that is, the
tension among the members of the Political and
Government Stability Pact and within the African Party
for the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde
(PAIGC), reports of an attempted coup d'etat, the
dissolution of parliament and the setting up of a new
caretaker Government - all those things have not
upset the political situation in Guinea-Bissau, which in
fact did not erupt into any political violence. That
continuity, we believe, is a positive sign of trust in the
institutions of governance and the consolidation of
democracy, which bodes well for the legislative
elections scheduled for 16 November 2008.
The voter registration figure of 94 per cent is in
itself a remarkable achievement and speaks to the
confidence of the people of Guinea-Bissau in the
electoral and political processes in that country. I
should add here that Guinea-Bissau has always had
free and fair elections in the past.

For that reason, my delegation is very pleased by
the report that the funding gap for the elections has
been reduced significantly, and we thank the
multilateral and bilateral donors for responding
positively to the request by the Secretary-General and
the Government for financial support for elections in
Guinea-Bissau.

My delegation is also pleased and encouraged by
the report's descriptions of ongoing security sector
reform, and we hold the View that addressing security
sector reform in Guinea-Bissau is very important and
will further enhance and consolidate peace and stability
in that country.

My delegation is also deeply concerned about the
continued reports of drug trafficking and organized
crime in Guinea-Bissau, and shares the assessment of
the Secretary- General that those illegal activities can
cast an

"increasingly dark shadow over the country and
threatens not only to erase the important progress
in the area of governance, but also to undermine
ongoing efforts for longer-term peacebuilding"
(S/2008/628, para. 45).

However, having said that, we do not believe that
the suggestion to create an expert group is the answer
to the illegal drug trafficking that is affecting Guinea-
Bissau. In fact, I should like once again to quote the
reason given, very diplomatically, by Ambassador
Viotti in her statement today. Her response to that issue
was that

"Guinea-Bissau may still be a fragile State, but it
is no longer in a war or a conflict situation, nor is
there any evidence that a conflict is about to take
place. On the contrary, there is a legitimate
Government, which is currently in the process of
consolidating its democracy and its institutions
and is trying to pave the way towards stability
and development. Guinea-Bissau deserves our
full respect as a sovereign country whose
willingness and resolve to address its own
problems with the support of international
partners should not be called into question."

In other words, what we need is to help
strengthen the institutions of law and order in Guinea-
Bissau, rather than minimize its sovereignty by
creating an expert group at a time when we should be
strengthening its Government. In fact, if we refer to the
Secretary-General's report, paragraphs 21 to 23 point
out that what we really need in Guinea-Bissau is a
much stronger Government in terms of law and order,
rather than an expert group. I do not know how one can
deal with any of the problems that are mentioned in
those paragraphs, including planes landing and people
being given bail and then disappearing. I do not know
how an expert group would deal with that.

What we need is to strengthen the institutions of
Guinea-Bissau so that they themselves can deal with
that issue. I would join in the call of the United States
representative for the Government of Guinea-Bissau to
account for and provide leadership on what has
happened with respect to those issues, rather than
subject a country that is still very fragile to an expert
group, which we do not believe would really do
anything more than divert the country's efforts to
strengthen its own institutions of law and order. The
support of the international community in building and
strengthening the capacity of local law enforcement
and judicial authorities in dealing with that challenge
will remain critical.

A further challenge to the Government of Guinea-
Bissau are the rising fuel and food prices that forced
the Government to adopt such drastic fiscal measures
as reducing tariffs. That led to a reduction in revenue,
resulting in salary arrears in July and August 2008.
Again, it is worth recalling that salaries used to be in
arrears for many months. The current Government has
tried to close that gap, and today we can sit here and
talk about salaries being in arrears for just the two
months of July and August. That is yet another reason
why we need to strengthen the Government so that it
can deal with the fundamental issues in Guinea-Bissau.
The issue of salary arrears presents a serious challenge
indeed for political stability, and the budgetary support
received from the World Bank, the West African
Monetary Union and the Central Bank of West African
States needs to be commended.

My delegation wishes again to pay tribute to the
Guinea-Bissau country-specific meeting of the
Peacebuilding Commission, chaired by Ambassador
Viotti, for the speedy and comprehensive manner in
which the Strategic Framework for Peacebuilding was
negotiated and adopted. That is important in View of
the many but interrelated challenges facing Guinea-
Bissau. The work of the Commission, the
Peacebuilding Fund and the international community in
addressing governance, security and economic
challenges will, in our View, begin to lay the
foundations for sustainable peace and prosperity in
Guinea-Bissau.

South Africa will continue to work with its
partners India and Brazil in assisting Guinea-Bissau in
the area of agriculture through the India, Brazil and
South Africa Trust Fund. South Africa, in addition to
opening its embassy in Bissau in March 2008, also
signed a framework cooperation agreement with
Guinea-Bissau on 25 September 2008 that will lay the
basis for bilateral cooperation between the two
countries in a variety of areas, including agriculture,
defence, trade, industry and mining, among others.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes again to
thank the staff of the United Nations Peacebuilding
Support Office, as well as the Peacebuilding Support
Office and the Guinea-Bissau country-specific meeting
of the Peacebuilding Commission for their hard work,
dedication and commitment to achieving sustainable
peace and development in Guinea-Bissau. All the
people of Guinea-Bissau need is a hand from the
international community to overcome the challenges
they face.

