Ms. Wronecka (Poland): In addition to the
statement I made as Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591
(2005), concerning the Sudan, let me make some
additional remarks in my national capacity.

Allow me to begin by thanking the outgoing
members of the Security Council - Bolivia, Ethiopia,
Kazakhstan, the Netherlands and Sweden - for their
fruitful and solutions-oriented cooperation during their
tenure on the Council and their invaluable contributions
to the work of the Committee. I would also like to
thank the Government of the Sudan and the Permanent
Mission of the Sudan to the United Nations for their
cooperation over the past year of my chairmanship.
Returning to the Sanctions Committee, I would
like to highlight a few issues of particular importance
to Poland. We are concerned about the reports of
sexual and gender-based violence, which continue to
be perpetrated in Darfur with impunity. We call on
the Government of the Sudan to take all the necessary
measures to put an end to those acts and bring the
perpetrators to justice, and to continue cooperating on
the matter with Special Representative Patten. We have
all witnessed the positive results of the Government's
engagement on the question of children and armed
conflict. We are convinced that the Sudan can build on
that experience in other fields.

We also remain concerned about the consequences
for the civilian population of the clashes between
Government forces and the Sudan Liberation Army-
Abdul Wahid faction in Jebel Marra, as well as
about the reports of human rights abuses committed
in relation to the fighting. The situation of Darfuri
internally displaced persons remains worrisome as
well. They lack access to economic and social services
as well as the provision of humanitarian aid. They are
also exposed to threats, harassment and intimidation.

With regard to other elements of the sanctions
regime, we note with regret the reports on the violations
of the arms embargo, both by the Government itself and
all armed groups, and we call upon the Government of
the Sudan to seek the Committee's advance approval
before transferring military material to Darfur.

I would like to seize this opportunity to thank the
Panel of Experts on the Sudan for their professional
approach, the quality of information that they provide
the Committee and our day-to-day cooperation. I
encourage the Government of the Sudan to continue
its cooperation with the Panel and provide the Experts
with the necessary space to fulfil their mandate
independently and impartially.

Poland believes that sanctions are not punishment,
but a policy tool aimed at changing behaviour and
making it constructive, and that they should be subjected
to regular reviews, in order to best reflect the dynamics
on the ground. In that context, I would like to recall the
recommendation from my visit to the Sudan, of which
I informed the Council during my quarterly briefing
in June last year (see S/PV.8287). The recommendation
reads as follows.

"That the Council pursue its intention, as expressed
in paragraph 3 of resolution 2400 (2018), to review
the measures on Darfur in the light of the evolving
situation on the ground. As part of the review I
referred to, the Council could consider setting
solutions-oriented parameters of the eventual
termination of the measures in the long term,
which might serve as a vehicle for positive change
in the Sudan."

I would like to uphold that recommendation and
assure the Council that, as Chair of the Sanctions
Committee on the Sudan, I stand ready to assist the
Council in every effort aimed at adjusting the sanctions
regime to best reflect the current situation in Darfur.

Let me conclude by assuring the Council that as
Chair I will continue to guide the Committee's work so
that it supports the Council in its efforts to facilitate an
end to the protracted conflict in Darfur and, by doing
so, contribute to peace and stability in the region.

