Mr. La Yifan (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
wishes to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council this month. We
wish to express our gratitude and appreciation to
Ambassador Sawers of the United Kingdom for his
08-36123
outstanding work during his presidency of the Council
last month.

China has always respected the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Somalia.
China supports the process of national reconciliation in
Somalia and appreciates the unremitting efforts of its
Government and people to achieve peace and stability.

After 17 years of civil war, the peace that the
people of Somalia have been anxiously awaiting
remains elusive. That calls for the international
community to focus its attention on Somalia as one of
the hot spot issues in Africa.

The question of Somalia has an important place
on the agenda of the Security Council. The Council's
mission to Africa landed on African soil yesterday and
will soon be on its way to Djibouti to start addressing
the question of Somalia. That demonstrates fully the
importance that members of the Security Council
attach to the question of Somalia. The Security Council
should increase its attention to and input into the
question of Somalia.

The rise of piracy on the territorial waters of
Somalia in recent years constitutes a grave threat to the
political and peace processes of Somalia and the
international efforts for humanitarian relief. It
interferes with the safety and security of international
shipping. On many occasions, the Transitional Federal
Government of Somalia has sent letters to the Security
Council calling for the Council's assistance in
combating piracy. The international community
broadly supports that reasonable request from Somalia
and is in favour of the Security Council adopting a
resolution to authorize Member States to assist in
combating piracy. China endorses that position and
supports the prompt adoption of a relevant resolution
in the Security Council.

Meanwhile, as the question of piracy touches
upon sensitive issues of international law and touches
closely upon the rights and interests of States Members
of the United Nations in the oceans, the Security
08-36123

Council must therefore act with great prudence. Its
actions should facilitate the international community's
assistance to Somalia in combating piracy, on the one
hand, and avoid negative consequences on the other.

Therefore, we maintain that the relevant
resolution must be based on the consent of the
countries concerned and in line with the wishes of the
Government and the people of Somalia. It should apply
only to the territorial waters of Somalia and not be
expanded to cover other regions. It must comply with
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
and should not conflict with existing international law.

Based on the positions I have just mentioned, the
Chinese delegation took an active part in the relevant
informal consultations. Resolution 1816 (2008),
adopted today, encapsulates to the greatest extent
possible the common understanding that the Security
Council has been able to achieve at present on the
question of piracy in Somalia. It is a positive and
prudent resolution; accordingly, China voted in favour
of it.

In the course of its implementation, various
problems may arise that will require the continued
cooperation of the international community. China
believes that the question of piracy in Somalia should
not be seen as a stand-alone issue because it is merely
an expression of the political contradictions in
Somalia. The international community, while helping
Somalia to combat piracy, should focus its attention on
removing the root causes of the current situation in
Somalia. China is ready to join the rest of the
international community in its ongoing effort to
promote a timely solution to the question of Somalia
and the achievement of peace and stability in the Horn
of Africa.

