Mr. Djinnit: I feel particularly privileged to
address the Security Council on the situation in West
Africa and the activities of the United Nations Office
for West Africa (UNOWA) over the last six months.
Let me start by stressing the obvious, which is that
2
West Africa is part of the African continent. Therefore,
the search for solutions to West African problems
cannot be dissociated from the overall peace efforts on
the African continent

The trends of conflicts in Africa show that, since
the early 19903, West Africa has been a laboratory for
peace and security. On the one hand, the subregion has
had more than its fair share of violent conflicts, with
dire consequences for development, stability and
human security. On the other hand, however,
experience shows that West Africa has learned much
from that difficult experience and has emerged as one
of the African subregions with the strongest
determination and the most effective institutional
framework to respond to challenges posed by political
instability and armed conflict.

The commitment of West African peacekeeping
forces, the Economic Community of West African
States Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) in Liberia and
Sierra Leone and other contributions by the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and its
member States to efforts aimed at addressing the
conflicts that afflicted the subregion, including in the
Cote d'Ivoire, Guinea-Bissau and Togo, are a
testimony to the strong political will of West African
leaders and people to remain at the forefront of peace
efforts in their subregion.

The report before you (S/2009/332) presents the
state of peace and security in West Africa over the past
six months and the efforts deployed by the United
Nations Office for West Africa (UNOWA) to support
initiatives aimed at addressing the challenges of peace
and stability in the subregion. The report underscores
the progress in the overall peace and security situation
in the subregion, especially the positive developments
registered in post-conflict recovery and peacebuilding
and progress in the area of governance and the rule of
law.

More precisely, the determination of West Africa
to address its crises decisively with the support of the
United Nations and the wider international community,
as well as its efforts to strengthen institutions,
governance and the rule of law and to enhance the role
of civil society including women, has led to an
important reduction in the scope and level of violence
across the subregion. Indeed, there is currently no open
armed conflict going on in West Africa. The impact of
armed violence on State institutions and societies,
09-39336
illustrated, for instance, by the number of refugees and
internally displaced persons, has significantly
decreased.

Peace operations in C6te d'Ivoire, Liberia and
Sierra Leone are steadily moving forward towards
post-conflict recovery and peace consolidation. In
Guinea-Bissau, the first round of presidential elections
has just been concluded and declared free, fair and
transparent, while the United Nations Peacebuilding
Support Office in Guinea-Bissau is transforming itself
into an integrated office for better coordination of
activities with all stakeholders so as to tackle the
formidable peacebuilding challenges in that country.

It is important to emphasize that the significant
progress achieved by West Africa in the area of peace,
security and stability remains extremely fragile, as the
root causes of conflict and instability persist. In some
cases, this progress is reversible, as illustrated by the
recent democratic setback in Mauritania, the prevailing
crisis in the Niger and other looming crises in the
subregion. Moreover, a number of growing or
emerging challenges, which include terrorist activities
in the Sahel band, piracy in the Gulf of Guinea,
governance problems, drug trafficking and organized
crime, jeopardize ongoing peace efforts in the
subregion. The potential impact of those threats on
international security should not be underestimated.

Meanwhile, the social and economic situation
remains precarious, as a result of the combined effects
of factors such as high demographic growth, declining
economic growth, rapid urbanization, youth
unemployment, climate change and food insecurity.
That is further exacerbated by the impact of the global
economic and financial crisis on West African
economies, which is deepening and is increasingly
destabilizing.

Allow me to highlight three specific challenges to
peace and security in West Africa that have continued
to require special attention and considerable efforts
during the past six months. The resurgence of
unconstitutional or violent changes of Government
emerged as one of the most alarming threats to peace
and stability in West Africa. Considering the strong
destabilizing effects of such events, the Security
Council decided, a few weeks ago, to focus on the
challenge of unconstitutional changes in Africa.
09-39336
It was particularly welcome in West Africa that
the Council, in its presidential statement dated 5 May
2009, expressed

44'

its deep concern over the resurgence of
unconstitutional changes of government in a few
African countries" (S/PRST/2009/11 , p. 1)

and called attention to

"the possible violence that may accompany such
events as well as the negative impact on
economic and social welfare of the people and the
development of affected countries." (ibid, p. 1)

Against that background, allow me to recall that
all of the unconstitutional changes of government that
have taken place in Africa recently, with the exception
of the case of Madagascar, occurred in West Africa. A
failed coup attempt has also been reported in the
subregion in the period under review.

The United Nations and its Office for West Africa
have been playing an active role in the collective
efforts that have been deployed to address the political
crises that have emerged following those
unconstitutional changes of government. In Mauritania,
efforts spearheaded by the Facilitation Team,
comprising Senegal, the African Union and the United
Nations, culminated in the signing, in early June, of a
framework agreement between the main political
forces, which paved the way to the return to
constitutional order in the country and the preparation
of presidential elections scheduled for 18 July 2009.
The leadership provided by Senegal and the
Facilitation Team and their determination, combined
with the unprecedented example of collaboration
between international organizations and individual
countries in promoting a consensual way out of the
crisis in Mauritania, should be commended and
emulated when tackling similar situations in the
subregion and the continent as a whole.

Meanwhile, in Mauritania we are faced with the
challenge of creating conditions for a free and fair
electoral process, despite a very tight schedule and a
rather difficult political environment, as a result of the
mistrust and conflicting interests among the various
parties represented in the consensual transitional
institutions, including the Independent Electoral
Commission.

In Guinea, efforts continue within the framework
of the International Contact Group, albeit in a context
3
of mounting concerns about the pace and timing of the
transition. The forthcoming meeting of the
International Contact Group scheduled for 16 and
17 July in Conakry should provide the opportunity for
a critical review of the situation in that country in the
light of the commitment of the authorities to the time
frame leading to elections before the end of the year.
On that occasion, the International Contact Group is
also expected to devise ways and means to revamp the
process.

In Togo, UNOWA, in liaison with ECOWAS, has
been encouraging the main stakeholders to create
propitious conditions for organizing peaceful and
democratic presidential elections in 2010. It has also
been collaborating closely with the United Nations
country team, the Government and ECOWAS to
address critical issues related to security and elections.

Closely related to unconstitutional changes of
government in West Africa is the recurrent question of
security sector reform. Council members will recall
that the mission of the Security Council to West Africa
from 26 June to 5 July 2003 noted in its report that

"in each country which has been a source of
instability in the subregion in recent years the
issue of the reform of the security sector is of
paramount importance". (5/2003/688, para. 68).

Six years later, the challenge of security sector
reform remains a pending and burning issue in a
number of countries in the subregion. As part of its
activities on security sector reform, the United Nations
Office for West Africa has initiated a process aimed at
clarifying the role of the security sector and other
institutions and enhancing their capacity in providing
security during electoral processes in West Africa. This
initiative, jointly carried out with ECOWAS, United
Nations country teams and Governments, is going on,
with interventions planned in countries where critical
elections are scheduled in 2009 and 2010.

There are other recurrent security challenges in
West Africa. Drug trafficking is currently one of the
most prominent. Indeed, the subregion has emerged as
an important route of transit for drug trafficking,
particularly of cocaine from Latin America to Europe,
with drug trafficking networks taking advantage of the
weaknesses of West African States, including porous
borders, abundant unemployed youth, widespread
corruption and poverty. The measures taken by West
African States, with the support of the United Nations,
to combat drug trafficking and criminal activities -
especially the ECOWAS regional action plan to address
the growing problem of illicit drug trafficking,
organized crime and drug abuse in West Africa
deserve unflinching support.

 

In addition to the important contribution the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
has been making in supporting subregional efforts at
addressing this plight, UNOWA is expected to play an
increasing role in channelling efforts towards
achieving common goals, including those outlined in
the ECOWAS plan of action. Tomorrow, here in New
York, ECOWAS, the Department of Political Affairs,
UNOWA, UNODC, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and INTERPOL will launch the West Africa
Coast Initiative. This joint programme is aimed at
building the capacity of the police and law
enforcement agencies in four pilot countries - Cote
d'Ivoire, Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea-Bissau -
thus allowing them to more effectively prevent and
combat organized crime and drug trafficking. I take
this opportunity to appeal for the full support of
Security Council members and the international
community as a whole for these and other efforts to
facilitate the implementation of the ECOWAS action
plan.

Before concluding, I wish to stress that, to be
effective in West Africa, action on cross-border and
regional challenges to peace and security should take
place as part of a broader, comprehensive strategy of
conflict resolution and crisis prevention. In this
context, UNOWA will continue to promote and
strengthen a regional and integrated approach to cross-
border issues in the subregion.

The United Nations, through its various entities,
has been providing a highly appreciated contribution to
assist the subregion to face its daunting socio-
economic and development challenges. In this respect,
UNOWA will pursue its efforts aimed at promoting
synergies within the United Nations regional system
and situating the role and contribution of each entity
within the overall objective of the United Nations, that
of achieving lasting peace, stability and progress in the
subregion, and its vision of delivering as one.

Collaboration with national authorities, civil
society and other international actors, in accordance
with their respective mandates, will remain a priority.
UNOWA will continue to work closely with regional

organizations, especially ECOWAS, which play a
critical role in the prevention, management and
resolution of conflicts. In particular, it will pursue the
promising avenue of triangular collaboration between
the United Nations, ECOWAS and the African Union
that it has promoted in the past months, especially in
preventive action.

In my capacity as Chairman of the Cameroon-
Nigeria Mixed Commission and of the Follow-Up
Committee on the implementation of the Greentree
Agreement, I, along with my team, will continue to
provide support for the ongoing demarcation process of
the boundary between the two countries. Particular
attention will be given to promoting confidence-
building measures between the two countries,
addressing the problems faced by the affected
population along the boundary and encouraging
bilateral cooperation in tackling common security
threats in the Bakassi peninsula and beyond, with the
support of partners in the international community.

In conclusion, I would like to thank the Security
Council for the attention it continues to devote to West
Africa and for its support to the United Nations Office
for West Africa.

