Mr. Kay: I wish to thank you, Madam President,
for this opportunity to brief the Council. I am glad to
be doing so with my friend and colleague Ambassador
Maman Sidikou. Yesterday we briefed the African
Union Peace and Security Council together, which
is why we are joining the Council today from Addis
Ababa. The African Union-United Nations partnership
in Somalia is unique, strong and essential for success.

Let me begin by thanking the Council for its
continued support to the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) and to the peacebuilding
and State-building process in Somalia.

When I spoke to the Council in February, I said
that I was both excited and worried about the year
ahead. I was excited because, after too long a pause,
there was the prospect of political progress again.
And indeed, momentum has been regained. Somalia's
third Government in less than three years is hard at
work, and the Federal Parliament has begun its sixth
session. Somalia's federal, regional and local leaders,
parliamentarians and people from all walks of life are
building a federal State, step by step, through dialogue
and reconciliation. The prevailing environment of
mistrust accumulated over nearly 25 years makes the
task difficult and painstaking; but it must continue, and
it deserves our sustained support.

Federal President Hassan Sheikh Mohamoud, as
well as the Prime Minister, Speaker and the leaders
of Puntland, Jubba and South-West Administrations,
have reiterated their determination to deliver Somalia's
Vision 2016 plan without any extension of the term
of the Federal Parliament or President in August
and September 2016, respectively. There are several
important targets the Government has set for itself in
the coming months, including completing the formation
of interim regional administrations and assemblies;
advancing the constitutional review; establishing the
National Independent Electoral Commission (NIEC)
and the Boundaries and Federation Commission; and
finalizing priority legislation on political parties,
citizenship and elections.

Once Parliament has approved the nomination of
commissioners for the National Independent Electoral
Commission, the NIEC will face a compressed timeline
to discharge its duties. Upon its establishment, the
Commission will need to decide swiftly on how to
implement its mandate. The United Nations will
deploy an electoral assessment mission to advise and
determine, in close collaboration with stakeholders, the
nature and extent of United Nations electoral support
in Somalia. The United Nations - together with the
African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, and the European Union and Member
States - continues to support the formation of the
interim regional administrations. Many challenges
remain, in particular ensuring inclusivity. More needs
to be achieved in terms of local reconciliation. Women,
minorities and youth must be well represented as part
of that inclusivity.

Progress on federalism has not been matched by
similar progress on the constitutional review process.
On 6 May, the Chairperson of the independent
Constitutional Review and Implementation Commission
resigned, but there should be no let-up in moving the
process forward. The United Nations is supporting
the commissioners and other relevant institutions in
starting the constitutional review process in earnest
without further delay. I am also concerned about the
timetable for elections in Somaliland, which were due
next month. The recent decision by the House of Elders
to postpone elections for 22 months until March 2017
is a disappointment. The United Nations has joined
other international partners in urging a reconciliation
of this timetable based on a political consensus among
all Somaliland stakeholders.

The security of United Nations staff in Somalia
remains a priority. Tragically, on 20 April a terrorist
attack in Garoowe claimed the lives of four UNICEF
staff members and three Somali guards. Al-Shabaab
targeted individuals who were working hard to improve
the lives of Somali children and families. It was, as
President Hassan Sheikh Mohamoud said, "an attack
against the future of the country". We honour our fallen
colleagues by continuing their work. We have to ensure
a balance between our duty of care to staff and the
delivery of our mandate to support the Somalis.

Overall, the United Nations - agencies, funds and
programmes and mission combined - have on average
1,400 people deployed throughout Somalia. We must
ensure adequate protection for these teams. In that
regard, I want to thank the Council for its support to
the expansion of the United Nations guard unit, which
provides vital protection to United Nations staff within
the Mogadishu International Airport compound and the
new offices we have moved into in Mogadishu city. This
is the first time a Security Council-mandated mission
has operated from outside the airport zone since 1995.

I remain concerned about security in Somalia
and about the threat posed by Al-Shabaab to the
wider subregion, demonstrated by the heinous attack
on Kenya's Garissa University College in April. We
need to monitor closely and be able to respond to any
sign that Al-Shabaab is benefiting from their links to
extremist groups in Yemen and from the instability
there. Counter-terrorism requires efforts on many
fronts. Ihope that the coming weeks will see even closer
cooperation among Member States to address this threat
at the subregional level, including measures to prevent
and counter Violent extremism. With so much at stake
between now and 2016, we can expect Al-Shabaab to
do everything it can to derail the political process in
Somalia.

Renewing the joint Somali and African Union
offensive against Al-Shabaab is an urgent priority.
I once again pay tribute to the courage of the Somali
national army and our African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) colleagues. The African Union and the
United Nations recently completed a joint mission to
Somalia to assess the benchmarks for a United Nations
peacekeeping mission and the impact of the surge of
AMISOM. troops, and to provide recommendations on
the next steps in the military campaign. My colleague
Ambassador Sidikou and His Excellency the Prime
Minister will brief further on this.

The development of the Somali national army and
the Somali police is an imperative for both the defeat
of Al-Shabaab and the AMISOM. exit strategy. The
Guulwade (Victory) Plan referred to in the Secretary-
General's report (S/2015/331) seeks to train and equip
the national army for joint operations now. It provides
a sound framework, but business as usual will not be
enough to support it. A robust architecture for the
delivery of international support to the national army
is needed, and we are consulting all partners on the
options. A similar plan for the police, including regional
police, is also needed.

I am encouraged that the mechanisms created in 2014
to support the implementation of the "New Deal" Somali
Compact are starting to perform. The Government has
exercised leadership in bringing all partners together.
A portfolio of seven programmes, aligned with the
Federal Government's priorities and donor resources,
and with a value of over $100 million, has been approved
for inclusion in the United Nations Multi-Partner Trust
Fund. I thank all donors who have pledged support, and
further encourage them to support Somalia's recovery
through these mechanisms. However, the alignment
and coordination of international assistance behind
Somali leadership is uneven. Of the funds generously
pledged at Brussels in 2013, only about 10 per cent have
been committed through the Compact architecture.
I encourage all Somalia's partners to adhere to our
collective commitments, and especially to increase
their use of national systems.

Although Somalia's financial system remains
high-risk, the Federal Government and its international
partners are taking steps within the New Deal
framework to ensure robust oversight of the overall
governance architecture. There is still a long way to
go, but I am pleased to report that a Treasury Single
Account is now in place, creating a single channel for
national revenues and payments.

There is work to do on human rights as well. This
year, Somalia will need to report on progress made on
their commitments in the universal periodic review. I
note with concern that there has been a marked increase
in executions and death sentences handed out in 2015
despite Somalia's commitment to put a moratorium
on executions. I also remain concerned about threats
and intimidation of journalists in Somalia. I welcome
the African Union's report on allegations of sexual
exploitation and abuse by AMISOM. soldiers and
commend the work of the investigations team. As the
Council has already noted, there is now a need to follow
up. Ambassador Sidikou will brief further on this.

The humanitarian situation in Somalia remains
alarming. The numbers speak for themselves. Some
730,000 Somalis continue to be unable to meet their most
basic daily food needs; an additional 2.3 million people
are at risk of sliding into the same situation; among
them, over 1.1 million Somalis remain displaced, the
majority women and children. This situation requires
constant attention, adequate funding and continuous
upgrades to our analytical and forecasting capabilities.
One third into the year, the humanitarian appeal is only
12 per cent funded, having received only $100 million of
the $863 million needed. The situation could be further
compounded by a poor rainy season, if that happens,
the closure of the Somali remittance operators and
the escalating conflict in Yemen. Between 27 March
and 14 May, Somalia received nearly 7,000 arrivals, of
whom the vast majority, about 92 per cent, were Somali
nationals, many of them with refugee status in Yemen.
The United Nations is actively supporting efforts to
assist those returning.

The high-level partnership forum in Mogadishu
planned for 29 July will be an opportunity for Somalia
and its partners to come together to agree on priority
action between now and 2016. But continued progress
between now and then will take sustained attention and
commitment from all sides. I believe that UNSOM's
mandate remains relevant for the coming year. As the
federalism process moves forward, we will adjust the
focus of our efforts. Our work in Somalia's regions will
become ever more critical, and we will seek to maximize
our support to existing and new administrations within
our mandate for providing good offices and strategic
policy advice. That requires logistical and security
support in difficult circumstances. I look forward to
the strategic review of the United Nations Support
Office for the African Union Mission in Somalia that
is also scheduled for July. It will help us to establish
what is feasible, including for supporting emerging
administrations where UNSOM. does not have a
presence. We will continue to update the Council on
the adequacy of security arrangements. Finally, we
will keep under review the preparations for an electoral
process in September 2016, and provide further advice
on the implications as required.

While it is too soon to celebrate definitive success
in Somalia, I believe we would be missing a strategic
opportunity if we failed to appreciate just how much
the Somalis and the international community are
achieving. As we cast our eye over the wider region and
beyond, where else do we see a country, once mired in
conflict, that now has progressively better functioning
governance, where political dialogue is replacing
the rule of the gun and, most importantly, where
violent extremism is being successfully countered?
A country that refugees once fled in their millions is
now receiving refugees from other countries, such as
Yemen, and welcoming home its own citizens. It is
an honour for me to work in such a context and with
such dedicated international partners and brave United
Nations colleagues. The world should not squander
this opportunity. We should reinforce success with
increased engagement and resources in the coming
period, and I am grateful for the Council's continued
support.

