Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
presence this morning and the Lithuanian presidency
for having organized this debate.

Spain fully associates itself with the statement
made this morning by the observer of the European
Union.

I will distribute in the Chamber the full version of
my statement. However, given the long list of speakers,
I will extract the paragraphs and statements that, in my
opinion, are the most interesting.

The strengthening of the rule of law is absolutely
key in conflict prevention and peacebuilding. The
international community should assist and support
those countries in conflict and post-conflict situations.

Spain believes that the strengthening of the rule of
law should be an essential component of mandates of
United Nations missions. In countries that have recently
experienced a conflict, moreover, the role of transitional
justice is particularly important. Transitional justice
should be aimed at the prosecution of serious crimes
and human rights violations perpetrated during the
conflict.

In the process of strengthening the rule of law,
women should occupy a central place. There are many
measures, but I will mention only one: women should
be given a relevant role in the decision-making process.

At the United Nations, we talk a great deal about
ownership. National ownership is absolutely key to
success. We therefore fully share the position expressed
in the excellent concept note prepared by the Lithuanian
presidency (S/2014/75, annex). National actors must
build institutions and make them their own. No one
likes to have institutions imposed from outside.

There must also be adequate planning for all
actions. To that end, we must always adopt a gradual
approach that includes flexibility.

It is also necessary to ensure that United Nations
missions receive adequate and predictable resources. In
that context I wish to highlight two issues. Predictability
necessitates knowing at a given time how to tackle new
situations, which will continue to arise. On the other
hand, within the context of the United Nations system,
the relationship between the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) and United Nations missions in post-conflict
situations must be strengthened.

I will conclude by mentioning Spain. My country
has placed the rule of law at the very core of its foreign
policy. We have supported capacity-building in the
justice and security sectors and established training
programmes on many diverse topics. We have organized
seminars, courses and workshops devoted to the justice
sector in several Latin American countries and also
worked in the Arab world, where, since 2010, Spain
has promoted the "Masar" programme focused on
promoting democratic governance in the Arab world.

Spain has broad experience in cooperation
with other countries and participates extensively in
peacekeeping operations. Such experience demonstrates
to the Spanish people that strengthening the rule of law
is an essential pillar of conflict prevention and ensuring
durable peace.

