Mr. Eteffa (Ethiopia): Thank you, Mr. President, for
giving me the opportunity to participate in the present
discussion of the matter that my Government brought to
the attention of the Security Council in its letter dated
9 January, concerning the attempted assassination of His
Excellency President Hosni Mubarak of the Arab
Republic of Egypt in Addis Ababa on 26 June 1995, on
the occasion of the Organization of African Unity (OAU)
summit, and the role of the Government of the Sudan.

The Horn of Africa is a region long known for war
and famine. It is this legacy of conflict and deprivation
that my Government has committed itself to transforming.
Over the last five years Ethiopia has striven to build
peace at home and with its neighbours, among them
Sudan. We believe strongly that there is a lot to be gained
through cooperation and a lot to be lost in confrontation.

While my country enjoys excellent relations with its
neighbours and continues to contribute towards finding a
durable solution to the crisis in Somalia, our efforts to
cultivate and maintain good relations with Sudan have not
yielded fruit. This is because the forces that direct Sudan
have placed themselves on a collision course with the
entire subregion. It was perhaps Khartoum's dangerous
policies that led it to involve itself in an act of terrorism
committed in our country. The assassination attempt
directed against His Excellency President Mubarak of
Egypt stunned the nation and shocked the world - and
especially Africa, whose leaders were congregating in
Addis Ababa for the OAU summit. Fortunately,
providence and vigilance saved the day. Had the attempt
succeeded, its effects, and particularly its impact on the
subregion, would have been disastrous and long-lasting.
Even though the assassination attempt failed, the
mounting evidence unearthed by our investigation team
that implicated the Government of Sudan clearly
illustrated the continuing threat to the peace and security
of the region.

It is with regret that we have brought this matter
before the Council. It had been the intention of my
Government to resolve the issue in the first place at the
bilateral level. After investigation revealed that three of
the terrorists suspected of involvement in the crime were
taking shelter in the Sudan, my Government provided the
relevant information to the Sudanese Government and
requested it to extradite those three terrorists, on the basis
of the 1964 extradition Treaty. In order to keep the matter

 

at the level of our two countries, we did not make the
results of the investigation public at first, but preferred
instead to give the Sudan every opportunity to come
forward and respond positively. This was in line with our
long-standing policy of maintaining good relations with the
Sudan.

Unfortunately, our good will was not reciprocated. The
Sudan limited its response to removing its Minister of
Internal Affairs, its Chief of External Security and a few
other officials. It resisted the extradition of the three
persons, playing for time and hoping that Ethiopia would be
satisfied with a few dismissals and promises of cooperation.
Essentially, we were expected to participate in a cover-up.
The choice was clear: either we disregarded the evidence in
the hope of maintaining a facade of good relations, or we
continued to seek Sudanese compliance at the risk of a
deterioration in bilateral relations.

My Government persisted in seeking the extradition of
the three terrorists. Bilaterally, we continued to ask the
Sudanese Government to comply with our request. But
realizing its resistance, we brought the matter to the
attention of the Organization of African Unity (OAU). The
Central Organ of the OAU Mechanism for Conflict
Prevention, Management and Resolution, at an
extraordinary session on 11 September 1995, called upon
the Sudan, among other things, to hand over the three
terrorists sheltered in its territory and to desist from
engaging in activities assisting, supporting and facilitating
terrorist operations. The Sudan, however, turned a deaf ear
to the OAU. Khartoum opposed the OAU's efforts and
refused to implement its resolution by complying with its
provisions. Following the lack of progress by the OAU's
mission to the Sudan in November 1995, the OAU Central
Organ once again, on 19 December, called upon the Sudan
to implement its resolution urgently and in full. To date the
Sudan has not complied with the resolution. To this day, it
refuses to extradite the three terrorists it should have
handed over six months ago. This is why my Government
felt compelled to bring the matter to the Security Council.

We are talking of a very serious crime. The details are
before the Council. Undoubtedly, an act of State-sponsored
international terrorism undertaken in the territory of another
State constitutes a clear threat to international peace and
security. Our efforts at the bilateral level have failed. The
OAU has been frustrated by the Sudan's uncompromising
attitude and non-compliance. We are therefore appealing to
the Council, so that the voice of the international
community may be heard with respect to bringing the
perpetrators of a vicious crime to justice. Justice and
fairness are all that we are asking for.

Sponsoring, aiding and abetting acts of terrorism and
sheltering criminals cannot be allowed to go
unchallenged. Prevarication, delaying tactics and
diversionary accusations cannot lead to a solution. Neither
can a conspiracy theory. We strongly believe that a
Security Council resolution calling on the Sudan to
comply with the request made earlier by Ethiopia and
then by the OAU for the extradition of the three terrorists
would confront the Sudanese authorities with a direct
challenge: to stop and think, and to make sincere efforts
to comply, thereby taking the first step to rebuilding the
confidence that is so necessary to help the subregion -
and, indeed, the continent as a whole - move forward
towards constructive engagement. Needless to say, the
Sudan should accept and carry out the decision of the
Security Council, as stipulated in Article 25 of the
Charter of the United Nations.

May I also add that such action by the Security
Council in support of the decisions of the OAU would
further enhance and strengthen cooperation and
complementarity between the United Nations and regional
organizations in the maintenance of peace and security.

Finally, Mr. President, allow me to extend to you
and to the other members of the Security Council, in
particular to the Council's non-aligned caucus, my
gratitude for having responded to the request of my
Government with the urgency, determination and fairness
required from this body in addressing a matter of such
grave concern not only to Ethiopia and to Africa, but also
to the international community as a whole.

As a footnote, I would like the Council to note that,
aside from the Sudan, certain countries were mentioned
in our submission, which provided some details of our
investigation of the crime. These were Saudi Arabia,
Kenya, Yemen and Pakistan. We wish to make it
absolutely clear to the Security Council, in order to avoid
any misunderstanding, that none of these States, except
for the Sudan, were involved in supporting the activities
of the terrorists in any way.

