Mr. Petrella (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, allow me to welcome you most warmly on
behalf of the Government and the people of Argentina. I
am certain that under your guidance this debate will be
extremely useful for the pursuit of the objectives that
have been set. We remember your words when you were
with us for the open debate at the end of September. We
know that you are a man who was born in Africa and
who struggled for the freedom of Africa and that in your
current position as Minister of State for Foreign and
Commonwealth Affairs you will continue to pursue those
objectives vigorously.

This debate should enable us to think about three
specific things: first of all, cooperation between the
United Nations, the Organization of African Unity (OAU)
and subregional organizations; secondly, strengthening
Africa's capacity in the area of peacekeeping; and thirdly,
conflict prevention.

With regard to the first point, I would say that it is
essential to maintain regular dialogue between the two
Secretariats, not only at the decision-making level, but
also in the area of preparation for decision-making. It is
not sufficient just to have an exchange of information;
there must also be, above all, an exchange of the analysis
of that information. There are various ways of putting this
into effect: exchange of visits, exchange of participation
of officials in meetings and more frequent presentations
by high-ranking OAU officials in private meetings, open
briefings and open meetings of the Council.

The presence of President Chiluba of Zambia last
September, for example, at the open meeting of the
Council on the Democratic Republic of the Congo was
extremely significant. Similarly, we believe that it would
be positive to have the presence of President Nelson
Mandela with respect to Burundi. We should explore all
possible mechanisms available under Chapter VIII of the
Charter.
With respect to the second point, we believe that
there are two aspects: training of peacekeepers and
logistical and financial support - in other words,
resources. This is where, in our view, the greatest
difficulties lie. The lack of resources is what determines,
to a certain extent, the conduct, duration and the
composition of peacekeeping operations. Voluntary
contributions and trust funds are important, but they
cannot replace the regular funding of peacekeeping
operations. Only regular funding gives peacekeeping
operations the necessary legitimacy, continuity and
predictability. The Secretary-General has noted this on
various occasions, and we have heard this from

 

Ambassador Fowler of Canada with particular emphasis just
now.

Lastly, with respect to conflict prevention, we believe
that there are various instruments that the Council could
keep in mind - for example, improving the early warning
system. This relates to the first point also - exchange of
information and analysis of information with the OAU and
main subregional organizations. Another instrument is the
application of sanctions, even, if necessary, when the
conflict is in its early stages. We should bear in mind that
the civilian population that is the primary victim of the
conflict should not also be the victim of sanctions.
Imposing a sanctions regime is, in itself, not enough; it
must be made effective. In this regard, the practical
initiatives taken by Ambassador Fowler of Canada as
Chairman of the Sanctions Committee on Angola are a
clear example of how to enhance the effectiveness of the
sanctions regime. In our view, fact-finding missions carried
out by the Secretary-General and missions of the Security
Council are instruments that should be used more
frequently. Lastly, the establishment of demilitarized zones
as a result of fact-finding missions can also be a useful
instrument.

No diplomatic instrument will be effective if we fail
to understand that at the root of conflicts there are social
and economic problems. We reiterate that peace and
development are two sides of the same coin. The United
States and France have just spoken about this. The end of
the cold war created conditions conducive to economic
relations. However, as the Secretary-General has pointed
out, the economy is global, while politics are local. The
disheartening result of the Seattle summit is an indication
of resistance towards trade liberalization that takes into
account the needs of developing countries. Hence the need
for coordination between the Council, the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council, together
with the other bodies of the system and the Bretton Woods
institutions, not merely in the transition from peacekeeping
to peace-building, but in the prevention stage. The
experience of Haiti offers some useful lessons to be applied
to African issues, even in the cases of the Central African
Republic and Guinea-Bissau.

In conclusion, it is a fact that no conflict will be
solved without genuine political will on the part of the
leaders to find political, and not military, solutions. But it
is also a fact that a clear resolve on the part of the Council
is essential in order to make specific contributions to the
solution of such conflicts.

