We commend Indonesia for convening this timely debate, and we welcome Her Excellency Mrs. Retno Marsudi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Indonesia. We also thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon and Ms. Sarah Cliffe for their significant contributions to this debate. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has had an enormous effect on the work of the United Nations. Continuity has been disrupted for peacekeeping operations, special political missions and the Peacebuilding Commission. They, along with United Nations agencies, funds and programmes, have been challenged in adjusting their operations to assist countries in addressing the pandemic. This widespread pandemic threatens not only development and peacebuilding gains, but also creates a high risk of rekindling conflicts or of igniting new ones. In some countries, fragile peace processes could be hindered by the crisis, if not disrupted. That is why a call for a global ceasefire, of which Poland was a staunch supporter, to foster multilateral efforts in addressing the pandemic and its impact as a matter of priority was launched by the Secretary-General. We welcome the fact that, in July, the Security Council unanimously adopted resolution 2532 (2020), in which the Council recognizes that the pandemic could reverse peacebuilding gains made by countries in transition and post-conflict countries and calls for all relevant parts of the United Nations system to accelerate the response to the pandemic, with particular emphasis on countries in need. Poland considers the role of the Security Council crucial in addressing the sustaining of peace in the world crippled by the global pandemic. COVID-19 is aggravating the humanitarian situation in the world's perilous conflicts and threatens to trigger an economic plummet that will most probably unleash violence. As the most recent report of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding and sustaining peace (S/2020/773) alarmingly mentions, the world's population continues to face increased poverty, inequality and exclusion, as well as threats to peace and security. By the end of 2019, 79.5 million persons had been forcibly displaced, which is twice as many as 20 years ago. Those numbers are only going to spike owing to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and climate change. The current pandemic is hindering aid programmes, drawing away both the attention and resources of major stakeholders battling the deadly virus on the ground, and cutting off support to already fragile, war-torn economies. Restricted by lockdowns, the movements of peacekeeping troops, envoys and non-governmental agencies are witnessing a hampering of mediation efforts and impediments in the distribution of urgently needed aid to vulnerable civilians. Humanitarian agencies struggle to keep up with the demand for help, especially in places where COVID-19 is spreading out of control. Owing to travel restrictions, United Nations peacekeeping missions have struggled with the logistics of troop rotations, while for some countries they are the only guarantors of security and health safety. We welcome mitigation measures to promote the safety, security and health of all United Nations personnel while maintaining the continuity and effectiveness of United Nations peacekeeping operations. Previous reports of the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in armed conflict demonstrate powerful evidence that existing crises have exacerbated and magnified structural gender inequalities. Recent data have only confirmed an increased level of gender-based violence. In our response to COVID-19, we must therefore put the safety of women and girls first. The verified numbers of violations against children presented in the reports of the Secretary-General are highly disturbing, though we are aware that they do not reflect the full scale. Poland expresses its serious concern over the detrimental and multidimensional impact of COVID-19 pandemic on children, especially those living in areas of armed conflict. The present challenge of COVID-19 to global health security could become a case in point of how it can be managed through multilateral frameworks. Poland is convinced that the World Health Organization will remain the lead coordinator of the global response to pandemics. The best way forward is to continue to build upon its present assets. Among those, the most important tools are the International Health Regulations and Solidarity Trial protocol that are aimed at minimizing the burden on countries' health systems when it comes to effective treatment options against COVID-19. Poland is engaged and supports financially both the European Union initiatives on solidarity and leadership in seeking global solutions and the United Nations system response to the COVID-19 emergency. In this moment of global crisis, we must leave no one behind.
