Mr. Lie Cheng (China) (spoke in Chinese): We
welcome the presence with us here today of the Prime
Minister of Guinea-Bissau and the statements delivered
by the various briefers. We also listened closely to the
statement by Ms. Pinto.

We have observed notable progress in Guinea-
Bissau over recent months. In implementing the Conakry
Agreement, the parties in Guinea Bissau have reached
agreement on forming an inclusive Government,
reconvening the National Assembly in plenary session,
and the date of legislative elections. China welcomes
this progress. Regional and subregional organizations,
such as the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), the African Union, the European
Union and the Community of Portuguese-Speaking
Countries, have played a significant role in overcoming
the political crisis and helping the parties to engage in
dialogue to resolve their differences.

Currently, the situation is largely stable in Guinea-
Bissau. Nonetheless, the country faces challenges in its
efforts to improve economic and social development,
to combat drug trafficking and to make progress on the
political process. China calls on international donors
and partners in multilateral and bilateral cooperation
to continue to support Guinea-Bissau and to build its
capacity to improve the lives ofthe population. We hope
that the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau, the Peacebuilding Commission,
the Guinea-Bissau country team, the United Nations
Development Programme, the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime and others will provide targeted
assistance to Guinea-Bissau based on the country's
actual needs.

China has always supported African countries
in their efforts to find African solutions to African
problems. We call on all parties in Guinea-Bissau to
work in the long-term interests of the country by finding
consensus and by using dialogue and consultation
to overcome differences, seeking the stability and
development of the country and striving to improve
the lives of the population. China has worked together
with the international community, including ECOWAS,
to promote dialogue and communication among the
different parties in the country and to maintain stability
and sustainable development in Guinea-Bissau and
West Africa as a whole. That can play a positive role.

