Mr. Argiiello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): As
we have been asked to be brief, I will start by merely
thanking the Security Council for the opportunity to
take part in this open debate. I wish also to say how
much we appreciated Ms. Hannelore Hoppe's
introduction of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2008/258). Delegations know how sensitive this
question is and how much importance my delegation
attaches to it, as demonstrated during our most recent
membership of the Council. Thus, after quite some
time, it is good to see that this organ has renewed its
interest in this question and has convened this meeting.

Previous speakers have been eloquent in their
reflections on this problem, which is becoming
increasingly urgent. The threat posed by the illicit trade
in small arms is a matter of concern to the entire
international community. At the same time, small arms
seem to be the weapons of choice in most of the
conflicts addressed by the Security Council. The wide
availability of such arms and their ammunition in many
regions is one of the main causes of insecurity and
poverty, as well as a factor that fuels many conflicts.
For that reason, we believe that synergies between
United Nations arms embargoes and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration activities should be
strengthened.

It is almost nine years since the Security Council
first addressed the question of small arms; yet we still
have a great deal to do in our efforts in prevent, combat
and eradicate the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons in all its aspects. However, this is a complex
and multidimensional problem involving security,
conflict prevention and resolution, crime prevention
and humanitarian and development issues, among other
dimensions. It also calls for joint action by the States,
intergovernmental organizations and civil society, at all
levels.

The report of the Secretary-General stresses the
need for the Security Council, the General Assembly
and the Peacebuilding Commission consider ways to
increase and improve their interaction on questions
linked to this matter, with a view to promoting the
formulation of long-term conflict prevention and
peacebuilding strategies, and in order to identify
existing links among the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons, the illicit exploitation of natural and
other resources and armed conflict.

I would like to reiterate my country's position on
what we believe are priority elements for an integrated
and comprehensive strategy to respond to the challenge
posed by this problem. First, there is a need to
strengthen international cooperation and assistance,
and to build capacities, including through technical and
financial assistance, to support and facilitate local,
national, regional and global efforts to combat this
scourge. It is necessary also to address questions
related to marking and tracing, control of arms
transfers, illicit brokering and ammunition, just to
mention a few. To that end, the United Nations Register
of Conventional Arms has become a basic instrument
to prevent conflicts, to attain peace and stability and to
encourage predictable and transparent conduct by
States.

Finally, I would like to reaffirm the support of my
delegation for the initiatives enabling us to address the
various dimensions of this problem, such as the
convening of this open debate. Argentina will continue
to work with resolve to contribute to this endeavour.

