Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): First of all, I would like to thank the Under-
Secretary-General for Peace Operations, Mr. Jean-
Pierre Lacroix, and the African Union Commissioner
for Peace and Security, Ambassador Sma'i'l Chergui, for
their briefings.

We welcome the signing of the constitutional

declaration in the Sudan on 17 August. The agreement is
the result of long negotiations and represents a key step
towards long-lasting peace, democracy and prosperity
in the Sudan. We also welcome the appointment of the
11 members ofthe Sovereign Council and the swearing-
in of the Prime Minister, Mr. Abdalla Hamdok, on
21 August. We commend the Sudanese people, in
particular women and young people, for their strong
yet peaceful action. All efforts must now be directed
towards implementing the agreement in the same spirit
of compromise and reconciliation that enabled the
stakeholders to achieve this historic milestone. In that
connection, I would like to stress the importance of the
following aspects.

First, there is a need to ensure inclusiveness by
bringing together all segments of society, especially
women, who were often at the forefront of the peaceful
protests, and representatives of all regions of the
country. Secondly, the human rights and fundamental
freedoms of the Sudanese people, including the right
to freedom of assembly, freedom of expression,
freedom of the press and freedom of religion, must be
respected. Thirdly, impunity must be addressed by, for
instance, putting in place an independent commission
of inquiry into the deadly events of 3 June, establishing
a country office of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights and engaging
in dialogue with the International Criminal Court
to ensure that those who are under an arrest warrant
are brought to justice, either before the International
Criminal Court or the national courts. And, fourthly,
civilians must be protected, including by allowing
unhindered humanitarian access.

Belgium fully supports the transition process
and looks forward to engaging with the civilian-led
transition authorities. Belgium welcomes the crucial
mediation role played by the African Union and Ethiopia
and the support provided by the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, the United Nations and the
entire international community. We encourage those
actors to continue to support the Sudan.

However, we remain concerned about the situation
in Darfur. Darfur remains a fragile region where the
root causes of the conflict, including access to land
and the future of displaced persons, have not yet been
fully resolved, as Under-Secretary-General Lacroix
and Commissioner Chergui reminded us. The fact
that, unfortunately, some groups in Darfur rejected the
17 August agreement shows that Sudanese stakeholders
must continue to work for a peaceful and equitable
solution for all, including a peace agreement between
all Sudanese parties and the different rebel groups. We
have been presented with a unique opportunity to put
an end to the various conflicts that have been ravaging
the country for far too long.

The African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) mandate will be
reviewed once again by the Council in October. In
the meantime, the Council must continue to follow
closely the situation in the Sudan in general and in
Darfur in particular. The UNAMID exit process cannot
be disconnected from developments in the rest of the
country. In that regard, we look forward to the joint
report of the United Nations and the African Union,
which will formulate a shared political strategy with
options for an appropriate and carefully calibrated
presence in Darfur.

In conclusion, the Sudan is experiencing a historic
moment in its history as a result of the courage and
aspiration to freedom, peace and justice of its people.
Significant challenges to sustainable peace remain, but
the Council will continue to support the country as it
continues its transition.

