Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Like other delegations, I too would like to begin by
acknowledging the presence of Her Excellency
Mrs. Zainab Hawa Bangura, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Sierra Leone, as well as to thank her for her
statement. I would also like to thank Mr. Michael von
der schulenburg, Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General, and Ambassador McNee, in his
capacity as Chairperson of the Sierra Leone country-
specific configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, for their statements. My delegation
would like to underscore some points that are of
particular attention for us.

First of all, with regard to reconciliation and
national unity, following the regrettable events in
Pujehun and Freetown last March, which led to a
political crisis, my delegation commends the
committed and mature attitude of the officials of the
two major political parties intended to halt the violence
in Sierra Leone and achieve national unity. That has
also ushered in a constructive dialogue on fundamental
issues in consolidating the progress achieved with
regard to democracy. We hope that that very
commendable step will be followed by the
establishment of independent mechanisms to
investigate the incidents of political violence and the
alleged acts of sexual violence that occurred during the
crisis, with a view to preventing impunity.

Costa Rica also acknowledges the positive signals
emanating from the Government and the
Anti-Corruption Commission, as well as the measures
taken against members of drug trafficking networks.
We once again urge the Government and political
factions in Sierra Leone to continue to work on those
and other cross-border problems by taking a
comprehensive approach and with the support of
regional bodies and the entire United Nations system.

We also commend the progress made in the
functioning of the National Human Rights Commission.
At the same time, we respectfully call on the Government
to continue its work to strengthen the observance and
promotion of human rights, especially those of women
and girls.

Costa Rica acknowledges the worthwhile efforts
made by the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL) in order to finalize
the Joint Vision of the United Nations system. We trust
that the political and development criteria will serve as
a key step in the process to consolidate peace in the
country, and in particular to provide support for the
implementation of the Agenda for Change. Likewise,
we hope that the special high-level meeting of the
Peacebuilding Commission to be held on 10 June will
produce the expected outcome and secure the necessary
financing.

Costa Rica joins the Secretary-General in
encouraging the Government and people of Sierra
Leone to take advantage of their significant natural
resources in order to create a strong economy as part of
the effort to achieve sustainable development.

Lastly, my delegation believes that the process of
revising the Constitution continues to be important
problem. In that regard, we are grateful for the
information provided to us today by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs. We urge her Government to make
progress in that process.

