Mr. Eler (Turkey): At the outset, allow me to
thank you, Madam, for organizing this very timely
briefing. Our thanks also go to Ms. Amos, Mr. Guterres
and Mr. Simonovic' for their valuable updates on the
intensifying humanitarian crisis in Syria.

Today's briefing serves as another reminder that the
grave humanitarian situation in Syria is unacceptable
and unsustainable. How many more wake-up calls are
necessary for the international community to effectively
address this crisis?
The Syrian regime, which tried to suppress
the legitimate demands of its people through the
indiscriminate use of violence and then declared an all-
out war against them by employing heavy weaponry,
has been escalating its inhumane attacks with every
day that passes. Al-Qusayr, Hama and Homs are under
the regime's heavy bombardment from both ground and
air. The use of ballistic missiles and chemical weapons
against the civilian population further increases our
concern and indignation and is turning the situation
into the greatest humanitarian tragedy of the twenty-
first century. Unless those attacks come to an end and
foreign militia forces fighting on the side of the regime
leave the country, it will not be possible to clear the way
for a peaceful settlement.

The bloodshed must come to an end through a
political solution and a meaningful transition, while
the territorial integrity and political unity of Syria is
preserved. The international community, in particular
the United Nations, has a vital role to play in that regard.
On the other hand, we should address the current
humanitarian crisis in a realistic and results-oriented
manner in order to extend a helping hand to the civilian
victims of this disaster.

As we just heard, recent reports of the United
Nations and its agencies operating on the ground
portray a troublesome picture. I will not repeat the
numbers, which speak for themselves.

When we look at the situation from the Turkish side
of the border, we see a crisis that threatens regional
and international peace and security and that places a
grave burden on Syria's neighbours. The neighbouring
countries cannot, and should not, be asked to face those
pressing challenges alone.

We in Turkey are exerting our utmost efforts to
respond the ramifications of the Syrian crisis. Our
assistance is based on the principles of responsibility
and conscience. I would like to stress that, despite its
ever-increasing burden, Turkey will continue to stand
by the Syrian people, and its open-door policy for
Syrians will continue.

We now host more than 200,000 Syrians in 20 camps.
The number exceeds half a million if we include those
who have found their way to various Turkish cities and
towns. Besides keeping its borders open, Turkey also
provides appropriate living conditions to Syrians in
the camps in all areas pertaining to daily life, such as
health, education and social needs. Turkish expenses
arising from the responsibility to respond to the crisis
have exceeded $1.5 billion. Furthermore, the Turkish
Red Crescent Society is delivering humanitarian
relief at the zero point of the border with Syria with
transparency and in conformity with international
legitimacy and humanitarian principles.

As highlighted by the United Nations, humanitarian
funding falls short of keeping up with the needs in
Syria. However, pledging financial support alone is
not sufficient. The existing methodology aimed at
achieving full, unimpeded and safe humanitarian
access is not working amid the growing and deepening
crisis in Syria. The international community, with a
view to burden-sharing, must take collective action. As
a response to the growing tragedy and the plight of the
Syrian people, new and creative measures and methods
are needed in order to ensure safe and sustained
humanitarian access to address the problems of
internally displaced persons within Syria. The Council
needs to consider alternative forms of aid delivery,
including cross-border operations.

The international community, in particular the
Security Council, has a moral responsibility to act
urgently, resolutely and collectively. In its absence, this
untenable situation, which is destroying human lives,
damaging livelihoods and threatening regional and
international peace and security, will continue to grow.

We reiterate once again our support for the Syrian
people's legitimate aspirations to live in dignity, as well
as our determination to continue to do our utmost in
responding to the humanitarian crisis across our border.
