Mr. Lacroix: I thank you, Madam President, for
the opportunity provided to colleagues of the African
Union, the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) and myself to update the Security Council
on the situation in South Sudan.

Today's meeting is timely as we look ahead to the
next round ofpeace talks at the High-level Revitalization
Forum in Addis Ababa. While I will principally speak
about key developments in the country since we last
briefed the Security Council in March (see S/PV.8197),
it is paramount that I underscore to the Security Council
that the peace process is at a critical juncture.

Heading into the next round of the High-level
Revitalization Forum, the parties remain far apart on the
critical issues of governance and security. The parties
continue to argue over the ministerial quotas in any
revised transitional Government arrangement, while
agreement on the modalities ofthe permanent ceasefire
and transitional security arrangements, including
security arrangements for Juba and security sector
reform, remains elusive. While the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) has worked to try
and narrow the gap in advance of the talks - which I am
sure Special Envoy Ambassador Wais will tell us more
about - the continued divergence in the positions ofthe
parties was underscored by Government and opposition
officials to Assistant-Secretary-General Keita, who has
just returned from South Sudan and Ethiopia.

While President Kiir and his Government have
repeatedly pledged to participate constructively
in the High-level Revitalization Forum, rhetoric
around the unilateral extension of the mandate of the
Transitional Government of National Unity and the
preparation of subsequent elections, should the High-
level Revitalization Forum fail to yield an "acceptable"
solution, is increasing. Those were the messages given
to Assistant-Secretary-General Keita while she was in
Juba three weeks ago.

Meanwhile, two weeks ago, the Transitional
National Legislative Assembly was presented
with a draft constitutional amendment bill, which
would incorporate the 2015 Peace Agreement into
the Transitional Constitution at a time when the
very agreement is under review at the High-level
revitalization Forum. Finally, last week, the Sudan
People's Liberation Movement (SPLM) held an
extraordinary meeting of its National Liberation
Council with the overall objective of advancing peace
through the reunification of the SPLM. and the holding
of elections. Several foreign dignitaries were also in
attendance. While efforts aimed at the reunification
of the SPLN are noteworthy, a unified and coordinated
approach by all regional and international partners in
support of an inclusive political initiative is critical at
this juncture in the peace process.

Two weeks ago, I also met with Ambassador Francis
Deng, a member of the national dialogue steering
committee, who was making rounds to give briefings
on the progress of the national dialogue. Apparently,
grass-roots consultations have been completed and next
steps include the launching of a constitutional review
process, which would incorporate the outcomes of the
consultations and set the framework for elections. June
2018 was cited as the date for completion ofthat process.
Concurrently, however, I had an opportunity to raise
these developments with a visiting delegation of the
South Sudan Council of Churches. In their estimation,
the national dialogue has not been an inclusive process,
with many South Sudanese constituents residing
in largely Opposition-controlled territories being
excluded from the local level consultations. Moreover,
the delegation was frank about the serious violations
that both sides continued to commit against civilians
and expressed concern at the steady deterioration of the
humanitarian and economic situation in the country.

The aim of grass-roots consultation is laudable, but
must be considered alongside other political processes
and must be inclusive; at the moment this is not the
case, with the majority of opposition parties boycotting
what they consider to be a flawed process.

It is our firm belief that the holding of elections
in the current political, security and humanitarian
environment is unrealistic and would be counter-
productive. As we are all aware, despite the signing of
the Cessation of Hostilities Agreement in December
2017, both the Government and the Opposition have
remained bent on armed confrontation, controlling
territory and forcing civilian displacement. In such a
situation, it is always the civilians who suffer, as they
are the ones who bear the brunt of the violence. It is
especially disconcerting that between the adjournment
of the High-level Revitalization Forum talks in February
and now, a period in which we would have expected the
parties to reflect on what compromises could be made
to end the violence in South Sudan and sow the seeds
of peace, military operations between the SPLA and
the SPLA-in-Opposition have escalated. There are no
signs of meaningful implementation of the Cessation
of Hostilities Agreement, and a ceasefire remains a
distant prospect.

We meet today on the heels of increased
hostilities in Unity state between the SPLA and
the SPLA-in-Opposition forces aimed at displacing
populations, securing hitherto Opposition-controlled
areas and supply routes between Bentiu and Leer.
Reports indicate that the fighting, which resumed
around the third week of April north of Mayendit and
subsequently spread to areas north and south east of Leer,
has resulted in mass civilian displacement, including
reports of civilians fleeing into the surrounding
swamplands and into the temporary protection areas
adjacent to the temporary base operated in Leer by
UNMISS, to escape indiscriminate violence and the
burning and looting of property.
At present there are 1,744 internally displaced
persons seeking refuge in the temporary protection
area. UNMISS has reported the SPLA mobilization
of armoured personnel carriers to clear the routes and
that it has heard artillery fire. On 26 April, hostilities
near Leer found the UNMISS temporary operating
base subject to overhead fire. I should also add that,
amid the increasing hostilities, humanitarian partners
have been forced to evacuate from most of the affected
areas, interrupting a range of activities, including those
related to health, education, nutrition and water and
sanitation for thousands of people.

Against this marked deterioration of the security
situation, Special Representative Shearer travelled to
Leer last week and saw at first hand the devastating
results of the clashes, including deserted villages,
burnt tukuls and ransacked health facilities, as well as
civilians - including children - injured as a result
of the fighting. During his mission to the affected
areas, he met with both Government and Opposition
authorities and urged the parties to respect the Cessation
of Hostilities Agreement and reign in their forces.
In the meantime, the Mission has dispatched a rapid
investigation team from its human rights division to
verify numerous reports of civilians being deliberately
targeted by military forces allied to the SPLA and bands
of youth during these operations, including being burnt
alive in tukuls and pursued into the swamps. Insecurity
has also increased in Jonglei, with the SPLA's successful
resupply of its position in Waat and subsequent clashes
in and around Opposition-controlled Akobo and its
environs. Meanwhile, reports of clashes across parts of
Central Equatoria state also continue.

I would like to add at this point that sexual
violence remains a prominent feature of the conflict.
The UNMISS human rights rapid investigation team
deployed to document the impact of recent fighting
in Unity state, in Leer and in surrounding areas has
received several disturbing accounts of conflict-related
sexual violence, including rape of young girls and gang
rape. These latest reports only compound what we
already know to be a desperate situation for women and
girls in South Sudan, who continue to be the victims
of appalling levels of violence. We must respond, and
respond quickly, to ensure accountability for these
violations and abuses and bring an end to these heinous
acts once and for all.

Meanwhile, the humanitarian situation continues to
deteriorate as a direct result of the protracted conflict.
Nearly 4.3 million people have been displaced to date,
including 1.7 million internally and 2.5 million across
borders. In March, United Nations agencies reported
that conflict-induced displacement was worsening
the country's already dire food security situation,
and anticipated that food security will continue to
deteriorate with the upcoming lean season from May
to July, likely to be the worst ever experienced in
the country.

Against this dire background, however, aid workers
continue to be a target in this conflict. Since the crisis
began in 2013, approximately 100 aid workers have
been killed, with numerous others targeted for attack
or kidnapping. This is simply unacceptable in a context
where these very individuals are racing against time to
save lives.

UNMISS continues its efforts to protect civilians
through an expansion of its protection activities, and
is also working hand in hand with partners to respond
to the worsening humanitarian situation, as well as
supporting resilience and reconciliation efforts at the
grass-roots level wherever possible. Success, however,
is relative in this complex environment of active
fighting and persistent insecurity.

It is against that backdrop that I reiterate that there
must be a tangible cost for the continuation of violence
in South Sudan. There must be consequences for blatant
violations of the Cessation of Hostilities Agreement
and broken promises to protect civilians. As a first
step in that direction, I encourage the Security Council
to urge IGAD to make public the ceasefire-violations
reports drafted by the Ceasefire and Transitional
Security Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism. The
Mechanism is working to monitor and verify the
reported violations, but these reports have yet to be
published and deliberated on. Without consequences,
we have no one to blame but ourselves for allowing the
crisis to escalate unchecked and perpetuating a lack of
confidence in a political solution to the crisis.

Finally, I also wish to urge the Security Council to
use its voice to dispel this unhealthy narrative of regime
change that some of South Sudan's leaders would like
to use against the United Nations and the international
community in a bid to win popular support. This
narrative serves no one and only sows seeds of hate and

paranoia in a country facing significant challenges and
where localized violence is becoming endemic.

