The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda.
In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite that representative
to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ileka
(Democratic Republic of the Congo), took a seat
at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council condemns with the
utmost firmness the seizure of the town of
Bukavu, on 2 June 2004, by dissident forces led
by former Congolese Rally for Democracy (RCD- Goma) commanders Major-General Laurent
Nkunda, Colonel Jules Mutebusi and others. It
also condemns atrocities and human right
violations which have occurred in this context. It
declares its profound concern regarding reports of
military actions these forces have undertaken in
other parts of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. It considers all such actions to constitute
a serious threat to the peace process and to the
transition, and demands that these cease
immediately.

"The Security Council reaffirms its
commitment to and respect for the national
sovereignty, political independence, territorial
integrity and unity of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. It expresses its solidarity with the
Congolese people and its full support to the
Government of National Unity and Transition. It
calls for the prompt and peaceful extension of
State authority throughout the Congolese
territory, in particular in Bukavu.

"The Security Council urges all parties
represented in the Government of National Unity
and Transition to remain fully committed to the
peace process and to abstain from any action that
could endanger the unity of the transitional
Government.

"The Security Council warns solemnly the
States neighbouring the Democratic Republic of
the Congo of the consequences of support to the
armed rebel groups. It urges the Government of
Rwanda, taking into account its previous
relationship with RCD-Goma, and all other
neighbouring States to do all in their power to
support the peace process and help secure a
peaceful resolution to this crisis, while at the
same time refraining from any action or
declaration that might impact negatively on the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. It recalls the terms of its resolutions 1493
(2003) and 1533 (2004), especially those
elements relating to regional security across the
Great Lakes, and calls upon all member States, in
particular those in the region, to fulfil their
responsibilities accordingly.

"The Security Council welcomes the
initiative of the Chairperson of the Commission
of the African Union aimed at overcoming the
current crisis, including in its human dimension,
and at facilitating the successful conclusion of the
peace process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

"The Security Council reiterates its full
support to the United Nations Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC). It
condemns the recent killing of three of its
personnel. It calls on all Congolese parties to
support the work of MONUC and demands that
they refrain from any hostile action against the
personnel or facilities of the United Nations."

This statement will be issued as a document of The Security Council has thus concluded the
the Security Council under the symbol present stage of its consideration of the item on its
S/PRST/2OU4/l9. agenda.

The meeting rose at 7.50 p.m.

