Mr. Estreme (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina thanks the Guatemalan presidency of the
Security Council for convening this open debate on
peace and justice, with a focus on the International
Criminal Court (ICC). We welcome the presence of
President Song and Mr. Mochochoko of the Office of
the Prosecutor.

The Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court is one of the most notable achievements of
multilateral diplomacy, and its contribution to the
fight against impunity for crimes against humanity,
genocide and war crimes is obvious. Little more than
a decade after the adoption of the Rome Statute, the
Court is today a fully functioning permanent tribunal
of international justice.

We now must recognize that, with time and
experience, the international community has left the
peace-versus-justice paradigm to embrace "peace and
justice". According to this paradigm, justice and peace
are conceived not as competing but as complementary
objectives.

The Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statute
recognized the need to address this issue, and did so
for the first time in the international criminal justice
stocktaking exercise at the 2010 Review Conference
of the Rome Statute, held in Kampala. The exercise,
for which Argentina was a joint focal point along with
Switzerland and the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
arrived at important conclusions that we should take
into account. The need for peace and justice to be
complementary objectives is confirmed by reality.

I would also like to refer to other important
aspects of the relationship between the International
Criminal Court and the Security Council. The Rome
Statute provides for a role for the Security Council and
a cooperative relationship with the United Nations.
This cooperative relationship is also referred to in the
Relationship Agreement between the Organization
and the Court. Over the years since the entry into
force of the Statute, that relationship has become more
fluid, and the Council itself has included the need for
accountability for Rome Statute crimes and for the
Court itself into its consideration of concrete situations.

There are a few elements of that relationship that
my delegation would like to point out. Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Court is crucial,
and must always respect the judicial independence of
the Court. The question of non-essential contacts with
persons for whom the Court has issued arrest warrants
must be part of the cooperation provided for in the
Relationship Agreement.

But the element that is the most crucial for the
ability of the International Criminal Court to fulfil
its mandate is cooperation by States. A permanent
international justice system requires the cooperation
of all United Nations Member States. All Member
States must cooperate with the Court, whether or not
they are parties to the Rome Statute. That obligation
is particularly relevant with regard to arrest warrants.

The obligation to cooperate with the Court leads
to the question of the follow-up that we believe the
Council must engage in with respect to referrals.
The fact is that when the Council makes a referral, it
receives reports of the Prosecutor of the Court with
a certain frequency, as well as information from the
Court in cases of non-cooperation. We are of the view
that the Council cannot merely take note of such reports
without ensuring follow-up of - for example - the
status of cooperation with the Court or situations on
the ground, such as in the case of the detention of Court
staff some months ago. Argentina believes that the
establishment of a follow-up mechanism for situations
referred to the Court would contribute greatly to
responsible collaboration between the Council and the
ICC.

I should like to highlight two issues of concern
for my delegation. One is the clause that, in the two
referrals already made, seeks to exempt nationals
of non-State parties to the Rome Statute from the
jurisdiction of the Court for acts or omissions arising
from operations established or authorized by the
Security Council or related to them. This could lead
to the Court being constrained in its ability to enforce
justice in an independent and impartial manner through
the action of a political organ that seeks to create an
exception not provided for in the Rome Statute. It could
also affect the credibility of the Security Council and
of the ICC itself.

The other concern, which also applies to both
referrals, is an issue that could have a serious impact
on the Court. In establishing that the expenses derived
from both referrals will be defrayed not by the United
Nations but by the States parties to the Rome Statute,
the Council is ignoring the provisions of article 115 (b)
of the Rome Statute and article 13 of the Relationship
Agreement. With the increasing number of cases, the
pressure on the resources available to the Court has
intensified. In practical terms, failure to address the
financing of referrals could threaten the long-term
viability of the Court.

Argentina wishes to emphasize in this respect that
the fight against impunity is an objective of States
parties to the Rome Statute and of the United Nations.
This debate is evidence of that. But that objective must
also be accompanied by the commitment to providing
the Court the necessary means to fulfil its mandate. It
is not a commitment alien to the Council or the United
Nations; it has been addressed with regard to the ad hoc
tribunals established by the Security Council. We must
now address it with regard to the ICC.

The entry into force and activation of the jurisdiction
ofthe Court over the crime of aggression will add a new
element to the relationship between the Council and the
ICC. In the evolution of the international community
towards a permanent international criminal justice
system based on the Court, the crime of aggression is
nothing but the corollary of the prohibition of the threat
or the use of force, as provided for in Article 2.4. of
the Charter of the United Nations. Argentina is actively
engaged in the internal process for the ratification of all
the Kampala amendments.

In conclusion, this year marks the tenth anniversary
since the Rome Statute entered into force. Argentina
reiterates once again that the Court represents one
of the most notable contributions to the fight against
impunity. I would like to remind the Council of the
words from the Kampala Declaration,

"recognizing the noble mission and the role of
the International Criminal Court in a multilateral
system that aims to end impunity, establish the rule
of law, promote and encourage respect for human
rights and achieve sustainable peace, in accordance
with international law and the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations".

Argentina reiterates its firm commitment to the
International Criminal Court.
