Ms. Samson (Netherlands): The Netherlands
aligns itself with the statement delivered earlier by
the observer of the European Union. I am grateful to
the Secretary-General for his detailed and thorough
report (S/2015/422) and would also like to thank
Special Representative Haysom for his briefing and
Ambassador Tanin for his statement.

The latest report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) describes the sharp increase in armed clashes
in a number of provinces resulting from the Taliban's
spring offensive. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
offers its condolences to the Afghan Government on
the lives that have been lost in that offensive and in this
morning's attack on the Afghan Parliament in Kabu, a
stark reminder of the threat that Afghan civilians face
on a daily basis. The Netherlands strongly condemns
that heinous assault, which, apart from the devastation
and loss of human lives it has brought, is also an attack
on the democratic process in Afghanistan.

The Afghan national defence and security forces
have been able to push back the insurgents, but Taliban
pressure remains high in several provinces. In the long
run, lasting stability and peace can be possible only
through reconciliation. It is therefore laudable that the
National Unity Government has taken the initiative to
enter into peace talks with the Taliban. Important first
steps have been taken. The Netherlands supports the
National Unity Government's regional approach. We
also hope to see the meaningful participation of Afghan
women in the peace talks. Peace is essential for any
further development in Afghanistan.

The National Unity Government presented its
ambitious reform agenda, "Realizing self-reliance",
during the London Conference. Since then, its
appointment ofa full Cabinet has progressed slowly but
steadily. However, with that now almost complete, we
hope to soon be able to see reforms come to fruition.

The Netherlands is looking forward to a draft of
the refreshed Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework
in the run-up to the senior officials' meeting in Kabul
on 5 September. The Framework should include the
agreements from the 2012 Tokyo Declaration on
Afghanistan, the Government's reform agenda and the
various ministries' 100-day action plans.

As the UNAMA report highlights, the National
Unity Government is committed to sustainably
improving the lives of women in Afghanistan. It has
made some significant progress in furthering human
rights, including women's rights, since its formation,
for example by prohibiting the recruitment of children
by the military and police forces and by addressing
corruption within the justice sector, as well as through
its nomination of the first female Supreme Court judge.
Continued commitment is vital. The Netherlands is
looking forward to the presentation of the Afghan
national action plan on resolution 1325 (2000) and to
the 100-day action plan of the Ministry of Women's
Affairs.

The Netherlands has been a long-time partner of
Afghanistan, with a relationship stretching back more
than a decade. We have been contributing in the area
of security in the provinces of Baghlan, Uruzgan
and Kunduz, and currently in Balkh province. Since
2002, Afghanistan has been one of our most important
partners in development cooperation, particularly in
the areas of the rule of law, reconstruction and gender.
We have been a trusted contributor to the World Bank's
Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund, supporting
Afghan economic development, education, health
care and governmental capacities. The Netherlands
also contributes troops to NATO's Resolute Support
Mission for training, advising and assisting in northern
Afghanistan and Mazar-e-Sharif. We have sent staff
to the European Union Police Mission training effort
and to UNAMA, and we will continue to support the
Afghan National Army and the Afghan National Police.

As our Minister for Foreign Affairs said at the
London Conference, the Netherlands will stand by the
Afghan people in the years to come. Our continued
support must go hand in hand with critical and
meaningful reforms within the Afghan Government,
as agreed on in the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework, so that self-reliance can indeed be achieved
in this new era of increased Afghan ownership and
leadership.

In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity
to underline the continued support of the Netherlands
for the role played by UNAMA, and to thank it for
its ongoing constructive role in coordinating the
international community's efforts and fulfilling its
political mandate.

