Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, like the other delegations,
Equatorial Guinea would like to express its deepest
condolences to the Government of Ethiopia and to
the families and the Governments of the States of the
victims of the Ethiopian Airlines crash that took place
yesterday, Sunday, 10 March, who included a group of
people who were travelling to participate in the fourth
United Nations Environment Assembly.

We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, for the comprehensive
report presented at this meeting (S/2019/193) and
also for his tireless efforts to achieve lasting peace
in Afghanistan. We also thank the National Security
Adviser of Afghanistan, Mr. Hamdullah Mohib, and
the Deputy Executive Director of the Afghan Women's
Network, Ms. Storai Tapesh, for their contributions,
which enrich and complement the information available
to us so far.

We welcome the intensified measures implemented
by the Afghan Government, through the National
Defence and Security Forces, to address security
threats in various cities, as a result of which a small
decrease in such incidents has been noted. However, the
reality is that security, unfortunately, remains the main
challenge for Afghanistan. We continue to observe with
extreme concern the high number of civilian deaths
caused by anti-Government elements and by the use of
improvised explosive devices, as reported by UNAMA.

In that regard, we strongly condemn all heinous,
deliberate attacks carried out during the reporting
period against civilians, especially against women
and children and civilian targets. We urge the parties
to the conflict to strictly comply with their obligations
under international humanitarian law to take all
possible measures to avoid attacks against the civilian
population and civilian infrastructure, as well as
with their obligations concerning the limitation of
humanitarian access.

We note the launching of a three-year public
administration reform programme by the Independent
Administrative Reform and Civil Service Commission,
in particular the increase in the representation of
women in civil service. As we have reiterated in the
past, meaningful participation by women in all stages
of the peace process is a guarantee for ensuring the
protection and promotion of Afghan women's rights in
any resulting peace agreement.

With regard to the humanitarian situation, we share
the deep concern of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and other delegations that spoke
previously. The 5 per cent increase in the total number
of civilian casualties and the 11 per cent increase in
civilian deaths as compared to 2017, according to the
published report of UNAMA and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
in addition to the approximately 13.5 million people
facing high levels of food insecurity owing to the severe
drought, among other factors, are cause for great alarm.
That is why, once again, we must all echo the call of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
all parties to reduce the level of violence and protect
civilians, especially women and children.

In conclusion, we would like to encourage the
Government of Afghanistan to continue its efforts to
achieve a comprehensive peace process through direct
conversations among the parties involved - inclusive
and comprehensive talks among Afghans - with the
participation of the countries of the region. It must also
join forces with other political actors to prepare the
presidential elections scheduled for 20 July to ensure
their credibility and legitimacy.

We would also like to express well-deserved praise
and support for the important role that UNAMA is
playing in promoting peace and stability in Afghanistan.

