Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I wish to start by expressing
our appreciation to Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, Special
Representative of the African Union (AU) to the Central
African Republic Moussa Nebie and Brigadier General
Herminio Teodoro Maio for their respective briefings.

Two years after the Government of President
Touadera took office, we note the progress made by the
Central African Republic towards a gradual restoration
of State authority through the deployment of district
administrations in all parts of the country, together
with the return of basic social services. That progress
should not be overlooked. However, as rightly stated
by the Secretary-General in his report (S/2018/611) and
stressed by Special Representative Onanga-Anyanga,
whose work we greatly appreciate, such gains remain
slow and fragile. What worries us most is the fact that
the first half of this year has witnessed a deterioration
of the security situation despite the incremental change
that we have seen in other areas.

Today I want to take this opportunity to highlight
what emerged from the discussion at the level of the
Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention and
Resolution in Africa, which we chair. Based on the
suggestion of members of the Security Council, we
organized a series of discussions on specific conflict
situations in Africa, not so much to rework the discussion
that takes place here in the Council but to facilitate a
genuine exchange of views on how to support national
and regional efforts in the spirit of African solutions to
African problems.

In that context, we convened a meeting last month
to discuss the situation in the Central African Republic
and how to prevent a reversal of the gains made and
to sustain peace. Assistant Secretary-General Keita,
the African Union Special Representative, the Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission configuration and
the Permanent Representative of the Central African
Republic, whose presence here today we very much
welcome, briefed the Ad Hoc Working Group. Unlike
at previous meetings, the discussion that followed truly
lived up to expectations, with members frankly sharing
their views in a much more interactive manner.

That is why we felt that we needed to bring that to
the attention of the Security Council so that the outcome
of the discussion at the level of the Ad Hoc Working
Group feeds into our deliberations here today. Serious
concern was expressed about the deteriorating security
and humanitarian situation and the socioeconomic
challenges, particularly over the past two months,
as well as the danger of inflammatory rhetoric and
sectarian violence. Serious concern was expressed in
that connection with regard to the role of non-citizens
farming the conflict through the use of incendiary
language. Much ofthat is resource-driven and was seen
as a very serious challenge.

The illegal exploitation of minerals and other
resources, primarily as the main source of funds for
supporting the operation of the armed groups, including
with the assistance of actors near and far, was also
raised as an alarming development. Furthermore, the
growing number of attacks against the peacekeepers
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) and their impact in hindering efforts
towards the gradual restoration of State authority in the
country was considered very disturbing.

In terms of the way forward, the importance
of promoting dialogue and reconciliation through
engagement with the local community, as well as
supporting the expansion of State authority, in particular
in remote areas, including by strengthening the capacity
of the Government and its reconciliation efforts, was
greatly emphasized. That is no substitute for addressing
that and other challenges, as Special Representative
Onanga-Anyanga also stressed a short while ago.
Promoting dialogue with neighbouring countries to
ensure border security was also underscored. That was
highlighted as extremely critical.

Members expressed support for the AU's efforts
in the context of the African Initiative for Peace and
Reconciliation and stressed the need to leverage the
United Nations and AU synergy, welcoming the recent
joint visit by Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and
Commissioner Chergui. With regard to MINUSCA,
the fact that the Mission needs a more robust posture,
adequately resourced with the necessary financial and
logistical support, was very well recognized. We heard
Special Representative Onanga-Anyanga say that as
well in his briefing a short while ago.

In the end, what emerged very clearly during
the discussion was that the Central African Republic
requires greater attention from the Council. That
clearly appears to be self-evident given the current
situation and the need to do everything possible to
prevent a reversal of the little progress made over the
past two years.

