Mr. Kitaoka (Japan): I would like to thank Mr.
Morris for his very informative and powerful briefing.
His explanation of the situation in southern Africa,
based on his recent trip to the region as the Secretary-
General's Special Envoy for Humanitarian Needs there,
was especially persuasive. We appreciate all of his hard
work.

We share the View that, as Mr. Morris has just
argued, peace and security cannot be maintained
without tackling hunger. The Secretary-General stated
in his report that

"A world in which every year 11 million
children die before their fifth birthday and
three million people die of AIDS is not a world
of larger freedom." (A/59/2005, para. 26)

The effect of hunger on children is especially
devastating, as it robs them of their future. Desperate
children without any means of obtaining food often
have no other choice than to become soldiers. Hunger
therefore also contributes to the serious problem of
child soldiers. We are deeply concerned about children
who are forced to experience such suffering, and we
are determined to continue to provide assistance in that
area, especially through, inter alia, school feeding
programmes. School feeding programmes contribute to
helping children to resume normal and peaceful lives,
as well as to overcoming hunger and promoting
education.

School feeding programmes were very useful
when Japan was trying to recover from the war. Those
programmes included the assistance of the United
States, UNICEF and other countries and organizations.
We are very grateful for that assistance.

Hunger, as an extreme form of poverty, results
from various interrelated patterns. Low productivity is
aggravated by conflict, natural disasters, HIV/AIDS
and weak governance. Comprehensive remedies are
needed to address problems of such complexity. In
addition, even when productivity is relatively high,
inefficient distribution systems or distribution systems
distorted for one reason or another can prevent
ordinary citizens from gaining access to food.
Distribution is also a challenge to the food assistance
programmes conducted by the World Food Programme
(WFP). Accurate needs assessments and reliable
monitoring are indispensable to distributing food to
people in need. And both require sufficient cooperation
from the Governments concerned.

Based on those observations, I would like to ask a
few questions. First, how does the World Food
Programme cooperate with other relevant United
Nations agencies to address complex problems of
hunger in a holistic manner? In that endeavour, what
does Mr. Morris expect from intergovernmental bodies,
especially from the Security Council?

Secondly, I assume that problems in the food
distribution system also affect chronic hunger in the
southern African region, which Mr. Morris Visited.
What are examples of such problems, and how is the
WFP helping to solve them?

Thirdly, what are the challenges that Mr. Morris
faces in obtaining cooperation from the Governments
concerned, especially with regard to needs assessment
and monitoring?

