Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, I would like
to thank our briefers today for their very informative
presentations. I particularly want to applaud Special
Representative Michael Keating for his extremely hard
work and continued efforts to support the peacebuilding
and State-building agenda in Somalia over the past
almost three years, and to wish him every success in
his future endeavours. I would also like to congratulate
Mr. Nicholas Haysom on his appointment as the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Somalia.

Poland welcomes the recent diplomatic developments
in the Horn ofAfrica between Ethiopia, Eritrea, Somalia
and Djibouti. We hope they can find peaceful solutions
to their outstanding issues with a view to forging new,
durable partnerships and economic cooperation that
will benefit regional security and sustainable growth.

With regard to Somalia, Poland welcomes the
progress that it has achieved so far, but we also note
the fragility of the situation. We commend the Federal
Government for setting an ambitious reforms agenda.
We welcome the initial agreement on the electoral
model, as well as the ongoing work on the electoral
law. At the same time, we believe that there are other
processes that have to move forward in parallel, in
particular the federalization and finalization of the
constitutional review that will allow for one-person,
one-vote elections in 2020 and 2021.

We appreciate the commitment that the Federal
Government of Somalia has demonstrated to economic
reform, particularly its efforts to strengthen budgetary
discipline and raise domestic revenue. Sustainable
socioeconomic development is hard to achieve without
taking concrete steps to combat corruption. In that
regard, we see the anti-corruption campaign launched
by the Government as a positive development.

The security situation remains critical to the
success of Somalia's recovery and development efforts.
Progress on security-sector reform, as well as on issues
related to the political settlement, including power-
and resource-sharing, is urgently needed and requires
the concerted efforts of all actors. We therefore call
on the Federal Government and Federal Parliament
of Somalia, and the federal member states, to work
together for the benefit of the people and in order to
implement the national security architecture. We also
call on the international community to support Somali
efforts in a coordinated way. In that regard, we very
much appreciated the recent Somalia partnership forum
held in July by international partners, including the
European Union and Sweden, together with the Federal
Government of Somalia.

Last but not least, I would like to emphasize the
critical importance of political inclusiveness and
ensuring women's genuine involvement in the political
processes in Somalia. Icould not agree more with today's
briefer, Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive
Director of UN-Women, that women in Somalia can
play a vital role in peacebuilding and reconciliation
efforts, forging resilience, addressing the root causes of
crises and developing strategies to counter terrorism.
The Council should build on the positive momentum
that we are witnessing and support the Federal and state
Governments' efforts to advance gender equality and
promote women's political participation in Somalia.
We also see a greater role for women in post-conflict
reconstruction and economic recovery. In that regard,
I want to thank all the United Nations institutions in
Somalia for promoting civic education and gender
equality and mobilizing young people. We especially
commend the adoption of the United Nations-Somalia
gender equality strategy.

I would like to conclude by thanking the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia, the whole
United Nations family and the African Union Mission in
Somalia, as well as other actors present on the ground,
for their daily efforts and their support to Somalia on its
path towards peace and stability.

