Ms. Wallstriim (Sweden): First of all, I thank the
Secretary-General and the Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Gamba, for their
important briefings to the Council this morning. I also
want to thank the Secretary-General for his annual
report (S/2017/821), because this year it has very
clearly focused on protection and prevention, which we
welcome. I also commend the Secretary-General and the
Special Representative for their enhanced engagement
with the concerned parties, which is very important.

I pay particular tribute to Mr. Mubin Shaikh for
sharing his story with the Council. I cannot help but
also turn to General Romeo Dallaire, because I want to
thank him for everything he is doing when it comes to
children in armed conflict.

As I said in the Council on Friday (see S/PV.8079),
I visited Afghanistan last week. In Afghanistan, one in
three civilian casualties of the conflict is a child. In
addition, children continue to be recruited, particularly
by armed groups. They remain at risk of sexual
Violence and are also subject to forced detention. I want
Council members to imagine a classroom. The teacher
has given the class an assignment to fill in the blank
in the sentence: "I want to be when I grow up." A
doctor? A lawyer? A teacher? One boy has no answer.
A week later, his chair in the classroom is empty. His
father died in the war, and the boy already knew that he
would now have to provide for his family by working as
a shoeshine. There are countless such stories. Some of
them, like that one, were captured in a short film by a
young filmmaker whom I met in Herat.

Children are the ones who are suffering most from
the conflict. We all know that that is the case in every
war and conflict. As we have already heard, we, the
international community, have a responsibility. We
must do all in our power to give every child the right to
a childhood.

The Secretary-General's report details the
shocking scale and severity of violations and abuses
against children in armed conflicts around the world.
To think of how children have been killed and maimed,
recruited and used as human shields and human bombs
is heartbreaking. We must not lose this generation of
children. How we treat those affected by armed conflict
has consequences for their future. Giving up on them
means giving up on their communities and the countries
that they live in.

While we cannot solve all the conflicts on the
agenda of the Security Council here and now, we can
protect the children who are suffering because of them.
The children and armed conflict agenda is a framework
for that. It gives us the tools to prevent all violations and
abuses against children and ensure that perpetrators are
held accountable. There is a unique consensus within
the Council on this agenda, and we should spare no
effort in its implementation.

Sweden has a long tradition of working to
strengthen the protection of children. As a member
of the Security Council and as Chair of the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict, our aim is to
advance that work further. There are a number of areas
in which we believe there is room for improvement.

First, the Council has heard from child Victims of
non-State armed groups, including Al-Shabaab, Boko
Haram and Da'esh. Their stories, like Mubin's, are
shocking. They have told us of their recruitment as
child soldiers, of sexual slavery and mass abductions.
We have a responsibility to act in the face of such
attacks to our common humanity. The first step is
to improve our work to prevent human rights abuses
and violations of international humanitarian law. That
should include Violations and abuses by all parties to a
conflict, including State and non-State armed groups.
In that regard, we call on those Member States that have
not yet done so to sign the Principles and Guidelines
on Children Associated with Armed Forces or Armed
Groups and the Safe Schools Declaration. However,
we, as the international community, must also ensure
that our response to those groups is in accordance with
international law.

Secondly, we should prioritize the effective
reintegration of children formerly associated with
armed forces or armed groups. Those children should
always be treated primarily as victims. Successful
reintegration is in the best interests not only ofthe child,
but also of society as a whole. Children should always
be part of the solution, and not part of the problem. That
was a clear message sent during the Council's visit to
the Lake Chad region.

Thirdly, we should guarantee the right to education
and protect schools. That is important in order to prevent
conflicts and build a sustainable peace. Sustainable
Development Goal 4 underlines the important role of
children's education in reducing poverty and inequality,
and in that regard I want to mention girls' access to
education in particular. As the penholder for children
and armed conflict, we are very pleased that the Council
today adopted presidential statement S/PRST/2017/2l,
which shows the Council's strong unity behind the
children and armed conflict mandate. The statement
strengthens the Council's stance on many of the issues
that I have just raised.

Looking to the future, we will continue to lead on
this issue. That includes using the Security Council and
our role as Chair of the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict as a platform to integrate child
protection as a priority in peacekeeping, prevention
and the agenda for sustaining peace, as well as to stand
up for the integrity of the children and armed conflict
mandate. We can and will work hard in all of our efforts,
both inside and outside the Council, to ensure children's
rights to education and health - including mental
health and psychosocial support in conflicts - and to
enable children to make their voices heard.

Protecting children today prevents conflicts
tomorrow. When we give children their futures back,
we give them the opportunity to realize their dream,
whether it is to become a doctor, a lawyer or a teacher.
By doing so, we put in place the building blocks for
peaceful and sustainable societies. The children trapped
in armed conflict today have no time to lose; neither
should we. It is time for action.

