Mr. Al-Bader (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Mr. President, I would like to thank you for
convening this important meeting. I welcome the
participation this afternoon of His Excellency Mr.
Hoshyar Zebari, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq.
Allow me also to thank Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad,
Permanent Representative of the United States, and Mr.
Ashraf Jehangir Qazi, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Iraq, for their briefings to the
Council on the activities of the Multinational Force and
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq,
respectively.

The State of Qatar has reiterated the need to
respect Iraq's sovereignty, political independence and
territorial integrity. We have also reaffirmed the need
for the Iraqi people to regain their security and
freedom, as well as for a commitment by all parties to
non-interference in Iraq's internal affairs. It is
necessary also to reject all attempts to entrench
sectarianism and division and to undermine security
and stability in the region. The State of Qatar also
considers it important to act expeditiously to identify
and address the root causes of the Iraqi crisis,
especially given that the situation in the country
remains extremely worrisome for all those concerned
about Iraq and the region.

In order to extricate the country from its crisis, it
is imperative to launch an inclusive, participatory and
transparent political process that fulfils the aspirations
of all factions in Iraq and integrates those factions into
political life and national institutions. It is also
imperative to confront the abhorrent sectarianism that
now exists in Iraq. The security situation must also be
brought under control and the necessary attention paid
to development and reconstruction and to meeting the
increasing humanitarian needs of the Iraqi population.

Significant efforts have been made to establish
stability and security in Iraq both by the Iraqi
Government, which months ago launched the Baghdad
security plan, and by the Multinational Force. The
success of those efforts has been limited in some cases.
Obstacles continue to hamper the effort to bring the
security situation under control and to end violence, a
goal that requires enormous efforts and the
strengthening of national security forces to enable them
to take control of the situation.

We condemn all acts of terrorist violence in any
form and from any source. The targeting of religious
sites has grave consequences for the security situation
in Iraq.

Expediting the improvement of the basic living
conditions of the Iraqi people - a third of whom live
under the poverty line, according to the Iraqi central
statistical agency - is another priority that must be
addressed by the Iraqi Government with the assistance
of international partners, the United Nations system
and intergovernmental organizations. In that regard, the
International Compact with Iraq, which was launched
at the recent Sharm el-Sheikh meeting, is a useful
initiative aimed at strengthening the foundations of
peace and relaunching socio-economic and political
growth in Iraq over the next five years.

The situation of Iraqi refugees is now a real crisis
whose scope and dimensions affect both Iraq and
neighbouring States. The conference organized at
Geneva in April by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees regarding the
humanitarian needs of Iraqi displaced persons helped
raise awareness of the need to support displaced
persons and the States that host them. This issue
continues to be a problem that requires an urgent
solution.

At this critical stage in the stabilization and
reconstruction efforts in Iraq, the United Nations is
playing an important role in the areas of constitutional
support, electoral assistance, reconstruction,
development, humanitarian assistance, human rights
and the rule of law. The world Organization and its
specialized agencies are capable of assuming a greater
role, with clear guidance from the Security Council and
the Iraqi Government. In his report (S/2007/330), the
Secretary-General expressed his willingness to
consider expanding the role of the United Nations. In
order to do that, however, it is essential to provide the
necessary infrastructure and create security conditions
conducive to carrying out the task.

