Mr. Richardson (United States of America): During
our formal debate in this Chamber earlier this week, we
heard the views of many delegations on the Har
Homa/Jabal Abu Ghneim controversy. We heard the deep
concern with which many members of the Council greeted
news of the Israeli Government's decision to commence
construction. We listened as delegation after delegation
expressed this concern.

The United States shares this concern as well. Let me
restate our views. The decision of the Government of Israel
runs counter to the progress and achievement of the parties
to date. We do not believe such activity is helpful to the
peace process, and, as President Clinton said earlier, we
wish that this decision had not been made. It undermines
the trust and confidence so badly needed in creating the
appropriate environment for successful negotiations,
especially on the difficult issues involved in the permanent
status talks.

Let me emphasize this latter point, because it is
absolutely critical. To achieve a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East requires an honest
negotiating process, one in which the parties do nothing to
pre-empt, prejudge or predetermine talks over any of the
issues the parties themselves have decided will be
addressed in permanent status negotiations. This is the logic
of the process the United States has co-sponsored since
Madrid, and it is the only process that is credible and can
produce results. For its part, the United States will do
everything it can to ensure that the process retains its
credibility and that issues reserved for permanent status
negotiations can be addressed fairly and honestly in those
negotiations.

Building this kind of environment also requires that
the parties themselves take special care to avoid pre-
emptive actions that prejudge outcomes, while also
nurturing an atmosphere of trust and confidence. The
decision on Har Homa/Jabal Abu Ghneim does just the
opposite. We regret that it was taken. Member States of
the United Nations, and in particular the members of this
body, are understandably moved by a desire to react to
this situation in a constructive manner. But we must take
great care to respond to developments in a way that will
bolster, not batter, the negotiating process and that will
encourage the partners in peace, not discourage them
from walking the path they have agreed to travel
together - that of settling their differences in face-to-face
talks.
That is the process we supported at Madrid and that
is the process that has proven time and time again that it
can achieve results that promise a historical
transformation of the political landscape of the Arab-
Israeli arena.

Unfortunately, this draft resolution would not have
helped that process.

Members have heard our Views on the
inappropriateness of outside interference in the direct
negotiations between the parties. We have never believed,
despite the useful role the Council can and has played in
working for Middle East peace, that it is an appropriate
forum for debating the issues now under negotiation
between the parties. It is not. Furthermore, this draft
resolution makes sweeping statements concerning the
legal status of Israeli settlements, which the parties
themselves have agreed are to be treated as a permanent-
status issue in the talks that are about to resume.

I do not suggest that the international community
should not make its views clear on important issues such
as the Middle East peace process. Indeed, in this spirit we
have made a good-faith effort to work with other
delegations to reach consensus on a presidential statement.
As friends and supporters of the parties involved, we owe
it to ourselves and to them to express our Views frankly.
But we should not be under the illusion that Council
action to lay blame on one party or the other, or to
interject ourselves into permanent-status issues, is the
right way to go about this.

The record of the last few months proves that the
parties themselves, working together, can resolve the
many outstanding issues now before them. Against long
odds and despite considerable political controversy, they
succeeded in reaching agreement on Hebron. Yesterday,

 

Israel announced its first phase of further redeployments.
This step represents a serious expansion of Palestinian
authority. It is the first of three phases and we hope that
Israel will do more in the second and third phases. At the
same time, the Palestinians and Israelis have agreed to
immediate and parallel negotiations on the Gaza airport,
safe passage and other issues.

These should be accelerated. These are the instruments
the parties use to resolve their differences and we must help
to create the best possible environment for these
negotiations to succeed.

What we ought to be doing is clear. We should
reiterate our support for the achievements of the partners to
date and respect their commitment to working together
towards their common goal - a peaceful and prosperous
Middle East - without the interference of outside parties.
I am sorry to say that this draft resolution would not move
us forward towards our common goal. Accordingly, the
United States was obliged to vote against it.

