Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to join other speakers in thanking Mr. Wane and
Mr. Mogae for their respective briefings.

As was pointed out in this Chamber last month (see S/PV.7982), it has been six years since South Sudan
declared its independence, but very few celebrations
have been able to take place, given the fact that the
country is still submerged in a deep crisis, with
6 million South Sudanese facing food insecurity and
millions of South Sudanese who have been displaced
from their homes owing to armed conflicts.

I am going to be very briefbecause some colleagues
who spoke before me have analysed many of the
points that we were going to mention, in particular,
for example, what was said by Ambassador Sison with
respect to the litany of commitments that have not been
fulfilled over the past few months, and the frustrations
over the obstacles that the South Sudanese Government
still imposes on the functioning of United Nations
forces. Also, as was pointed out recently by Ambassador
Rycroft, we are absolutely convinced that this crisis is
strictly the result of a conflict of personal ambitions
between two of the country's political leaders, who
have placed their own ambitions of attaining power
above the needs of their citizens. What a contrast with
the example of Colombia and its efforts in its peace
process. What a contrast between some people who are
brave enough to do everything for peace and others who
continue just to wage war and seek strictly personal
benefits. That is truly very sad.

Fortunately, in the midst of all of this, we must
recognize the tireless efforts of the African Union, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
and the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission
in trying to relaunch a political process. However, no
effort by the Security Council, the African Union or
IGAD will be even the least bit successful ifthe political
leaders of South Sudan do not commit to fulfilling their
people's needs.

