Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): This is
the first time since 2006 and the adoption of resolution
1738 (2006) that the Council has met for an open debate
on the protection of journalists. I would like to thank
the American presidency for taking the initiative to
organize this debate, at a time when the number of
journalists killed in the exercise of their profession
has reached an alarming level. The testimonies we
have been offered speak volumes about the situation of
journalists in periods of conflict and about the risks to
which they are exposed. I would also like to take this
opportunity to thank Kathleen Carroll, Richard Engel,
Mustafa Haji Abdinur and Ghaith Abdul-Ahad for
sharing with us their experience on the ground. I also
thank the Deputy Secretary-General, Mr. Jan Eliasson,
for his presentation.

Luxembourg fully supports the statement to be
made by the observer of the European Union.

In the globalized, interconnected world to which
we belong, information reigns supreme. Journalists are
its primary transmitters. A free press is always the sign
of a lively democratic society; by the same token, its
absence is a sure indicator of authoritarianism. New
technologies have multiplied the number of useful
sources of information available to journalists; they
have also accelerated the transmission of information.

In times of armed conflict, the role ofjournalists
takes on yet another dimension. Their work contributes
to making it possible for the world to know.

But the journalistic profession is increasingly
accompanied by mortal dangers. Last year, according
to UNESCO, 121 journalists were killed and more than
200 were jailed. Those are unprecedented numbers.
As we have already been reminded this morning,
10 days ago in Somalia the journalist Liban Abdullahi
Farah was killed on his way home from work. He was
the sixth member of the press to be killed in Somalia
this year, which makes that country one of the world's
most dangerous for journalists. According to the
International Press Institute, 54 journalists have been
killed to date in 2013, many of them in Syria. In light
of that disturbing increase, the reports of the Secretary-
General on the protection of civilians should devote a
specific section to the issue of the safety and security
ofjournalists, as mandated by resolution 1738 (2006).

We condemn in the strongest possible terms all
attacks, physical and otherwise, that deliberately target
journalists, as well as all other forms of intimidation.
But our condemnation alone is not enough. We must act
to ensure that journalists enjoy in practice the protection
to which they are entitled by virtue of international
humanitarian law. Resolution 1738 (2006) is very
clear: journalists in periods of armed conflict must be
viewed as civilians and as such must be respected and
protected.

The Council invoked that principle in the
presidential statement it adopted on 12 February
(S/PRST/2013/2). I appeal to all parties to armed
conflicts to take all possible measures to ensure respect
for and protection of journalists in accordance with
international hunaitarian law. In cases of violation,
States are responsible for ending impunity and for
bringing to justice those responsible for violations.
Considerable efforts have been made in recent years
in the United Nations with respect to the protection of
journalists. In April 2012, the United Nations Chief
Executives Board for Coordination adopted the United
Nations Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and
the Issue of Impunity, initiated by UNESCO. The Plan
of Action must be fully implemented.

Adequate follow-up must also be given to Human
Rights Council resolution 21/12, adopted by consensus
on 27 September 2012, on the importanace of the safety
of journalists as a fundamental element of freedom of
expression. We await with interest the compilation of
best practices that the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights was charged with compiling, in
collaboration with the Special Rapporteur on the
promotion and protection of the right to freedom of
opinion and expression. Luxembourg supported those
endeavours and will continue to do so.

We take this opportunity to encouarage greater
cooperation among Governments, international
organizations, civil society and representatives of
the media. It could also be interesting to develop
cooperation at the level of ombudsmen and national
human rights institutions, as was recommended by the
international conference on the safety of journalists
held in Warsaw on 23 and 24 April 2013.

To conclude, I insist on the need for the Security
Council to continue to give this matter all the attention
it deserves. Journalists shoulder the responsiblity for
protecting the truth. The Council should shoulder its
own responsibility by guaranteeing their protection.

