Mr. Gata Mavita wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): I would like to say
once again how much we are honoured to see you,
Mr. President, as the President of the Security Council
at this time and to reassure you of my country's support
in the success of your very noble task.

I thank the Council for the opportunity to speak
at this meeting convened to consider the situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. This is also
an opportunity for me to especially thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon, who, since taking up the
leadership of the Organization, has spared no effort to
find a solution to ensure the return of lasting peace in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The signing on
Sunday in Addis Ababa of the framework agreement on
peace, security and cooperation in my country and in
the Great Lakes region is further proof of his efforts.

I should like to welcome the presence of Mr. Roger
Meece, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I thank him
for giving the Council his assessment of the progress
achieved since November 2012 in the implementation
of resolution 2053 (2012).

I would like to begin, ifI may, by first conveying
the following three points.

First, strengthening the mandate of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and swiftly
deploying an intervention force are major concerns
for my Government at the moment. That effort, as we
all know, is intended to respond to a real and urgent
security need in the eastern part of my country. After
many appeals by my Government, the Secretary-
General and a number of partners, both bilaterally
and multilaterally, we believe that the matter of
strengthening MONUSCO's mandate is the correct
thing to do and requires swift action by the Security
Council.

Secondly, taking into account the fragility of the
situation on the ground, my Government calls on the
Security Council to consider as quickly as possible
adopting a resolution to change MONUSCO's mandate.

Thirdly, with regard to human rights violations in
the area of Minova that are purported to be committed
by the forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
I should like to point out that the Government has never
refuted those accusations; quite to the contrary, it has
authorized the arrest of the perpetrators of those acts so
that they can be brought to justice before the competent
judicial bodies. That has been done, as noted in several
paragraphs of the report before the Council (S/2013/96).

I would now like to turn to that report, which
Mr. Meece has just introduced. I should first like to
refer to the annexes.

First of all, I would like to reiterate my Government's
support for the goals of the revised comprehensive
strategy that the Secretary-General proposes to replace
the current International Security and Stabilization
Support Strategy, as set out in annex I to the report.
Our hope is that attention will be given to achieving
the main goal, that is, promoting long-term economic
development to ensure sustainable stability in that area
of the country. With regard to the strategy and initiative
to transfer responsibility for some of MONUSCO'S
tasks to members of the United Nations country team,
as set out in annex II to the report, the Government
will express itself on that point once it has had an
opportunity to review the special report to be presented
by the Secretary-General to the Council.

The Secretary-General's progress report, currently
before the Council, clearly establishes that the activities
of the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) have significant
consequences on stability in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in the Great
Lakes region, affecting hundreds of thousands of
innocent civilians, as noted in paragraph 78 ofthe report.
The same paragraph also concludes that the progress
achieved on a number of fronts has been hampered,
or even cancelled out, in certain areas. Moreover,
the Secretary-General indicates that the M-23 enjoys
external support for its destabilizing actions, which my
delegation has repeatedly condemned, as has the Group
of Experts in the clearest terms. The tension is widely
known, so I shall not go into the details. However, I
would urge those who still harbour doubts to read the
Group's final report, dated 12 October 2012 (S/2012/843, annex), as well as its 18 May 2012 interim report and
its annex (S/2012/348, annex). The reports highlight
the role of external actors in the current destabilization
of the situation in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

From a human rights and humanitarian assistance
perspective, the cruelty of the acts attributed to M-23
terrorists and the foreign forces supporting them have
resulted in a deteriorating situation that affects both
North and South Kivu, as underscored in paragraph 45
of the Secretary-General's report. Numerous allegations
of violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law have been attributed to M-23 fighters
during the period under consideration, especially in
November 2012.

To return to the security situation in Goma, I
commend MONUSCO'S implementation of its internal
security plan in the context of Operations Wide Awake
and Silent Guns. Under the chapter on progress,
the report emphasizes the progress achieved in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo with the adoption
by the two houses of Parliament of the organic law
establishing a national human rights commission, as well
as the continuing discussions on security sector reform
in general and reform of the armed forces in particular.
In that connection, I should point out that the necessary
legislation has already been adopted: law 11/012, of
11 August 2011, concerning the reorganization of the
armed forces; law 11/013, also of 11 August 2011, on
the organization and functioning of the national police;
law 13/005, of 15 January 2013, concerning the military
code for the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo; and the law governing the personnel of
the national police, which is now being promulgated.
Those efforts will be continued in order to give the
country an army capable of deterrence. What matters
at the moment, and what the Congolese people expect
as soon as possible, is the fulfilment of the promise to
change MONUSCO'S mandate, with a view to deploying
the intervention brigade whose establishment has been
announced.

In conclusion, we look forward eagerly to the
issuance of the special report of the Secretary-General
on the strategy to be followed in future.

