Mr. Lewicki (Poland): At the outset, let me thank
the Swedish presidency for organizing this highly
important debate. I would also like to thank Deputy
Secretary-General Amina Mohammed and Minister
Hassan Janabi for their excellent briefings. Last but
not least, I am very grateful to Ms. Hindou Ibrahim for
her very touching statement and for having reminded
us, the Security Council, of our responsibility to tackle
the security challenges resulting from climate change,
because we are talking about the effects of climate
change on the lives of ordinary people. We also welcome
the President of Nauru and look forward to hearing
his statement on how climate change is affecting his
country, as has been mentioned by several speakers.
It is a kind of existential threat to a number of small
island States.

More than 10 years ago, the Security Council
discussed the link between climate change and security
for the first time (see S/PV.5663), as mentioned by
Ambassador Karen Pierce. Since then, the situation
has not improved. Since then, the number of climate
change-related conflicts has only increased. That is
why we believe that it is more timely than ever that we
are having this debate right now. It falls fully within
the Security Council's mandate. Ifthe Security Council
does not address this topic on climate-related security
risks, we will fail the people on the ground and fail to
deliver on our mandate.

Having said that, I wish to stress that we simply
cannot neglect the negative impacts of climate change
on global peace and security. What we are seeing, as
Ms. Ibrahim oultined in her statement, is that those
impacts are threat multipliers that can aggravate poverty,
environmental degradation and social tensions, and can
lead to escalations oflocal and regional conflicts.

Poland would like to underscore the inevitable need
of acting in the spirit ofmultilateralism. The problem of
climate change is not a problem only of the affected or
risk-exposed countries. It is also a global challenge of
the whole international community and needs a global
response. The only effective way to respond to that
challenge is to act together. Every country should share

the responsibility to act.

The effective prevention of conflicts that have
resulted from climate change is definitely more cost
effective than addressing their consequences. That is
why the focus should be put primarily on preventing
and mitigating the root causes of conflicts and natural
disasters, as well as on enhancing countries' adaptive
capacities, strengthening resilience and reducing their
vulnerability to climate change.

We believe that the Security Council is key to
enhancing the United Nations response to conflicts,
in particular in the context of conflict prevention
in regions affected by adverse effects of climate
change, such as the Lake Chad basin, West Africa,
the Sahel and Somalia. The Council should underline
the need for better climate-related security risk
assessment and management strategies, as has been
discussed by a number of previous speakers. In order
to fulfil such a task, the Security Council should be
equipped with accurate climate-related security risk
information, analysis and early-warning mechanisms.
We cannot overestimate the critical role of reliable
data about climate-change related risks, which is
key to avoiding conflicts, building resilience and
preventing natural disasters. Therefore, we believe that
in order to implement adequate prevention measures,
comprehensive information from the field is inevitable.
All States and organizations should use the full
potential of their field offices and diplomatic missions
in order to gather reliable and current information from
the regions affected or vulnerable to climate change
and conflicts.

Poland would like to see regular discussions
and reporting on climate change and security on the
agenda of the Security Council. That is why we are
grateful that Sweden has addressed that topic. Such
debates could complement other deliberations carried
out in United Nations forums, mainly in the General
Assembly, within their respective mandates and by
various international and regional organizations and
other stakeholders. That is the point we have been
making consistently in recent years and which we will
be raising in the future if need be.

This year, Poland will assume the presidency of
the twenty-fourth Conference of Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(COP). This will be the fourth time we will hold the COP
presidency, and we intend to use our past experience to
deliver positive conclusions. While leading the climate
negotiations, we will bear in mind that climate security
issues constitute the core threat for countries vulnerable
to climate change, especially small island developing
States and least developed countries.

In conclusion, let me underline that effective
responses to climate change and conflict are strictly
linked to the implementation of the security and
sustainable development agendas. Only by taking
coherent and integrated actions in those areas can
tangible and durable progress be accomplished.

