Mr. Verbeke (Belgium) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to thank the Under-Secretary-
General Mr. Guehenno for his briefing and presentation
of the report of the Secretary-General on the situation
in Afghanistan.

Let me, through you, Mr. President, welcome the
presence of Mr. Kai Eide and congratulate him, on
behalf of Belgium, on his appointment as the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan and to pledge full support and confidence
of my country as he fulfils this important role.
Additionally, I am pleased to see at the Council table
the presence of our colleague from Afghanistan.

In addition to the statement which will be made
today by Slovenia on behalf of the European Union, to
which my delegation fully subscribes, I would like to
make the following comments on the central role of the
United Nations in the comprehensive strategy in
Afghanistan.

A little more than two years ago, Afghanistan and
the international community concluded a five-year
compact in London. The objectives defined at that time
are still topical. Even though there still are challenges
before us, on a positive note the international
community remains strongly engaged in Afghanistan,
as was emphasized by the Secretary-General in his
report.

As in any partnership, each party, of course, bears
its portion of responsibility.

The Government and the people of Afghanistan
have a leading role to play; the international
community, through its efforts, can only support and
strengthen the elected regime. Within the framework of
that partnership, the United Nations is prepared to
respond to the recent appeals to assume a central role
in coordinating international aid, and Belgium
welcomes that. However, if it is to succeed, the
Organization must be provided with the means and the
space necessary to carry out that responsibility.

The cooperation between Afghanistan and the
international community is even more essential in the
light of the interconnected nature of the challenges
facing Afghanistan. Succeeding in Afghanistan means
improving the daily lives of Afghans and putting in
place an institutional system that can maintain the
progress made. Only a comprehensive approach and
strategy will make that possible.

As we know, without security there can be no
development, and without development security cannot
be ensured. Unfortunately, the drug problem is an
illustration of that. If we are to strengthen these two
pillars of the Afghanistan Compact, namely, security
and development, the third pillar - governance, the
rule of law and human rights - will be just as crucial.
Here, Afghans have a major responsibility. While
progress has been made, particularly through the
establishment of the Independent Directorate for Local
Governance, much still needs to be done. Corruption
remains a major problem undermining judicial, police
and administration reform efforts, and progress with
respect to human rights remains limited.

In all those areas, the United Nations can make
the difference. That is why Belgium supports the
recommendations made by the Secretary-General in his
report (S/2008/ 159), particularly with regard to the role
of coordinating the international community's efforts,
support for efforts to improve governance at the local
level and strengthened cooperation with the
International Security Assistance Force. In that regard,
Belgium welcomes the participation of Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon in the international meeting on
Afghanistan to be held in Bucharest on 3 April on the
sidelines of the NATO Summit.

2008 should be another important stage in the
process begun in Bonn in 2001 to ensure that
Afghanistan will once again become a stable and
prosperous State. In addition to finalizing and
launching the Afghanistan National Development
Strategy, important decisions must be swiftly taken for
the upcoming presidential and legislative elections.

The international conference that France has
offered to host in Paris in June should be an
opportunity to assess progress made and to encourage
everyone - the Afghan Government and the
international community - to redouble efforts
between now and then to ensure that the objectives set
in London will be attained.

