Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States of America): I very much thank Deputy Special Envoy Matar for her briefing and updates today. We continue to extend our full support to her and to Special Envoy Pedersen. Monthly briefings to the Security Council remain crucial to guiding our efforts to end the conflict; therefore, we appreciate her availability today. Every facet of the United Nations-led political process to implement resolution 2254 (2015) is paralysed, and we need to be honest and clear about why. The simple truth is that the Al-Assad regime is determined to pursue a military, rather than a political, end to the conflict. For proof we need to look no further than the more than 350,000 people displaced by the regime and Russia's indiscriminate attacks against civilians in Idlib since December 2019. While Damascus and Moscow deliberately stall the United Nations- facilitated political process and deprive millions of humanitarian assistance, they pursue an_ illusory military solution in Syria - one that will undoubtedly fail to bring about a lasting resolution of the conflict. The assault on Idlib that is under way represents the largest violation of resolution 2254 (2015) to date, with humanitarian consequences that will prove both devastating and lasting. Attacks on the people of north- west Syria by forces of the Syrian regime, Russia, Iran and Hizbullah are unjustifiable and will directly lead to life-threatening shortages of food, medicine and other basic necessities. In the light of those grave developments, our message today is that the Council must be united in telling the Syrian authorities and Russia that we will not abide by their pursuit of a military solution. We must demand Syria and Russia's full, irreversible and verifiable implementation of all aspects of resolution 2254 (2015). The United States will maintain economic and diplomatic pressure until the day the regime and its sponsors accept such a reform. Actors who obstruct, disrupt or prevent a ceasefire in northern Syria will be further subjected to United States sanctions, and those who work to intimidate or prevent displaced persons from voluntarily returning to places of residence in Syria will not be allowed to do so with impunity. The United States remains deeply concerned about the escalation of Syrian and Russian military attacks in Idlib, for humanitarian reasons and because of the inextricable link between the security of Idlib province and the fate of the Constitutional Committee. The Al-Assad regime and its allies must end their offensive in north-west Syria immediately because of the grave impact it is having on the United Nations-facilitated political process. To those allies of the regime participating in the assault on Idlib, the United States is fully prepared to level sanctions, in accordance with the recently signed Caesar Syria Civilian Protection Act, against foreign military contractors, mercenaries or paramilitary forces that are knowingly operating in a military capacity inside Syria for the Governments of Syria, Russia or Iran. The United Nations and the Council must work towards the implementation of a comprehensive nationwide ceasefire in line with resolution 2254 (2015). We must also reject the regime and Russia's tactical announcement of the so-called pauses and ceasefires in north-west Syria to cast themselves as peacemakers. They are ceasefires in name only and are repeatedly followed by deadly attacks on civilians and fresh efforts by the regime to stall the work of the Constitutional Committee. The delays of the Committee are directed by the Al-Assad regime and are accompanied by a military push by the regime and its allies into north-west Syria, killing hundreds and further displacing close to | million Syrians. Moreover, the Russian Federation has publicly threatened to end the United Nations vital life-saving cross-border aid to the very part of Syria under assaultby Syrian and Russian forces by July, when resolution 2504 (2020) expires. Those threats serve to spread even more fear among Syrian civilians and compel the Syrian political opposition to surrender. Instead of spending its dwindling financial resources on a costly and brutal military campaign against its own people, the Al-Assad regime should be spending to provide its people with sustenance and essential services. While the Al-Assad regime uses massive amounts of fuel in its military attacks against the people of Idlib, Syrian civilians cannot afford fuel to heat their homes or cook their children's food. While the Al-Assad regime forces its people to go without electricity, it spends millions of dollars on expensive rockets and missiles that kill Syrian civilians. And, while soaring prices have put basic goods out of reach for the vast majority of Syrians, Al-Assad-regime elites continue to live lives of luxury. Critically, the Al-Assad regime and Russia fail to recognize that the military solution will never resolve the underlying reasons for the Syrian conflict. Therefore, if they continue to pursue this solution, instability, insurgency and violent extremism will not abate. Absent a political solution to the conflict facilitated by the United Nations Special Envoy and in line with resolution 2254 (2015), the United States will continue to withhold reconstruction funding from the regime, as should the United Nations in keeping with its stated principles and parameters to withhold reconstruction funding until the political process in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015) is complete. The Al-Assad regime will not be legitimate in the eyes of the Syrian people until the regime allows for the basic demands of its citizens to be heard through freedom of assembly and elections; until the regime delivers on basic necessities, such as food and water; and until the regime ensures accountability for years of atrocities, extrajudicial killings, arbitrary detentions and torture The only way to begin bridging those divides is for the Al-Assad regime and its leaders to move forward with the steps outlined in resolution 2254 (2015). The culture of the regime's institutions must change if it is ever to regain the trust of the Syrian people. The United States will maintain forceful economic and diplomatic pressure until the day the regime and its sponsors accept such reform.
