Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): South Africa
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Kosovo, Mr. Farid Zarif, for his
briefing today on the report (S/2012/275) on the
activities of the United Nations Interim Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). We welcome Minister for Foreign
Affairs Jeremie back to the Council and thank him for
his statement. We also welcome Mr. Hoxhaj and thank
him for his statement too.
South Africa reiterates its position that resolution
1244 (1999) remains in force and forms the basis for
the resolution of the situation in Kosovo. It is therefore
incumbent on the international presence in Kosovo,
including the Kosovo Force and the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, to maintain a status-
neutral position in the execution of their mandates, in
line with the Council's previous decisions.

My delegation continues to support the dialogue
process facilitated by the European Union between
Belgrade and Pristina, as mandated by the General
Assembly. We have noted the recent agreements that
were reached in Brussels on 24 February on Kosovo's
regional representation and cooperation, as well as the
agreement regarding the implementation of the
integrated border management deal that was concluded
in December 2011. South Africa encourages all sides to
maintain this dialogue in order to reach agreement on
all outstanding issues.

Although there have been some positive
developments, tensions between the two sides remain.
We call on all sides to utilize regular direct contact as
an important confidence-building measure to improve
trust and allow the parties to address the outstanding
and contentious issues.

We welcome and commend UNMIK's mediation
in facilitating a solution to the challenges related to the
Serbian parliamentary, presidential and local elections
that took place on 6 May. Arbitrary arrests by both
sides are provocations aimed at causing instability to
threaten any political will to encourage constructive
dialogue. All parties should exercise restraint and
refrain from taking unnecessary actions that may erode
the fragile trust between the two sides. Violence and
the use of excessive force will only reverse the gains
made by the parties in the dialogue process, ultimately
making reconciliation more difficult to achieve.

We welcome the parties' commitment on the issue
of missing persons, and we are confident that, with the
assistance of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, much can be achieved. It is unfortunate that
progress on voluntary returns appears to be slow
compared to previous years. It remains the
responsibility of both sides to encourage returns by
ensuring safe conditions on the ground. In that regard,
my delegation urges all parties to show cooperation
and flexibility in finding solutions to this crucial
outstanding issue. Negotiations remain the only
approach to produce a reciprocally beneficial and
sustainable solution.

My delegation remains concerned by the
resistance against legislative measures aimed at
protecting cultural and religious sites in Kosovo. We
are aware that those sites are under security risks, and
we call on Pristina to strengthen the security measures
in place to guard them. We are appreciative that the
Kosovo authorities have expressed willingness to
employ necessary security measures at the sites. Public
reconciliatory pronouncements from the leaders on
both sides are welcome and remain positive
contributions towards reconciliation.

With regard to the allegations of organ
trafficking, we reiterate our position that a credible,
thorough, impartial and independent inquiry into those
allegations should be conducted.

In conclusion, South Africa once more urges both
sides to refrain from any actions that could undermine
the achievements attained in the dialogue process. We
therefore call on the parties to exercise flexibility to
enhance their engagement in order to resolve
outstanding matters and for reconciliation to prevail. I
would like to express South Africa's appreciation and
support for the role of UNMIK, under the capable
leadership of Mr. Farid Zarif, in implementing
resolution 1244 (1999).

