Mr. Patriota (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): I have
the honour to convey to you, Madam President, the
fraternal greetings of President Dilma Rousseff. The
Brazilian Government wishes every success to the
Argentine presidency of the Council for the month of
August.

I also welcome the statements made by
representatives on behalf of the various regional and
subregional organizations, in particular those on behalf
of the Union of South America Nations (UNASUR)
and the Community of Latin American and Caribbean
States (CELAC).

You, Madam President, made my task easier by
referring to the interception of communications and
acts of espionage. Such practices violate sovereignty,
harm relations between nations and constitute a
violation of human rights, in particular the right to
privacy and the right of our citizens to information. In
that respect, you have complied with the decision of
the States parties of the Common Market of the South
(MERCOSUR) who met in Montevideo last month.
Yesterday, the Foreign Ministers of MERCOSUR
conveyed to the Secretary-General the position of
Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Uruguay and Venezuela
with respect to, and in compliance with, that decision.
The matter will also be placed before various United
Nations bodies, in accordance with the decision and
the document circulated under the symbol A/67/946.
This is a very serious issue with a profound impact on
the international system. Brazil is coordinating with
countries that share similar concerns for the benefit of
an international order that respects human rights and
the sovereignty of States.

I welcome the timely statement made on 12 July
by the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, Ms. Navi Pillay: "surveillance [programmes]
without adequate safeguards to protect the right to
privacy actually risk impacting negatively on the
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms".
Pillay also mentioned article 12 of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and articles 17 and 18 of
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
which established, respectively, that "No one shall be
subjected to arbitrary interference with his privacy,
family, home or correspondence", and that "Everyone
has the right to the protection of the law against such
interference or attacks".

Brazil also associates itself with the repeated
appeals by Ms. Pillay in various forums that efforts
to combat terrorism must necessarily respect human
rights and international humanitarian law. Her position
was incorporated into the decision of the Heads of State
of MERCOSUR as well as the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2013/12) adopted by the Council this morning.

I would like to welcome for the timely initiative
of the Argentine Republic to hold this open debate,
which involves various dimensions on the coordination
between regional and subregional organizations and the
United Nations. Pursuant to Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations, that coordination already takes
place throughout the world, in different forms and to
various degrees, including in regions characterized
by peace, democracy and cooperation, such as South
America.

In that context, UNASUR has significantly
contributed to the promotion of the ideals and purposes
of the United Nations. The South American Defence
Council establishes an innovative mechanism for
coordination and cooperation among South American
countries in matters of peace and security, including
through greater transparency on military expenditures.

In addition, the Caribbean Community (CARICOM)
and the countries of Latin American have decisively
supported the efforts of the United Nations for the
stabilization of Haiti, the only country in the Americas
where a United Nations peacekeeping mission is
currently deployed.

CELAC constitutes a new mechanism for political
coordination and integration that brings together the
33 countries of South America, Central America and the
Caribbean. One of its main goals is to consolidate Latin
America and the Caribbean as a region of dialogue,
cooperation, integration and peace. In that context, it
is worth recalling the unequivocal support of CELAC
for the legitimate claim of the Argentine Republic for
sovereignty over the Malvinas Islands.

The member States of the zone of peace and
cooperation of the South Atlantic have supported a South
Atlantic free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of
mass destruction. We are thereby attempting to bring
closer together the two sides of the South Atlantic as
regions free of nuclear weapons thanks to the Pelindaba
Treaty in Africa and the Treaty of Tlatelolco in Latin
America and the Caribbean. We encourage other regions
to associate themselves to the agenda and look forward
to the convening of a conference for the establishment,
in the shortest possible term, of a nuclear-weapon-free
zone in the Middle East.

(spoke in English)

Chapter VIII of the Charter teaches us that, before
resorting to the Security Council, Member States
must make an effort to attempt to settle disputes
peacefully by means of regional arrangements,
agencies or mechanisms. No issue is more sensitive in
the articulation between regional and United Nations
multilateral spheres than the question of the imposition
of sanctions and the use of force. Even in the recent past,
we have seen the occurrence of unilateral interventions,
which are incompatible with an international order
based on peace, cooperation, solidarity and respect
for international law. It is with that in mind that in the
new world order being created, Brazil has defended the
establishment of a multipolarity based on cooperation,
devoid of unilateralism or exceptionalism, an order that
favours the improvement of multilateralism and aims at
searching for peaceful solutions to the challenges faced
by the Council, based on international law.

Mention should be made of the North Atlantic

Treaty Organization (NATO) in this context, a defense
alliance that does not seem to frame its activities clearly
under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations
and that has made use of concepts and strategies that
raise problematic and sensitive issues in terms of the
articulation between the regional level and the United
Nations system. We are concerned that, historically,
leaders of NATO and member countries have
considered that the organization does not necessarily
require explicit authorization from the Security
Council to resort to coercion. We are also concerned
that NATO has loosely interpreted mandates for action
aimed at promoting international peace and security
authorized by the Security Council. As Brazil has
maintained, including through the Brazilian concept
note on "responsibility while protecting" (S/2011/701, annex), the Security Council should avail itself of
the institutional means of monitoring the adequate
fulfilment of its mandates.

We are concerned as well that NATO has been
searching to establish partnerships out of its area, far
beyond the North Atlantic, including in regions of
peace, democracy and social inclusion, and that rule
out the presence of weapons of mass destruction in
their territories. It would be extremely grave for the
future of the articulation between regional and global
efforts at promoting peace, as prescribed by the United
Nations, if groups of countries started to unilaterally
define their sphere of action beyond the territory of
their own members.

I would like to underline the important cooperation
that exists today between the United Nations and the
African Union. Through its refined Peace and Security
Architecture, the African Union has contributed to
satisfactorily preventing and solving tensions and
conflicts in the African continent, as in the recent
cases of the Sudan and Somalia. Brazil defends African
solutions to African problems. In that spirit, President
Dilma Rousseff participated at Addis Ababa in the
fiftieth anniversary of the African Union, thereby
reaffirming the Brazilian commitment to strengthen
our partnerships with the African continent.

Brazil welcomes the political commitment of the
Secretary-General and of the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region and neighbouring countries
to the implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region. We are confident that,
under the leadership of Brazilian General Carlos
Alberto Santos Cruz, the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo will play its role in the protection of civilians.
The military component, however, should be seen as
a tool in support of a political strategy, and, as Special
Envoy Mary Robinson has mentioned, as one part of
a comprehensive approach that embraces security and
development.

In the case of Guinea-Bissau, we welcome the
emphasis that the Security Council has placed on the
importance that stakeholders involved in mediation
efforts speak with one voice. The international
community must avoid any possible discrepancy
between the positions of regional and subregional
groups that are closer to a conflict or a specific situation
and the positions of other geographically broader
entities. The harmonization of messages and positions
between the regional and the multilateral strengthen
international efforts towards peace. Conversely,
discrepancies weaken our peace efforts.

The Brazilian Government remains deeply
concerned about the Violence in Syria and strongly
supports the work of United Nations-League of Arab
States Joint Special Representative Lakhdar Brahimi.
His efforts should provide a synthesis of the possibilities
for an articulation of the regional and multilateral levels
in international relations.

We cannot help but take careful note of the words of
the Chair of the Independent International Commission
of Inquiry of the Human Rights Council, Paulo Sergio
Pinheiro, to the General Assembly on 29 July, when he
stated "There is no military solution to this conflict"
and that "Those who supply arms to the various warring
parties are not creating the ground for victory but rather
the illusion of victory". Mr. Pinheiro also highlighted
that that was "a dangerous and irresponsible illusion,
as it allows the war to unfurl endlessly before us" and
"it opens the door to further immense human suffering
and the possible conflagration of an entire region". As
reiterated on several occasions, including at the Council
on 23 July, Brazil supports the holding of, and is ready
to contribute to, a new Geneva conference as soon
as possible, so as to promote an inclusive, Syrian-led
political process leading to a transition that corresponds
to the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people.

Brazil considers it fundamental to reverse the
impasse and paralysis that have characterized the
peace process between Palestinians and Israelis. It
is a regrettable situation in which neither regional
organizations nor the United Nations, as a multilateral
organization, have reached tangible results. The
plurilateral mechanism that is professedly responsible
for the issue - the Quartet - has been inoperative.
I reiterate that the Brazilian Government considers it
fundamental that the Security Council fully assume its
responsibilities and refrain from outsourcing its role to
third parties, unless that can translate into measurable
results for the promotion of peace.

In that context, the Brazilian Government supports
the mediation efforts carried out by United States
Secretary of State John Kerry and notes with satisfaction
the announcement of the resumption of negotiations
between Palestinians and Israelis, with the objective
of reaching a comprehensive peace agreement in nine
months, which shall culminate in the establishment of
an independent Palestinian State. We welcome Israel's
decision to free 104 Palestinians from its prisons and
hope that the gesture will contribute to the much-
awaited realization of a two-State solution on the basis
of the 1967 borders.

Finally, allow me once more to welcome the
Argentine initiative of promoting this debate.
Opportunities to discuss topics directly related to the
core mandate of the Security Council are important,
not only to contribute to the constant updating of
the political guidance and working methods of the
Council, but also because they allow us to underline
the importance of basing our efforts for the promotion
of peace on the strict observance of the Charter and
of Council resolutions. They also bring to the fore the
need to permanently improve our coordination aimed at
the construction of a Council attuned to contemporary
reality, including as concerns its composition.

In that connection, Brazil would like to highlight
the paragraph of the presidential statement it adopted
today, according to which,

"The Council further encourages enhanced
cooperation between the United Nations and
the regional and subregional organizations and
arrangements to foster a global dialogue for the
promotion of tolerance and peace, to promote
better understanding across countries, cultures and
civilizations".

