Mr. Henningstad (Norway): Let me begin by
expressing Norway's appreciation to the United States
presidency of the Security Council for taking the initiative
to hold this open meeting on the impact of AIDS on
peace and security in Africa.

We would also like to thank Vice-President Al Gore
for his comprehensive and thoughtful intervention this
morning. My delegation particularly liked the part about
new and fresh money and we think this should be a
guiding light for all donor countries.

For far too long, AIDS was regarded mainly as a
health problem and was left to the health sector. But
gradually, the international community has recognized that
the devastating effects of this accelerating pandemic on
human, social and economic development in Africa call
for much broader action. The HIV/AIDS epidemic is
becoming one of the main constraints on development in
large parts of the continent.

This meeting of the Security Council is an
acknowledgement of the links between AIDS and peace
and security. Norway warmly welcomes the initiative to
establish an International Partnership against AIDS in
Africa and hopes that it will lead to broad and concerted
action at all levels. In December last year, I participated
in the launching meeting presided over by the Secretary-
General here in New York. That meeting certainly gave
very important impetus and inspiration to the work of the
Partnership, but I must say that you, Sir, have really
heightened the level by calling this meeting of the
Security Council, for which we thank you.

 

More resources are clearly needed, both from the
international community and from national and private
sources. Norway places very high priority on this
cooperation. We are one of the major contributors to the
Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS)
and a month ago we also granted a special allocation of
28.5 million Norwegian kroner to be used within the
framework of the new Partnership in Africa.

We must certainly step up international efforts to
develop a vaccine against HIV. We must also find ways to
make existing drugs more accessible to those who need
them. Public/private partnerships are crucial to making this
happen.

While preventive measures are important, we must not
forget those millions of people who are already infected
and affected by the virus. We must make sure that people
living with HIV/AIDS receive appropriate care and that
their human rights are fully respected. We need a broad
multisectoral approach to mitigate the effects of the
pandemic on social and economic development in Africa,
as well as on peace and security. The erosion of human
capital affects the education system, the productive sectors,
government and administration, and hence the security
situation, and cannot be dealt with by the health sector
alone. A broad range of actors within the international
community - including, but not limited to, the co-sponsors
of UNAIDS - have important roles to play in supporting
the efforts of member States. This meeting of the Security
Council should help to move the issue higher up the global
agenda.

