First, we would like to thank Mr. Huang Xia for presenting the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/272). I will focus my intervention on three issues: the political situation, security and the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. On the political situation, the Dominican Republic is grateful to hear that the leaders of the region have taken steps, at bilateral and multilateral levels alike, to ease tensions between neighbouring countries and address differences. We applaud the quadripartite summits and the leaders who brought about these dialogues and agreements, and hope that these diplomatic initiatives serve as a starting point and baseline for solving the outstanding regional conflicts. With regard to the security situation, the Dominican Republic regrets that in spite of the increased military operations, the commitment of President Felix Tshilombo Tshisekedi to delivering peace and stability and the efforts of the leaders of the region, the security situation in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo have deteriorated. We also lament that the tensions between Burundi and Rwanda persist and that the armed groups in the Central African Republic continue to violate the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic. Nonetheless, we are encouraged by the treaties signed between Rwanda and Uganda and between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda to repatriate former combatants of the Mouvement du 23 mars, as well as the treaty signed between the Sudan and South Sudan to define their common borders and uphold the ceasefire in South Sudan. It is unfortunate that this positive momentum is being undermined by the growing concern about the unprecedented magnitude of the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on people, the health system and a constrained economy. In that regard, the Dominican Republic calls for an urgent, coordinated and united regional and global response to meet the global challenges of COVID-19. We call for international cooperation to help Africa and the Great Lakes region mitigate the effects of the pandemic and reactivate its economy. We also echo the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire. Finally, we welcome the development of a peace and security strategy for the Great Lakes region. In addition, we commend Mr. Huang Xia, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the leaders of the region, the regional organizations and the international community for their commitments under the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region. We encourage them all to continue working together to improve the regional humanitarian situation and deter human rights violations, such as sexual and gender- based violence, and to better manage their natural resources to ensure a peaceful, prosperous and integrated Great Lakes region.
