Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
I will start by paying tribute to the men and women who
serve the flags and the values of the United Nations on
the ground. The Security Council owes it to them to
continue the work it is doing as part of the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative.

Today I would like to raise a few questions and
underscore two points: first, our responsibility to
support political processes and, secondly, the quest for
performance by the operations themselves.

I would like to start by affirming our commitment
to focusing on sustainable political solutions. I see
many ways to achieve that. First of all, peacekeeping
operations must be dynamic and adapt to the realities
on the ground. The African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur is a prime example of that.
Pursuing withdrawal without taking into consideration
the political developments under way in Khartoum
would be unrealistic. In that regard, I would be very
grateful if Lieutenant General Ngondi could share with
us his assessment of that particular matter.

Secondly, missions can be served only through clear,
understandable, unequivocal and consistent mandates.
I have a question for the two Force Commanders: how
could the Council make mandates clearer?

Thirdly, with regard to providing appropriate
mandates and adequate resources, Belgium is very keen
on ensuring that adequate resources be made available
to United Nations missions.

My second point concerns performance. The
performance of missions is key to improving their
acceptance by local populations and the renewed
commitment of police- and troop-contributing
countries. We all have a shared interest in effective
performance. The host country is both a key player
in terms of performance and the primary beneficiary
of that.

Performance, however, does not depend solely on
adequate capacity and the training of troops, it also
depends on how United Nations missions function
and use their capacities over and beyond the necessary
command and control relations of the military
component. What we are talking about is the way in
which all capacities and components are deployed
and the so-called integrated function of the mission.
In that regard, I have a question for the two Force
Commanders. How do they see the integration of their
respective missions?

Finally, the performance of missions involves the
people within the missions. We were pleased to hear
from Major General Cheryl Pearce today and we
commend the Secretariat for the action undertaken
on gender equity in the United Nations Peacekeeping
Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP), which makes the mission
a model of gender equity with regard to its leadership.
How is Major General Pearce experiencing that aspect
of UNFICYP?

