Ms. Amos: Humanitarian conditions in Iraq
continue to deteriorate, and 5.2 million people are now
in need of assistance throughout the country. Several
hundred thousand people were displaced in Anbar
governorate at the start of the year. The number of
internally displaced persons (IDPs) across the country
now exceeds 2 million, and the rate of displacement
continues to rise. In the past 10 weeks alone, more
than 200,000 people have been newly forced from their
homes by violence in Anbar, Ninewa, Sala Al-Din,
Kirkuk and Diyala governorates. More than 100,000
Iraqis have been registered as refugees in neighbouring
countries so far this year. In addition to the 2 million
displaced, there are 1.5 million people from host
communities, 1.4 million who live in active areas of
conflict where access to basic services is minimal, and
220,000 refugees who have fled Syria, all in urgent
need of assistance. Every governorate in Iraq is now
hosting displaced people. More than 900,000 men,
women and children have found refuge in the Kurdistan
region of Iraq. The rest are spread across the country,
including some 400,000 in Anbar and 150,000 in the
southern governorates.

The crisis in Iraq is first and foremost one of
protection, with intense violence and brutality being
meted out to civilians from all religious and ethnic
backgrounds. As the High Commissioner for Human
Rights has already outlined, women have been
specifically targeted, with daily reports of kidnapped
women and girls from Yezidi and other communities
being sold into marriage or sexual servitude to militants.
While the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
bears responsibility for the majority of those atrocities,
it is not the only perpetrator of human-rights abuses.
Armed groups, including militias affiliated with
the Government, continue to carry out brutal acts of
violence against civilians. Entire communities have
been uprooted, with a significant humanitarian impact.
And around half of all those displaced are children.
Many are deeply traumatized. Their schooling has been
disrupted and their families torn apart. As many as 700
children are believed to have been killed or maimed in
Iraq so far this year, including in summary executions.

The United Nations and its partners have quickly
scaled up their response, thanks to a generous
contribution of $500 million from the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia and support from other donors early on
in the crisis. Hundreds of staff have been deployed to
the governorates most affected in the north and are
now also in other areas of the country, including Basra.
That early infusion of donor funds has had tangible
results. More than 1.4 million Iraqis have received food
assistance this year, in all 18 governorates. Emergency
health interventions have ensured access to essential
medical services for at least 1 million people, and
around 1.5 million have been provided with water,
latrines, bathing facilities and hygiene materials. About
1.2 million IDPs have received emergency shelter and
essential relief items, including tents, mattresses,
blankets and stoves. Nearly 100,000 displaced Iraqi
children have received psychosocial counselling, while
82,000 have received assistance enabling them to
continue with their education.

But despite all of that, much more help is urgently
required. With the onset of winter, 450,000 people are
still in need of warm Clothing; 300,000 need blankets,
stoves and other non-food support; 100,000 require
urgent help with water and sanitation; and more than
1 million, mainly children, need health assistance in
dealing with acute respiratory infections and other
chronic illnesses. Over 660,000 children require
vaccination for measles.

The ongoing insecurity and fighting prevent us from
reaching all those who need help. There are currently
3.6 million Iraqis living in areas under the control of
ISIL and affiliated armed groups, and 2.2 million of
them are in urgent need of humanitarian assistance.
Despite acute needs, including for shelter, health and
food in the areas most impacted by the conflict, only
meagre amounts of assistance have been delivered to
areas under ISIL control to date.

Every day, the humanitarian community faces
considerable operational challenges in our effort to
deliver aid. And every day difficult decisions have to
be made about who will receive assistance, given the
scarcity of resources.

A total of $173 million in winterization funding is
urgently required in order to meet the needs of IDPs in
the Kurdistan region and elsewhere. Those needs are
time-sensitive, and there is little room for delay. If the
World Food Programme does not receive $85 million
in the next few days, then food cannot be procured or
shipped, and distributions for around 2 million people
will be severely disrupted in January.

The Government of Iraq has provided $50 million
for the construction of camps and other support to the
displaced in Dohuk governorate, with additional funds
promised for Erbil and Sulaymaniyah governorates.
Those funds helped the relocation of IDPs from all
secondary school in Dohuk governorate. The Ministry
of Displacement and Migration has also begun the
construction ofa camp with 1,000 prefabricated shelters
in Diyala governorate.

I am pleased that salaries are to be paid to all civil
servants. The national health and food-distribution
systems need to be maintained throughout the
country, and kerosene for heating and cooking needs
to be subsidized for displaced people during the
winter. Current unsubsidized fuel prices mean that
humanitarian organizations are able to provide fuel for
heating and cooking for less than half of the 80,000
vulnerable families who need it in the Kurdistan region
for the next two months.

This is not the first time that Iraq has experienced
a humanitarian crisis. Iraqis are already weary of the
decades of sectarian violence and war which destroyed
the country's institutions. One million people are IDPs
from previous Gulf wars.

This is not just Iraq's crisis. It is part of a regional
catastrophe that we have a collective responsibility to
address. The humanitarian needs in Iraq are real, they
are urgent, and they are growing each month. Millions
of Iraqis face an uncertain future, with years spent
in camps or unfit dwellings. It is urgent that security
be re-established and that the protection of civilians
remain at the heart of national and international
political, military and other efforts.

As is always the case in these crises, it is the
ordinary people who suffer the most.

