Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom thanks Special Representative Qazi
and Ambassador Bolton for the updates they provided
to the Council this morning. It is also a pleasure to
welcome the presence of Ambassador Al Bayati at this
meeting.

We commend the ongoing work of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) on the
ground in support of the Government and the people of
Iraq. The importance of that work across the political,
reconstruction and human rights spheres cannot be
overstated. As the latest report on UNAMI's activities
(S/2006/706) notes, the Iraqi people, through their
active participation in two elections, concerning the
constitutional process and the constitutional
referendum, have made clear their commitment to a
peaceful, democratic and prosperous Iraq.

But while there has been impressive political
progress, culminating in the formation of a
Government of National Unity, there remain serious
challenges on the ground. The UNAMI report
highlights some of those concerns: cementing national
reconciliation, curbing the influence of militias,
tackling sectarian violence and terrorism, promoting
reconstruction and development and improving human
rights.

Tackling the high level of violence and the grave
human toll it inflicts must be the top priority. We
welcome Prime Minister al-Maliki's Baghdad security
plan, implemented in conjunction with the
Multinational Force, which is beginning to have an
impact on the ground. We also welcome the progress
made in training and equipping Iraqi forces, as well as
the historic handover of security responsibilities in
Al-Muthana and the decision to transfer responsibility
in Dhi Qar. We look forward to the Iraqi Government
building on that progress, in particular by beginning
rapidly to tackle militia issues.
Together with measures to improve security
directly, there must be parallel progress on the
political, economic and human rights tracks. The
United Kingdom welcomes Prime Minister al-Maliki's
National Reconciliation Plan, as well as the United
Nations contribution in support of it. It is crucial that
Iraq's political leaders of all communities should come
together to promote stability, security and economic
development. It is also crucial that the international
community continue and intensify its support for Iraq's
Government at this critical juncture. The International
Compact provides such a vehicle, allowing the Iraqi
Government to set out a compelling vision for the
country and permitting the international community to
lend concrete assistance in implementing that vision.

We therefore look forward to the high-level
meeting to be held in New York on 18 September to
help take this work forward. We hope that the Compact
in turn will lead to the international community and the
region deepening their engagement with Iraq.

We also look forward to the planned Arab League
conference in support of Prime Minister al-Maliki's
efforts to promote reconciliation. We hope it might be
possible for it to take place soon, and so we call on
Iraq's neighbours, in particular Syria and Iran, to do
more to prevent the flow into Iraq of arms and materiel
that promote the insurgency inside Iraq.

Iraq's future is our shared concern. Helping Iraq
achieve a stable, democratic and prosperous future is in
all our interests.

