Lieutenant General Singha: I am Lieutenant
General I.S. Singha, Head of Mission and Force
Commander of the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (UNDOF). It is a great privilege to
address this gathering today on the accomplishment of
traditional mandates under changed politico-military
environments.

As the Council is aware, UNDOF is a traditional
mission under Chapter VI of the Charter of the United
Nations and has operated effectively as per its mandate
for the last 40 years. The essence of UNDOF'S mandate
is to keep the military forces of Israel and Syria apart,
by establishing and manning a buffer zone, or an area
of separation, 75 kilometres in length and 235 square
kilometres in area. We are required to observe, monitor
and report any violations in the area of separation. In
addition, with the help of observers from the United
Nations Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO), we
are also required to inspect periodically the levels of
manning of troops in the area oflimitation extending up
to 25 km on both sides. However, since March 2012 we
have experienced fighting between opposition groups
and the Syrian Army in the area of separation, which
is a clear violation of the mandate. In that internal
strife, apart from dealing with the two parties that are
signatories to the Agreement on Disengagement, we
have had to face a third and complex party: opposition
groups of different shades that are not signatories to
the Agreement. That has made the task of peacekeepers
very challenging, demanding and dangerous.

Exchanges of fire of artillery, tank, mortar,
automatic weapons, anti-aircraft and small arms, as
well as clashes between the two sides, take place on a
regular basis. Over the past three years, peacekeepers
have been affected by a large number of incidents,
including abductions, car-j ackings, weapons snatchings,
restrictions of movement, peacekeepers coming under
crossfire, vandalism of United Nations property and
direct threats to peacekeepers by the radical elements.

The landscape changed drastically this year, with
the radical groups arriving in large numbers and
controlling the moderate elements. The opposition
groups have systematically launched a southern
offensive from the Jordanian border, captured the
area of separation up to main route 7 and pushed the
Syrian Arab Armed Forces further to the east in the
area of limitation. We witnessed an upward spiralling
of violence to higher levels, amid which peacekeepers
were directly targeted by the extremists.

During the crisis in which 45 Fijian peacekeepers
were detained by armed members of the opposition, an
ordeal that lasted for 15 days, the radicals made their
intent clear and surrounded another 72 peacekeepers
from the Philippines. The Filipino and Fijian
peacekeepers bravely faced that situation and exhibited
raw courage, resilience and patience. However, during
the release of the peacekeepers, the radical group
reiterated that if presented with another opportunity,
they would detain additional peacekeepers, seize
United Nations vehicles and weapons and ransack
United Nations property. They have also clearly spelled
out that the United Nations was not required in the
area. In spite of all such challenges, it is to the credit
of the senior management and peacekeepers from all
troop-contributing countries that in all major incidents
involving detentions since last year, all peacekeepers
have been released safely without any harm.

It was not an easy task to operate in that
environment, but we have evolved as a mission
and adjusted our operations to meet the challenges
presented by the environment of internal conflict and
clashes that have recently increased in their intensity
and severity. The weapons employed by both sides,
the size of the area and the number of fighters have
increased exponentially, engaging the entire area of
separation and up to 10 to 15 kilometres of the area of
limitation on the Bravo side.

Within the existing mandate, we have enhanced and
honed our capabilities. The elasticity of the traditional
mandate was stretched just short of the breaking point,
preventing it from snapping. When the threat was
unacceptable and direct, we decided to temporarily
relocate most of our assets on the Alpha side, leaving
six positions and observation posts still held in the
area of separation and five observation posts, or big
positions, on the Alpha side, thereby ensuring that we
now focus more on the ceasefire line, or the Alpha line.
The process of adapting and carrying out the
mandate differently during these trying times was
not done in a graduated manner, but all concerns
were addressed simultaneously to achieve significant
cohesion in moving ahead and continuing to retain
our relevance. We had to reconfigure our operational
capabilities and the methodology of the execution of
operations on the ground, tweak mission support by
tailoring and remodelling logistical and supply chains,
and concurrently ensure the safety and security of the
peacekeepers to fulfil our mandate. We adjusted to the
situation very quickly and we continue to evolve in the
face of dynamically changing threats. In the beginning
of 2013, we improved our vehicle movement code and
stopped the movement of single vehicles, acquired
armoured cars for all movements and monitored and
controlled every movement carefully. With various
prophylactic measures in place, we were able to reduce
incidents to a trickle, until the radicals took control
and the moderates, although opposed to targeting the
United Nations directly, had very little leverage.

Last year, we saw four troop-contributing countries
pull out of the mission, leaving it seriously stretched.
Only the Philippines and India stayed the course, their
soldiers taking on significant extra responsibilities
during this period. With the help of the Security
Council and the troop-contributing countries present
today in the mission, we were able to transform and
empower the mission with an additional 200 soldiers,
a mechanized company and the capability to counter
improvised explosive devices, and to induct some
heavier weapons.

UNDOF has doubled its liaison capabilities, and
we were given information analysis capabilities and
a special adviser. Mission support was able to realign
itself with the renewed operational ethos and was able
to harden the existing positions and observation posts.
Drills were refined, and we were able to ensure the
safety of the peacekeepers. We were proactive and on
occasion fired back in self-defence, when fired upon,
basically restoring the situation and disengaging from
the area.

We did reduce our footprint, but continued to
monitor the situation with constant information
collection by different means, including the induction
of long-range day and night surveillance equipment
and thermal imaging devices. The troop-contributing
countries of UNTSO also stepped up and started to
deploy more experienced observers who could cope
with the rapidly deteriorating situation. At my behest,
they changed from day-time observation to around-
the-clock observation at the observation posts. Certain
threatened observation posts manned by unarmed
observers from UNTSO were provided with protection
by line troops from UNDOF, from time to time, and we
still continue to provide protection to two observation
posts on the Alpha side.

With mitigations measures in place and the
participation of new troop-contributing countries with
greater risk-taking abilities, UNDOF still skilfully
implements its mandate in a modified manner and has
ensured that two traditional adversaries are kept away
from a conventional war. I must say that, in spite of the
changing contours and complexity of the environment,
both the parties, Israel and Syria, were steadfast and
committed to our resolve to continue with our mandate
and tasks.

When the situation started to deteriorate further,
after 27 August, and the radical elements started
to directly target us, we laid out a decision-support
matrix, which guided us through the relocation process.
It was due to the brave actions of the Fijian, Irish and
Indian contingents that the softer elements were sent
out earlier, and the troops of those three contingents
moved in the end from Camp Faouar in proper tactical
formations without any untoward incident. Those brave
peacekeepers and selected members of international
staff exhibited great courage and fortitude. In the
entire temporary relocation process, both Israel and
Syria gave wholehearted support to ensuring that all
800 peacekeepers crossed over safely to the Alpha side.

Notwithstanding the enhanced threat, UNDOF

still maintains 11 positions and observation posts in the
area of responsibility. The gallant Gurkhas from Nepal
continue to hold the strategic Hermon Heights and are
fully mentally and physically prepared to face the harsh
winters. The command elements have been divided into
two: a smaller element is located in Damascus and the
main one is in Camp Ziouani.

Efforts are under way to locate one battalion
headquarters on the Bravo side. The opposition groups
have now understood the essence of our presence in the
area of separation, as the engagement levels have gone
up, with Syrian defence forces targeting them with
air power. Until the time of relocation, the Syrian Air
Force had shown considerable restraint in targeting the
opposition groups in the area of separation.

The partiesto the 1974 Agreement on Disengagement
between Israeli and Syrian Forces fully appreciate the
relevance of UNDOF during the Syrian crises, and
my interlocutors on both sides have applauded our
flexibility, transparency and, above all, impartiality
throughout the ongoing internal strife in Syria over the
past three years. That transformation would not have
been possible without the strong support UNDOF has
received from the Security Council, the Secretariat,
United Nations Headquarters and Member States. I
would be remiss ifI did not mention the assistance that
has been provided by the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon, among others, with rotation and logistics
movements, which are carried out through Beirut due
to the prevailing security situation. The cooperation
between UNDOF and UNTSO, whose observers
support the mission through Observer Group Golan,
continues to be constructive.

I am very grateful for the opportunity to address
the Security Council. I would like to conclude by
reaffirming my personal commitment and that of my
senior leadership team and all UNDOF peacekeepers,
military and civilian, to continuing to do everything
possible to ensure the implementation of the mandate
that the Security Council has entrusted to UNDOF.

