Mr. Nyago (Uganda): Uganda profoundly
appreciates Chad's Minister for Foreign Affairs
presiding over this relevant open debate. We also
appreciate the statement of Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, and indeed
that of Ambassador Te'te Anto'nio delivered on behalf
of the African Union, which Uganda fully subscribes
to. The participation in this open debate of the Foreign
Ministers ofNigeria, Luxembourg and Argentina and of
Chile's Director General for Foreign Policy illustrates
its crucial nature.

Uganda once again presents its condolences to
Pakistan, Nigeria, Kenya and Australia for the senseless
terrorist killings that they have experienced this month,
in addition to the recent victims of the rabid Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham.

Uganda is committed to the fight against terror
within its borders and the region. Uganda thanks you,
Mr. President, for a theme well selected, as, for Africa,
it has an added poignant relevance, bearing in mind the
worrying contemporary situation on our continent. The
theme is relevant because currently 20 African countries
are afflicted by terrorism, the majority of which are
in the Horn, East and Central Africa, in addition to
the Sahel and the western and northern parts of our
continent. Additionally, Africa, most unfortunately,
humanitarianosts at least two dozen United States State
Department-listed terrorist organizations.

The experience of organized, systematized terror
and terrorism is not new to the African continent. It was
clearly manifest in the transatlantic and trans-Sahara
slave trades, in addition to the equally nefarious East
African slave trade. This form of systematized and
organized terror and terrorism affected the lives of
millions of our people and resulted in acute societal
dislocations whose negative consequences still afflict
us today.

If we are to sincerely appreciate the reasons why
terrorismisprevalentinAfrica,then itwouldbeinsincere
if we were to ignore the legacy of colonialism on the
continent. For, of the 20 or so African countries that
are affected by terrorism, at least half are landlocked,
and, in the main, landlocked African countries tend to
be the most underdeveloped and have the lowest global
human development indices. This is due in part to the
extremely high costs of trade they routinely encounter,
that is, when legitimately trading within themselves, or
when engaged in regional cross-border trade or, indeed,
that of the broader international type.

The Balkanization of the African continent, within
the context of its having fragile States and political
structures, is another factor that fuel the unfortunate
thriving of terrorism. Indeed, this unhealthy
cocktail - being Balkanized, landlocked, poor and
with stateless geopolitical entities - unfortunately
encourages opportunistic terror groups with an enabling
environment to thrive in, and I have in mind here,
among others, terror groups as the Allied Democratic
Front, the Lord's Resistance Army, Al-Qaida in the
Islamic Maghreb and Al-Shabaab.

Terrorism-driven intra- and cross-border trade
is devastating our continent. Take the example of the
elephant population of Garamba National Park, in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In
the 1970s, it was estimated that there were up to 20,000
elephants roaming freely in this vast, exceedingly
beautiful nature reserve. However, today, 40 years
later, more than 90 per cent of those animals have been
indiscriminately slaughtered for illicit trading, namely,
but not only, by the Lord's Resistance Army and other
criminal networks. This is indeed a devastating loss not
only for the Democratic Republic of the Congo but for
all of humankind.

For this body, together with the broader international
community, to definitely solve the menacing challenges
of terrorism in Africa, we must seriously consider
providing the following interventions: support the
ongoing regional integration efforts, as, for instance,
with the East African Community, the Southern
African Development Community and the Economic
Community of West African States, among others,
for those bodies would facilitate the required process
of creating viable States, economies and regional
legitimate trade. Indeed, the international community
must assist these efforts towards regional integration
through support for the construction of our physical
infrastructure such as roads, rail transport and airports.
Such intervention would enable the blossoming of
legitimate internal regional cross-border and broader
international trade, hence supplanting the terror-driven
illicit trade.

The political will to create viable State structures
through well-conceptualized Marshall plans in
situations of weak States or statelessness, in such
countries as, for instance, Somalia, Libya, South Sudan
and the Central African Republic, is also required.
There is also a need for the international community
to ensure that illegitimate trade such as poaching and
poached commodities such as ivory and illegally mined
minerals is also severely constrained.

All of this must be done in a spirit of enlightened
self-interest. For, as the unfortunate examples of Osama
bin Laden and Al-Qaida, and currently the Islamic State
in Iraq and Syria, clearly illustrates to us all, we ignore
the growing terror threats in Africa at our own peril.

