Mr. Zhang Yesui (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First of all, I wish to thank you, Madam President, for
convening today's meeting. We would also like to
warmly welcome to the Security Council His
Excellency Mr. William Jefferson Clinton, United
Nations Special Envoy for Haiti, and Her Excellency
Mrs. Michele Duvivier Pierre-Louis, Prime Minister of
Haiti. We also welcome the report (S/2009/439) of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), as well as the briefing
just given by Special Representative of the Secretary-
General He'di Annabi.

Over the past five years, thanks to the support of
the international community and, in particular, the
outstanding contributions of MINUSTAH, the security
situation in Haiti has improved a great deal. As
indicated in the discussion in the Secretary-General's
report of the consolidation plan annexed to the report,
Haiti has made encouraging progress on all five
benchmarks of the consolidation process. We have also
noted that the situation in Haiti continues to be fragile,
in particular with regard to the economic, social and
development situation. Great challenges also remain in
terms of the political process, institution building and
the security sector, and especially with regard to
police, legislative, judicial, penal and institutional
reform, as well as in combating corruption.

As the international community continues to
provide support, we call upon the Haitian Government
to muster greater determination, make increased efforts

and strengthen in a practical manner its own capacity-
building efforts in order to effectively assume
responsibility for achieving sustainable peace and
stability in the country. The Government of Haiti is
expected to strengthen its coordination with
MINUSTAH and to take effective steps in the political,
security, economic and social spheres. It should also
step up its legislative and judicial reforms, strengthen
the recruitment and training of police and bolster its
coordination with its neighbours in the areas of border
control and the fight against drug trafficking and crime.
At the same time, it is essential to strengthen dialogue
between the Haitian Government, the Parliament, the
political parties, the private sector and civil society,
with a View to achieving consensus, in a joint effort to
maintain stability in the country.

Extreme poverty and economic and social
underdevelopment pose the major obstacles to
sustainable peace and stability in the country. In order
to achieve sustainable stability, Haiti must make
greater progress on the economic and social fronts. The
Haitian Government and people bear the greatest
responsibility in that regard. The international
community should provide assistance appropriate to
the conditions in the country. Through MINUSTAH, it
can also provide support and the necessary resources in
connection with political, security and rule of law
efforts.

However, we should also realize that ensuring
Haiti's economic and social development is not
MINUSTAH's mandate. The Security Council cannot
just turn to the Mission for the country's development;
other United Nations and international and regional
organizations, Haiti's neighbours and countries of the
region can all play a greater role.

MINUSTAH has now been deployed for five
years. It has made a great contribution to the
maintenance of Haiti's peace and stability. We
appreciate its work and pay tribute to its staff for its
dedication. At a time when the situation in Haiti is still
fragile, we support the continued presence of
MINUSTAH. However, as progress continues to be
made in Haiti's consolidation and stabilization process,
MINUSTAH should eventually hand over
responsibilities to the Haitian Government and people.
We hope that MINUSTAH will focus on carrying out
its mandate to maintain peace and stability in Haiti and
remain from taking on tasks that do not fall within its
responsibilities.

At a time when the countries of the world face all
sorts of security challenges, there is an ever-growing
demand for United Nations peacekeeping operations.
However, there is only a limited supply of available
peacekeeping resources. The Security Council is
currently engaged in discussions on the reform of
peacekeeping operations. It is necessary for the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) to
carry out a comprehensive assessment of
MINUSTAH's mandate, including its military and
police components, and the deployment and efficient
use of resources, so as to ensure that the Mission's
assets and resources are configured as appropriately as
possible in order to further improve the efficiency of
peacekeeping operations and propose drawdown plans
where appropriate.

Strengthening the capabilities of Haiti's security
sector is an important task. The Haitian President's
Commission on Public Security has developed some
recommendations for the establishment of a force with
military status. Those recommendations merit further
study. We hope that the Organization of American
States, DPKO and countries of the region will accord
due attention to recommendations on Haiti, so that they
can together arrive at a solution.

