Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): May I alsojoin others
in thanking our briefers - Under-Secretary-General
Lacroix; Special Envoy Nicholas Haysom, to whom
we bid farewell and look forward to seeing very soon;
Special Envoy of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) for South Sudan Ismail Wais, who
I know has been working on this dossier so tirelessly
and for so long; and Ms. Grace Jones for the valuable
human perspective she offered the Security Council.

The Peace Agreement signed last week gives us
all hope, none more so than the 12 million people of
South Sudan. We very much welcome the commitment
shown by the region on the important issue of peace
and security. We have been consistent in the Council
in supporting IGAD and its work. Although the Peace
Agreement signed is a significant achievement, it is the
first step on a long journey. We must continue to strive
for progress. The people of South Sudan will continue
to suffer if peace is not achieved and sustained.

The conflict has already killed thousands
and forced a third of the population to flee their
homes - 2.5 million to neighbouring countries. Half of
the population is food-insecure. Ofthe 7 million people
in need of humanitarian assistance, more than half are
children. Following years of conflict, displacement
and economic collapse, those children are less likely
to receive an education than any other children in the
world. At times, South Sudan's leaders have seemed
indifferent to the suffering of their people. It is not the
result of a natural disaster or an unavoidable situation,
it is man-made, and therefore the solution must also be
man-made, starting with political stability. The Peace
Agreement must create the conditions for a lasting
end to the violence. As I said, the region played a vital
role in bringing parties to the conflict together, and I
commend the much-needed commitment and energy
that they invested, including States around this table.
Now is the time to build on that momentum. A peace
agreement on its own will not deliver and sustain
peace for South Sudan. We need to see the continued
engagement by all parties and ensure that words are
turned into meaningful and sustainable actions.
Those ofus who have been saying those things have
picked up some irritation and frustration at those sorts
of comments. It has been said that we are not being
positive enough, or that we are undermining a peace
process. I believe that no one will be more positive than
those of us around this table - if the process really
means an end to the violence and a determination to put
the needs of the people first.

Similarly, those ofus around this table have a special
responsibility to bring the experience and lessons that
we have from other conflicts, other peace processes and
indeed from our experience of the South Sudan conflict
and peace process, to bear. It does not serve the parties
to the Peace Agreement, or the people of South Sudan,
if we do not use our experience and our knowledge
from other peacebuilding situations. It is therefore vital
that we adapt and use those lessons. In countries such
as Libya, we have seen how political agreements can
unravel and enable a relapse into violence. From our
experience in Colombia, we have seen that the ongoing
commitment from the parties is the key factor for the
successful implementation of peace agreements. We
have also seen that implementation needs support from
the region and sustained, determined engagement from
the Council. We need to draw from all those experiences
when we consider the situation in South Sudan, as well
as understanding why previous peace processes have
not worked in that country, and focus all of our efforts
on successful implementation.

We must ensure that the revitalized Agreement
does not repeat past mistakes. The continued violence,
even following the most recent ceasefire agreement,
is extremely concerning. Nineteen violations were
reported by the Secretary-General between June
and September. The increase in humanitarian access
incidents and violence against humanitarian workers
are gravely concerning. Thirteen humanitarian workers
have been killed in South Sudan this year alone.

In addition to that, we are deeply concerned that
United Nations Mission in South Sudan peacekeepers
have been repeatedly denied access to key areas to
allow them to perform their mandated responsibilities.
That is unacceptable, and it must end. The region and
the international community must closely monitor
violations and ensure that those responsible are held to
account. I very much support Ms. John in calling for
the establishment of the hybrid court for South Sudan.

As the international community, we must not stand
by and allow individuals to undermine peace. The
targeted sanctions we imposed in July are an important
tool, and are just as important now that the Agreement
has been signed. They can be used to maintain pressure
on all the parties to keep the promises that they have
made. The arms embargo signalled that the international
community will not tolerate attempts to impose military
solutions. I urge the region and the wider international
community to continue to support those measures.

The United Kingdom remains committed to peace
in South Sudan, but in order to be convinced of the
parties' commitment, we need to see significant change
in the approach by the parties to the conflict. They
must silence their guns, allow humanitarian workers
to deliver life-saving assistance and release political
prisoners. They must show a genuine commitment for
the effective and accountable implementation of the
Peace Agreement and must demonstrate that they are
willing to work for the benefit of all South Sudanese,
including through checks on executive majority power
and the transparent use of resources.

Today the peace process stands at a crossroads. To
overcome the challenges ahead, we need unity across
the international community. We urge the region
to continue to drive forward constructive progress,
especially on security arrangements, in step with
the United Nations and the international community.
Above all, we urge the leaders of South Sudan to put
aside personal interests to work together for a better
future for their people.

