Mr. Bolton (United States of America): We are
all aware of the delicate situation in the Middle East,
where new and major developments are unfolding as
we speak.
06-42893
In the light of the fluid and volatile nature of
events on the ground, the United States believes that
this draft resolution was not only untimely but already
outmoded. We have just recently witnessed a major
escalation by Hizbollah. On top of that, we have the
announcement that the Secretary-General will be
sending a team to the region to help resolve the
situation. These important new developments should be
reflected in any text we consider.

Notwithstanding these new developments, there
were many other reasons to reject this draft. The draft
resolution before the Council was unbalanced. It
placed demands on one side in the Middle East conflict
but not the other. This draft resolution would have
exacerbated tensions in the region and would have
undermined our vision of two democratic States -
Israel and Palestine - living side by side in peace and
security.

Adoption of the draft would also have
undermined the credibility of the Security Council,
which itself must be seen by both sides as an honest
broker in the Middle East conflict. In that regard,
public statements of United Nations officials must also
accurately reflect positions agreed by Member
Governments.

The United States worked hard with other
delegations to achieve a more balanced text, one which
acknowledged that Israeli military actions were in
direct response to repeated rocket attacks into southern
Israel from Gaza and the 25 June abduction of Israeli
Defence Forces Corporal Gilad Shalit by Hamas.
Regrettably, we were not able to reach agreement.

While we remain gravely concerned about the
deterioration of the situation in the West Bank and
Gaza, we remain steadfast in our conviction that the
best way to resolve the immediate crisis is for Hamas
to secure the safe and unconditional release of
Corporal Shalit.

Establishing the foundations for a lasting peace,
however, will require us to focus our attention not just
on Hamas but on the State sponsors of terror that back
them, particularly Syria and Iran. Let us be clear:
without the financial and material support of Damascus
and Tehran, Hamas would be severely crippled in
carrying out its terrorist operations.

We call on Syria and Iran to end their role as
State sponsors of terror and unequivocally condemn the
06-42893

actions of Hamas, including this kidnapping. We yet
again call upon Syria to arrest the Hamas ringleader,
Khalid Mishal, who currently resides in Damascus. We
stress again our condemnation of Syrian and Iranian
support of Hizbollah, which has claimed responsibility
for the other kidnappings along the Blue Line, between
Israel and Lebanon.

We further call on the Palestinian Authority
Government to stop all acts of violence and terror and
comply with the principles enunciated by the Quartet:
renounce terror, recognize Israel, and accept previous
obligations and agreements, including the road map.
The failure of the Palestinian Authority Government to
take these steps hurts the Palestinian people.

We are obviously concerned about the duration of
the present difficulties and the lack of a solution, but
the issue for us is whether action by the Council makes
such a solution more or less likely, not simply whether
or not the Council seems to be "engaged".

The United States remains firmly committed to
working with others to establish the foundations for a
lasting peace in the region, a foundation that would
have been undermined had this draft resolution passed.

