Mr. Lewicki (Poland): First of all, let me join other
delegations in condemning in the strongest terms the
recent terrorist attacks and in expressing our sincerest
condolences to the families of victims. These heinous
acts must stop, and those responsible for these terrorist
attacks must be held accountable.

Let me also thank all briefers. We have heard
repeatedly that despite the many challenges that
Afghan women still face, the progress made in recent
years has been impressive. I wish to commend the
Afghan authorities and society, in particular Afghan
women, for that progress because we - the Security
Council, the international community and the United
Nations - are here simply to assist them in their efforts
to achieve a stable and prosperous Afghanistan.
As stressed in resolution 1325 (2000), the founding
resolution of the women and peace and security agenda,
women play an important role in conflict prevention
and resolution. As one of the World Bank's reports on
the role of gender in the prevention of violent conflicts
assesses, women's empowerment and gender equality
are strongly associated with more peaceful and stable
societies and with more effective and long-term
peacebuilding efforts. So we are more than happy to
see the progress made regarding the empowerment
of women in Afghanistan because no stable peace is
possible without women's full participation in the
peace processes.

In that vein, we support all efforts to find a peaceful
settlement and we have heard about many efforts,
including by the members of the Security Council. It is
our view that it is crucial to ensure the full participation
of Afghan women in all peace talks. As was mentioned
by many colleagues, any peace agreement cannot
compromise the gains achieved by women over recent
years. I therefore fully concur with what Under-
Secretary-General DiCarlo said about the fact that
women need to fully participate in the peace talks.

We are concerned about the Violence still faced by
Afghan women. Ms. Afghani said that approximately
60 per cent of women are still affected by violence. In
that context, we see an important role for the security
and justice sector, which means that the security and
justice sector, supported by local communities, needs
to find an effective response to gender-based violence.
The culture of impunity must be eliminated for the
benefit of the whole of Afghan society.

In that regard, we welcome and strongly support
the increased efforts of the European Union and
the United Nations to fight violence against women
through the Spotlight Initiative. We also agree with
Ms. Afghani that special attention should be paid to
women, in particular those in a vulnerable situation,
such as women with disabilities. We hope that the
recently adopted resolution 2475 (2019) on persons
with disabilities, initiated by the United Kingdom and
Poland, will strengthen the protection of rights and
improve the situation of women with disabilities.

I also wish to agree with the Ambassador of
Indonesia, Mr. Djani, about the positive role that can
also be played by religious leaders in the promotion of
women's rights. I would also like to echo colleagues in
stressing the importance of fair and credible upcoming
presidential elections.
I wish to express our deep appreciation to the
United Nations, the Deputy Secretary-General and our
brave colleagues, United Nations personnel, working in
the challenging situation in Afghanistan.

