Mr. Mejdoub (Tunisia) (spoke in French): Mr.
President, allow me to convey to you our most sincere
thanks for having acceded to the request of the Non-
Aligned Movement that this open meeting of the
Security Council be convened to consider the Iraq
crisis. All signs had indicated that this issue was going
to be resolved peacefully, in keeping with the norms of
international law, relevant Council resolutions and the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. But
now we see that it has resurfaced in a way that
threatens to plunge the world into crisis.

Indeed, the world is heading towards a serious
crisis, and, if we are not careful, we shall be entering a
period of terrible turmoil. Terrorism struck on 11
September 2001, and its evil deeds are spreading, as
the recent carnage in Bali attests. The tragedy
continues in Palestine, fighting goes on in Afghanistan,
the world economy is in a dire state, and now there is
talk of a new front - a fresh war in Iraq.
It is hardly surprising, then, that the entire world
is mobilizing; that Member States are engaging in a
debate in an open meeting of the Security Council; and
that those present here should hear directly what
millions of people - including some of our
longstanding Anglo-American friends - are telling our
Governments: that there should not be an attack on Iraq
and that there should not be a war, because such a war
would be pointless.

I say that it would be pointless because its
motivation is not well-founded. Mr. Brent Scowcroft,
National Security Advisor to the first President George
Bush, wrote recently:

(spoke in English)

"There is scant evidence to tie Iraq to terrorist
organizations, and even less to the September 11
attacks".

(spoke in French)

That statement was often cited in the democratic
debate in the United States Senate on 10 October,
which we followed.

Such a war would be pointless because United
Nations inspectors have been expected in Baghdad to
carry out their tasks since 17 September, as Iraq has
agreed to receive them immediately and
unconditionally. A formal agreement to that effect was
reached on 1 October in Vienna between the
International Atomic Energy Agency and Hans Blix on
the one hand, and an Iraqi delegation on the other.

Advocating an automatic recourse to force, thus
prejudging the outcome of inspections, is unacceptable;
we must not lose sight of the fact that it has not yet
been established that Iraq possesses weapons of mass
destruction. Rather than embarking on a spiral path that
leads inexorably to confrontation and war, we should
be facilitating the immediate return of the inspectors,
whose job it is to dispel any doubts surrounding this
issue by fully carrying out the mandate entrusted to
them by all relevant Council resolutions.

Such a war would be pointless from the Arab
standpoint. The Iraqi question - an Arab issue - has
entered a new phase. In March 2002, following the
active diplomacy of Crown Prince Abdullah, the Arab
countries, inspired by wisdom and in a constructive
peacemaking spirit, came together at the Beirut Summit
to cement reconciliation among all the countries of the
region. Iraq undertook to respect the independence,
sovereignty, security and territorial integrity of the
State of Kuwait - those were the very words to come
out of the summit - and to settle all humanitarian
questions still outstanding between the two nations.

I remind the Council that the Beirut Summit
unanimously and firmly opposed any attack against
Iraq and took the View that any threat to the security
and integrity of one Arab State was a threat to the
national security of all Arab States". The Beirut
Summit also demanded that the independence,
sovereignty, security, national unity and territorial
integrity of Iraq be respected and that the sanctions
imposed on it be lifted in order to put an end to the
suffering of the Iraqi people with a view to securing
stability and security in the region.

In September, the idea of a war became even
more pointless because the consensus was expanded,
thanks to the goodwill, positive attitude and
constructive approach of the Iraqi side. The Arab
Group, the Non-Aligned Movement and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference welcomed
Iraq's unconditional acceptance of the return of
inspectors, thereby providing an opportunity for the
problem to be resolved by diplomatic and peaceful
means.

Such a war would also be harmful because it
would trigger an avalanche of reactions and counter-
reactions in Iraq and in the region as a whole. It would
upset the balance in several ways. It would provide
certain extremists with a pretext for expanding the war
still further.

Such a war would be damaging because it would
be likely to undermine the campaign against
terrorism - a campaign that the international
community has been painstakingly organizing, on the
basis of a multilateral network, since the adoption of
resolution 1373 (2001). Why risk creating the fracture
in the alliance against terrorism that many experts have
predicted and perhaps jeopardizing the commitments
that have been undertaken by those involved in that
alliance?

Such a war would be an affront to the Arab
world, which during the Beirut Summit rejected any
attack directed against Iraq.

How then, should we handle this crisis? First of
all, we must put an end to the war-mongering hysteria.
To some extent, President Bush gave a sign of hope by
stating that war was not inevitable. Other speakers
have made the same point, including Senator John
Warner, who stated that the resolution under
consideration in Congress was not a blank cheque, but
rather a deterrent.

We must therefore reconstruct multilateralism and
place our trust in the good sense of the international
community. In a striking book, Joseph S. Nye, Dean of
the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard
University, wrote:

(spoke in English),

"Teddy Roosevelt advised that we should speak
softly but carry a big stick. Now that we have the
stick we need to pay more attention to the first
part of his admonition, and we need not just to
speak more softly but to listen more carefully."

(spoke in French)

It is no offence to our friends to tell them to listen
to the international community and act with the
Security Council.

The Arab Group had expressed the hope that
there would be no new draft resolution. Such a draft
would now be pointless, as it would arrive half way
through the process, when the inspectors are already
prepared to return to Iraq to carry out their mission.
However if - God forbid - a resolution were to be
adopted by the Council, it should be devoid of any
bellicose dimension that might lead to a new
unilateralist concept of the settlement of international
disputes. In this respect, the French approach might be
of assistance to the Council, as might the statement
presented on behalf of the Secretary-General this
morning.

We must also ensure that the great Powers, as
much if not more so than the young countries, show
respect for international law, if only to set an example.
An ill-advised act of force would undermine all the
principles of the United Nations Charter: respect for
sovereignty, sovereign equality, territorial integrity and
non-interference in the internal affairs of States, as well
as the prohibition of the use of force.

We believe that the Council, as the sole guarantor
of peace and international security, today has a weighty
historic responsibility in two respects. First, it owes it
to itself to dispel all the doubts regarding the
credibility of the Organization and prove that the
world's affairs are not managed according to a double
standard. The Council's second responsibility is to
remain vigilant in order to avoid providing a sort of
legal cover for unilateral tendencies or creating
dangerous precedents that could turn out to be
disastrous if they were ever transposed and applied in
the resolution of other conflicts and to other areas of
tension throughout the world.

As do all other peace-loving countries, Tunisia,
which is known for its moderation, supports the call of
the United Nations Secretary-General and other world
leaders for restraint and for exploring all diplomatic
channels in the search for a peaceful solution and to
spare the Iraqi people further suffering.

We believe that the dialogue between the United
Nations and Iraq remains the ideal forum for resolving
all unsettled problems. In that regard, we reiterate our
satisfaction at Iraq's decision to accept the
unconditional return - I repeat, the unconditional
return - of the inspectors, which constitutes, as the
Secretary-General indicated at the beginning of the
session of the General Assembly, a step towards
detente in the region and the lifting of sanctions.

In that context, Tunisia reaffirms its attachment to
the Arab position of opposing all strikes against an
Arab State, while calling for the prevention of further
suffering and harm to the Iraqi people and for the need
to preserve Iraq's national integrity, its sovereignty and
its territorial unity.

