Montenegro thanks the Council and the Dominican Republic, as President for the month of April, for the opportunity provided to the Member States to continue to participate in and contribute to the activities of the Security Council during these challenging times. Montenegro welcomes the first report of the Secretary-General on youth, peace and security (S/2020/167) since the adoption of resolution 2250 (2015). While recognizing the essential role of young people in peace and security, the report clearly indicates the remaining core challenges that can have a devastating impact on youth development and lead to their further marginalization. The marginalization of young people foments political distrust and hopelessness, challenges systems and structures and contributes to national, regional and global insecurity. Therefore, we must do more to engage young people as equal partners, not only as beneficiaries, in our efforts to shape the future of the world. In particular, their voices and perspectives must be heard in regard to conflict prevention and peacebuilding. We strongly believe that by empowering new generations of peacemakers, we will prevent their marginalization and stigmatization, further mistrust and even radicalization. In doing so, particular attention should be given to the protection of young human rights defenders and peacebuilders, during and after armed conflict. The youth, peace and security agenda, along with resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018), charts a course for young people to become active citizens in shaping Government policies and politics in their countries. Its successful implementation requires further support, including political will and ownership on the part of Member States, funding for programming and institutional support for capacity- building and prioritization. Montenegro supports all efforts aimed at making the specific needs of young people heard, upholding their rights and acknowledging their diversity and the challenges that they face. Montenegro's National Youth Strategy for the period 2017- 2021, along with its action plan, is focused on facilitating access by youth to the labour market and employment; access to quality education; active participation in decision-making processes and policy creation; quality health care; and access to culture as both creators and consumers. Through the adoption of the Strategy and the Law on Youth, we have established an efficient framework for the systematic improvement of the situation of young people in Montenegro. We strongly believe that investing in youth is the best investment for the stability and prosperity of our society. The Government of Montenegro has already undertaken activities aimed at achieving the goals of the United Nations Strategy on Youth by initiating policies and reform processes aimed at increasing their active participation in social life and improving the quality of education by introducing new skills into national school plans, both for acquiring knowledge and personal development as well as to ensure their future success in the labour market. In order to improve on existing mechanisms for supporting youth in Montenegro, the Government of Montenegro is closely collaborating with the United Nations country team in Montenegro through various programmes and projects. These initiatives are of great importance in terms of enabling young people to use their full potential in the areas of decision-making and entrepreneurship and participation in various social activities. Bearing in mind that the process for achieving lasting peace needs to be democratized in such a manner as to include the communities most affected, Montenegro is also very active in connecting youth from the region of the Western Balkans, particularly through the work of the Regional Youth Cooperation Office. We are proud of the fact that Montenegro was the first country to establish a liaison office for this important regional initiative aimed at reconciliation through the promotion of joint activities for young people from the Western Balkans region. Although some progress has been made globally in supporting the active participation of young people, we must step up our efforts to accelerate the implementation of the youth, peace and security agenda. Young people must be treated as a vital asset. Investment in their capacities and leadership, addressing structural barriers and ensuring their equal participation are prerequisites for achieving lasting peace and the Sustainable Development Goals. Therefore, we call on all Member States and partners to listen to what young people have to say and to engage in translating their words into action.
