Mrs. Nunez de Odreman (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for this month.
We would also like to express our gratitude to
Ambassador Mayoral for his work during the month of
March.

We endorse the comments made by the
representative of Malaysia on behalf of the Non-
Aligned Movement.

We are meeting in the Security Council today to
consider the regrettable events that have recently taken
place in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem. In response to those events, we are
morally obligated to express some opinions and to
make a contribution on behalf of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela.

If international peace and security are to be
maintained, relations between States, regardless of the
ideology of those States, must be in strict conformity
with the Charter of the United Nations and generally
recognized principles and norms of international
relations, in particular, full respect for all human rights,
the non-use of force against the territorial integrity or
political independence of any State, non-intervention
and non-interference in the internal or external affairs
of States and peoples or with respect to their natural
resources, and the principle of the self-determination of
peoples and their freedom from colonial or neo-
colonial domination, foreign occupation or racist
regimes.

In Venezuela, we are convinced that sovereignty
resides exclusively with the people. The future of the
Palestinian people can be determined only by the
Palestinians themselves. We cannot judge people when
they choose their leaders; that would be contrary to
democracy.

In Venezuela, we are also convinced that in order
for violence to cease in both the Israeli and Palestinian
territory, full control over their territory must be
returned to the Palestinian people. Peace cannot exist
while the occupation continues, since occupation will
always be rejected by the people. Similarly, we must
stop the military actions of the Israelis in that territory,
which succeed only in claiming innocent victims.

We believe that a comprehensive, just and lasting
solution to the Palestinian problem - the nucleus of
the Arab-Israeli conflict - must be based on the
relevant United Nations resolutions and the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice, endorsed
by the General Assembly, regarding the construction of
the Israeli wall in the occupied Palestinian territory, as
well as on the following fundamental principles: the
withdrawal of Israel from the Palestinian territory
occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem, and other
occupied Arab territories; respect for the right of all
States in the region to live in peace, without any form
of intervention, within internationally recognized
borders; and, finally, the recognition of the inalienable
rights the Palestinian people, in particular their right to
self-determination and to development. We, therefore,
do not believe in a new demarcation of the borders
between Palestine and Israel. Ultimately, this would
further worsen problems in the territory. Moreover, we
believe that suspension of financial aid imposed on the
Government and the people of Palestine is a bad
mistake. These coercive and inhuman measures affect
only the people, women, children and men alike.

As a peace-loving country, the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela calls for a comprehensive and
peaceful solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. We
hope that the negotiations to that end will be carried
out in conditions that guarantee genuine self-
determination for the Palestinian people and bring
peace to the Middle East region.

