Mr. Reyes Rodriguez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba considers this to be a very timely debate on this
subject as we approach the seventieth anniversary of
the founding of the United Nations and the adoption
of its Charter. The year 2015 also marks the seventieth
anniversary of the end of the Second World War and
of the nuclear bombing of the cities of Hiroshima and
Nagasaki, which were horrific chapters in the history of
humankind that should not be repeated.

Realizing the right to peace requires eradicating the
threats that conspire against that common desire. The
consecration of altruistic purposes and principles in the
Charter is not enough. It is essential that Member States
and other international actors strictly adhere to such
principles in their conduct. Flagrant violations of the
Charter of the United Nations, including interference
in the internal affairs of other States for the purpose of
hegemonic domination, acts of aggression, wars over
natural resources, neocolonialist practices in foreign
policy, the unfair and exclusionary current international
order, the inequality and selfishness resulting from
neoliberal capitalist globalization, discrimination and
xenophobia, and the denial of peoples' right to self-
determination constitute serious violations of the right
to peace.

The purposes and principles enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations and international law
are violated when States resort to the use and threat
of the use of force and to serious actions taken
against the sovereignty of other nations, including by
implementing unilateral coercive measures. While it is
true that sustainable development cannot be achieved
without peace and stability, it is truer still that there
will be no peace or stability without development and
there will be no peace or security if millions of people
are condemned to hunger, poverty and hopelessness.

The Security Council has an important role to fulfil
in relation to the primary responsibility of maintaining
international peace and security and promoting respect
for the purposes and principles of the Charter. It must
perform its functions in accordance with the powers
that were conferred upon it by the Charter of the
United Nations. The members of the Security Council
should be the first to give priority to peaceful solutions
and exercise a clear, effective and resolute resistance
against the recourse to war. They must take advantage
of any opportunity that might save lives. They should
not be standard-bearers for the philosophy of regime
change, which is a clear attack against peoples' self-
determination.

As clearly confirmed by the Declaration on
Principles of International Law concerning Friendly
Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations, respect for the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
States, the non-use or threat of the use of force, self-
determination and non-interference in the internal
affairs of States constitute the basic foundation of
international law and a prerequisite for the peaceful
coexistence of nations, sustainable development and
the promotion and protection of all human rights for all.

The rule of law in international relations is
incompatible with unilateralism and economic,
commercial and financial policies and measures
contrary to international law. The rule of law at the
international level is also violated when actions are
carried out to impose regime change, intervene in the
internal affairs of States or incite internal conflicts
in sovereign States under foreign agendas aimed at
hegemonic domination and influence.

Seventy years after its foundation, the United
Nations must be strengthened and the Security Council
democratized, to make them standards of transparency,
democracy and participation by the entire international
community in the resolution ofpressing global problems.
A revitalized General Assembly is also needed to take
the central role in the realization of the right of peoples
and of every human being to a just, democratic and
equitable international order that supports the efforts
of States in the construction of a sovereign future that
each nation decides for itself.

Cuba wishes to reaffirm the unwavering commitment
of the Cuban people to the Charter of the United Nations,
in particular its purposes and principles, and reiterate
its vocation for peace in this forum. The historical
leader of the Cuban revolution, Fidel Castro Ruz, said
that the struggle of peoples for their sovereignty and
independence is the fight for peace. Cuba has fought for
peace, fighting the exploitation of man by man. Cuba
has fought for peace to defend its sovereignty.

Cuba will continue to contribute with its modest
resources and all its energy to the well-being of
peoples, especially those most in need. It will remain
committed to supporting international cooperation
for the achievement of sustainable development with
inclusion and in defence of international peace and
security.

