Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Mark Lowcock and
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo for their very useful briefings.
Given the tragic situation in Syria, particularly in the
north-west, I would like to underscore three priorities:
the critical need to preserve the ceasefire in Idlib, the

non-negotiable imperative to respect international
humanitarian law and the protection of civilians and
the urgency of reaching a lasting political solution.

The preservation of the ceasefire in Idlib must be
our top priority. France is extremely concerned about the
recent ground offensive launched by the Syrian regime
in the north-west, as well as the bombardments and
artillery fire by the regime and its allies. Those actions
are flagrant violations of the ceasefire agreement
between Russia and Turkey, which was reiterated in the
joint communique of the Istanbul summit last October.

Reports that this offensive has ended still need to
be confirmed on the ground. We will remain vigilant
in that regard. Compliance with the ceasefire must be
ensured over the long term. We must do everything
we can to prevent another disaster in the north-west;
the lives of 3 million civilians, including 1 million
children, are at stake. To put it plainly, we must prevent
Idlib from becoming the new Aleppo at all costs. An
offensive would not only have drastic humanitarian
consequences, but would also pose a serious migration
and security threat to all of us, with a major risk of
terrorist fighters spreading.

In that context, it is the primary responsibility of the
guarantors to preserve the ceasefire, in accordance with
the agreement on Idlib, on which the Astana guarantors
reaffirmed their commitments at their meeting on
26 April. France especially calls on Russia to honour
its commitment to uphold the ceasefire in Idlib and
bring all the necessary pressure to bear on the regime
in that regard. Moreover, I repeat that France will be
extremely firm in the event of chemical weapons being
used again, and we stand ready to act.

Against that backdrop, the protection of civilians
and respect for international humanitarian law constitute
an absolute priority. The humanitarian consequences
of the escalating violence are of great concern. More
than 180,000 people have been displaced, 150 are
dead and 11 schools and 18 medical facilities were
attacked, including hospitals that were de-conflicted.
I reiterate here that France condemns in the strongest
terms all attacks on hospitals and health workers, as
they constitute war crimes. I repeat, once again, that
the protection of civilians, including humanitarian and
health workers, as well as civilian infrastructure, is an
imperative by which we all must abide and which is
non-negotiable.

Let us make no mistake about it: the current
offensive is not exclusively about the fight against
terrorism. It is part of the brutal retaking of areas that
are still outside the control of the regime and its allies.
That offensive contributes only to the amplification
and spread of the terrorist threat. We support Turkey
in stepping up its efforts to reduce the influence of
terrorist groups. In any event, fighting terrorism, which
is a priority for all of us, cannot be used to justify
violations of international humanitarian law.

As everyone can see, we are facing a new moment
of truth in Syria, the future of which is at stake. How
can we restore the necessary confidence for a credible
political process when the population of Idlib is targeted
by a violent military campaign? How can we both wish
for the return of refugees and launch an offensive that
will inevitably make hundreds of thousands of Syrians
flee? The reality is that an offensive in Idlib will ruin
the prospects for peace in Syria, which could otherwise
come to fruition today.

Only a credible, irreversible and inclusive political
transition will break the cycle of the Syrian tragedy and
pave the way for reconstruction. We must collectively
support the Special Envoy's efforts to implement all the
elements of resolution 2254 (2015), including a credible
constitutional package. The regime's obstruction,
which has been going on for months, is unacceptable.
It is equally important that Geir Pedersen continue his
work on confidence-building measures in parallel, with
a view to establishing a secure and neutral environment,
in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015) and the
Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex), and that
he start preparing for the holding of elections. On all
those points, Russia has a leading role to play vis-a-vis
the regime.

After years of failing Syria in the Security Council,
it would be yet another great moral and political mistake
to turn the page today and look elsewhere, whether
because we tired or not courageous enough. To think
that the Syrian tragedy is behind us would be a grave
lapse in judgement, also because we are convinced
that today, for the first time perhaps in eight years, a
small but real window of opportunity is opening for us

to put an end to the conflict; we must not allow that
small window to close. That means that, as members
of the Security Council, we must assume our collective
responsibility to switch off our automatic pilot modes,
build upon our commonalities and at last achieve peace
in Syria.

