Mr. Baja (Philippines): We too are grateful to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ambassador Jessen-Petersen, for his comprehensive
briefing. We appreciate the progress made in some
areas, which Mr. Jessen-Petersen described to the
Council this morning. Nevertheless, in trying to solve a
problem like Kosovo, it is time to face some realities.

First, Kosovo has been run practically as a United
Nations protectorate for the last six years. Although the
Security Council sat out the Kosovo conflict, in
significant ways it has owned the problem. Kosovo
cannot remain in some sort of international limbo
indefinitely. Secondly, under present circumstances,
neither Kosovo's return to Belgrade's rule, nor its
partition, nor any possible unification with Albania has
a sporting chance of being supported. Thirdly, neither
Kosovo Albanians, nor the Kosovo Serbs, nor Belgrade
is able to adopt more accommodating positions.

This morning we heard a dichotomy of
assessments of the situation in Kosovo. The problem
for some delegations, in particular that of the
Philippines, is not only what we still do not know, but
what we do know that may not be so. Therefore, under
the present circumstances, the suggested mission to
Kosovo becomes a necessity.

We believe that it is time for the international
community to begin to act decisively. NATO, which
prosecuted the war, and the Group of Eight, which
negotiated the peace, have key roles to play. The
Security Council should not allow Kosovo to dangle
much longer.

The six-member Contact Group should be able to
devise a more viable road map for Kosovo. After all,
four members of the Contact Group are permanent
members of this Council, and the other two have their
own passion with regard to the issue of permanent
membership in the Council.

I think time is of the essence. A repetition of the
deadly uprising in March last year is an unwanted but
likely possibility if continuing uncertainty prevails on
the ground. The economic situation, as painted this
morning by the Special Representative to the
Secretary-General, could be a ticking bomb and should
be diffused as soon as possible. Another series of
incidents like those of March 2004 would unravel
whatever progress or gains NATO, the European
Union, the government in Kosovo and the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) have achieved for Kosovo. Another
explosion like that of March 2004 would unleash the
dogs of another war which would generate regional
instability. Even a well-endowed UNMIK may be
unable to contain the escalation of such an explosion.

Therefore, a process for determining the future
status of Kosovo, with timelines and guarantees for the
protection of minority rights and other human rights, is
an attractive approach. We are gratified to know that
this process could begin in the middle of the year. The
challenge for the Council is to ensure that when the
train leaves, the important passengers are on board.

