Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): I would
like to warmly congratulate Japan both for the choice
of this highly important topic, which offers us today
the opportunity to respond to the substantial question
of how institution-building can consolidate peace and
prevent a relapse into conflict, and for its successful
chairmanship of the Peacebuilding Commission's
Working Group on Lessons Learned.

It is precisely one of the first lessons learned
that good governance and strong and accountable
institutions are essential for easing tensions, reducing
poverty and having a positive impact on development.
The development of a democratic process based on
strong democratic institutions whose workings function
properly, as well as on sound knowledge and respect for
the rule of law and human rights, is a key determinant of
the failure or success of any post-conflict State-building
project after a conflict or any political transition. Strong
institutions are the basis of the restoration of trust
between the State and the citizen, which is the sine qua
non for anchoring the country in lasting peace. Citizens'
confidence in the ability of the State to defend the
common good is an equally fundamental prerequisite
for the establishment of the rule of law, which is not
only an instrument of Government, but a principle to
which all society, including the Government, is bound
to advance democracy.

There is no State without authority, workers,
politicians or civil servants. Ifthe State wants to regain
the trust of citizens, it must be accessible and near at
hand. It should be able to offer justice and to be the
sovereign guarantor of social cohesion and guardian
of the integrity of its territory. As a multidimensional
process that is long-term and requires huge financial
and human investments, institution-building in the
framework of peacebuilding needss the sustained
mobilization of all the political forces of the country
concerned, regional and subregional partners,
international financial institutions and the international
community as a whole.

In the African context, especially in countries
emerging from conflict, where almost everything
needs to be rebuilt, institution-building is much more
like a State construction project than one of the reform
and consolidation of existing State structures. This
demonstrates the vast scope of the task that faces a
fragile African country and all stakeholders involved
in peacebuilding.

Beyond the re-establishment of state authority and
the implementation of efficient and rational reforms
of the security and justice sectors, the success of any
institution-building project makes it essential to take
the following elements into account.

The effectiveness and sustainability of
institutional capacity-building is directly related to the
institutionalization of the role of capacity-management
at the national level. A body consisting ofrepresentatives
of various sectors and spanning all areas concerned
can support, advise and monitor institutional capacity-
building processes. Legislation based on the promotion
of good governance and human rights would result in
the development of policies respectful of human rights
by the State, civil society and the population.

Transparency in the development and
implementation of public policies requires the public
to have access to social services and to demand that
their rights be protected. Facilitating public access
to information can in some cases be an effective
strategy to improve the state of public spending and
protect economic and social rights. Efforts to educate
the public and heighten its understanding of political,
economic and social issues provoke debate, promote
informed social dialogue and strengthen awareness
among citizens of their rights.

Strengthening the obligation of public officials to
account for their actions through sound accountability
legislation allows a balance to be struck among
institutional power systems and creates mechanisms
providing redress to victims of human rights violations.
Efforts to protect and promote human rights are
essential elements of the transition from conflict to
peace. Governance reforms that promote human rights
can be implemented even in the midst of insecurity and
conflict, as well as during transition periods that follow
political oppression and conflict.

Good governance encourages public participation in
Government, allows civil society to be actively involved
in policy development and the interests of society to be
well represented in the institutional process. Policies
that respect cultural diversity and minorities contribute
to the resolution of social conflicts, ease tensions
and help to lower the barriers of inequality, poverty
and marginalization.

Public participation in local development must be
institutionalized and given a central role in designing
and implementing genuine development policies in
the context of a participatory local administration.
The political representation of women in political
institutions and processes must be strengthened so
that they are able to defend the adoption of laws and
initiatives to their benefit.

Respect for human rights must be enhanced
and conflicts managed through a participatory,
inclusive and transparent constitutional process that
promotes public confidence in the new constitution.
Allowing ordinary citizens to express their opinion
on constitutional issues helps the development of a
legitimate document that would be owned by the people.
The political participation of indigenous communities
must be promoted by protecting their right to define
and establish their own public policy priorities.

Governance, transparency and accountability in
the management of public and private resources must
be strengthened because there can be no satisfactory
development where corruption is rife. Unproductive
public expenditure, and in particular excessive military
expenditure, must be abandoned so asto allow the
increase in the social spending that Africa badly needs.
It is essential to stabilize macroeconomic stability
so as to sustainably increase the private savings and
investment necessary to establish a liberal and stable
economic and regulatory environment.

Debt relief is directly linked to the fight against
poverty. When debt burdens the national budget, it
undermines the ability of a Government to provide its
citizens with the basic social services. Aware of the
magnitude of this constraint for African economies.
His Majesty King Mohammed VI decided in 2000 to
cancel the debts of African least-developed countries
to Morocco and to lift all tariffs imposed on products
imported from those countries. This decision was based
on Morocco's belief in the need to uphold and enshrine
the spirit of solidarity and on its African identity.

The efforts of countries in fragile situations to
develop and implement national plans and reforms to
strengthen their institutions and entrench the rule of
law should be encouraged, notably by providing them
with appropriate financial assistance. The merit of the
identical resolutions adopted by the General Assembly
and the Security Council on peacebuilding is that they
highlight the inadequacy of the assistance mobilized
by the international community with respect to the
real needs of vulnerable country. It up to us to give
substance to the ambitious project of implementing the
recommendations of the review. Peace in Africa and
around the world depends on it.

The meeting rose at 4.20 pm.
