Mr. Maurer: We met in New York exactly 149 days
ago for the adoption of resolution 2286 (2016), which
many of us appreciated for its clarity in language,
commitment to international humanitarian law and
design of concrete follow-up. In the five months that
have passed since then, however, attacks on health
care personnel facilities and vehicles have certainly
not ceased. The situation in many countries remains
deeply alarming.

In Syria, for instance, on all sides of the front lines,
health facilities and personnel regularly come under
fire or are forced to close due to heavy clashes. Just
a few hours ago, the two largest hospitals in Aleppo
were reportedly attacked. Patients were killed and
medical staff were injured. All across the country,
many hospitals are no longer functional, leaving
injured people with little hope of getting life-saving
medical assistance. The violence, the disruption of the
electricity and water supplies, and the lack ofmedicines
have severely jeopardized access to health care.

In Yemen, one-quarter of all health services have
reportedly either been destroyed or shut down at a time
when there are more injured people than ever. Just over
a month ago, a Medecins Sans Frontieres supported
hospital in Hajjah governorate, Yemen, was hit and 90
people were killed - and that is just a tip ofthe iceberg.
The list continues - Afghanistan, South Sudan,
Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Libya and so on. Unfortunately, the
trend described previously continues unabatedly. The
behaviour of actors on the battlefield has not changed
over the past couple of months, nor have belligerents
been seen to factor humanitarian consequences more
prominently into their military decision-making. Health
systems continue to disintegrate under the cumulative
impact of violence, leaving millions of people in highly
fragile conditions.

Although we have not seen progress on the
battlefield, at least here at the United Nations the
community of States has resolved to work on this issue.
First, the International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC) is pleased to see the leadership of the Council
reaffirming the continued validity of international
humanitarian law as the universally agreed framework
for the protection of the wounded and sick and the
delivery of medical care in armed conflict. We must
remain confident and demonstrate through our
actions that, even in the most trying circumstances,
international humanitarian law remains relevant and
can make a difference for people bearing the brunt
of war.

Secondly, specific recommendations and measures
for the protection of health care in conflict are now
integrated in official resolutions. At the International
Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent, the
resolution to protect health care in armed conflict
was unanimously adopted. The Security Council
unanimously adopted resolution 2286 (2016). Eighty-
five countries supported it and we now have a solid
foundation from which to promote such measures.
But it is clear that more concrete action is necessary.
The ICRC notes with appreciation the letter of the
Secretary-General addressed to the States Members
of the United Nations (S/2016/722, annex), as a follow-
up to resolution 2286 (2016) and delineating a clear
road map for implementation. We appreciate having
been consulted on the content of the letter and for the
opportunity to provide input.

From our perspective, being close to the victims
when negotiating humanitarian access with weapons-
bearers on all sides and from the information collected
through the Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement's
Health care in Danger initiative, we believe that there
are four areas where concrete measures must be taken.

First, on legislation, States must strengthen
domestic legislation protecting access to health care as
is their obligation under international law. They must
ensure that national laws recognize the role of first
responders, often staff and volunteers from national
Red Cross and Red Crescent societies. States must
do everything in their power to enforce existing legal
sanctions so that they act as a deterrent.

Secondly, on data collection, we encourage
States and other relevant actors to set up national and
international systems to collect and analyse data on the
occurrence of violence against health care personnel,
facilities, medical transports and patients and convene
multi-stakeholder meetings to regularly share challenges
and good practices on preventing and addressing acts of
violence against the delivery of health care.

Thirdly, on accountability, I ask the Council to
ensure that acts of violence against the delivery of
health care that amounts to grave breaches of the
Geneva Conventions are penalized as such in domestic
legal orders. We would like to see the strengthening
of capacities to enable full, prompt, impartial,
independent and effective investigations, ensuring
enhanced accountability and addressing the grievances
of victims.

Lastly, on preparedness and prevention, we ask
States and other relevant actors to adopt contingency
plans. Such plans would be adopted in anticipation of
situations that could jeopardize the organization and
provision of assistance to the sick and the wounded
and to develop practical measures for armed forces to
minimize disruptions to health-care services during
the planning and conduct of military operations and
incorporate them into orders, rules of engagement,
training and standard operating procedures and other
relevant documents.
I would like to renew ICRC's offer today to build
a more constructive relationship of deep operational
engagement, feedback, dialogue and corrective
measures with all parties to conflicts on the conduct
of hostilities. That may eventually help to re-establish
trust among belligerents that the law is not only
applicable because of the sanctions and accountability
processes attached to it, but as a useful and necessary
tool in the interest of all. In that regard, let me make the
following comment.

I do understand and respect the role of the Council
to offer political positions and guidelines with regard
to international peace and security. In dealing with
the issue of international humanitarian law and its
implementation, the Council must still factor into
its reflections the importance of trust, confidence
and consensus among belligerents that can best be
promoted through mutual, impartial and independent
intermediaries able to maintain the confidence of
the parties to the conflict, as stated in the Geneva
Conventions. It is important, therefore, that, while
united around the table today, we also understand and
respect our roles and responsibilities as political and
humanitarian actors.

One hundred and forty-nine days ago, the Council
took historic measures and your presence here today,
Sir, attests to your commitment to the protection of
patients and health-care workers everywhere. But
meanwhile, men and women, girls and boys, doctors
and nurses, continue to run to the basements when they
hear planes and rockets approaching. They continue to
pull their loved ones out from the rubble of destroyed
hospitals. They continue to fear armed men stopping
their ambulances. Much stronger engagement is needed
to turn our commitment into a reality on the ground, to
make a real difference for people suffering in wars. I
urge the Council to continue to push.

