Mr. Hoang Chi Trung (Viet Nam): We wish to
thank Mr. John Holmes, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, for his comprehensive briefing. We are
also very grateful to the Permanent Representative of
Chad for his statement.

My delegation shares the concerns expressed
about the grave situation in Chad and the Sudan,
especially the plight of the affected population in
Darfur, where 4.5 million people still live in dire need
of humanitarian assistance. The sexual and gender-
based violence against women in Chad and the Sudan
is also alarming. We are particularly concerned about
the banditry, carjacking and armed attacks on relief
workers in Darfur.

We categorically condemn all those violent acts
against relief workers in Darfur and support
investigations to bring the perpetrators to justice. We
urge all parties concerned to fully respect international
humanitarian law and ensure the safety of United
Nations staff and humanitarian workers.

Viet Nam welcomes the improvement in relations
between Chad and the Sudan, especially the recent
exchange of ambassadors between the two countries.
We hope that this will be a major contribution to the
consolidation and improvement of the security and
humanitarian situation in the subregion.
We take positive note of the Sudanese
Government's 17 November extension of the
moratorium on fast-track procedures for humanitarian
workers in Darfur until 31 January 2010. We believe
that this step will help to enhance the delivery of
much-needed humanitarian assistance to the affected
population in the region and facilitate humanitarian
operations. This momentum of cooperation should be
further encouraged.

Viet Nam highly appreciates the efforts made by
the humanitarian community, especially the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, in cooperating with the respective
Governments of Chad and the Sudan to improve the
humanitarian situation in the subregion. In this
connection, we commend the visit by Under-Secretary-
General Holmes to Chad and the Sudan in November.
We welcome the launching on 20 November of the
United Nations work plan for the Sudan and call on the
international community and donors to respond
actively and to extend the resources necessary to
expedite the plan's implementation.

Finally, we are of the view that better
coordination and cooperation between the United
Nations missions in the subregion - the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and
the United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad - will have help to improve the
humanitarian situation in Chad and in the Sudan. The
root causes of the conflict and their concomitant
humanitarian disasters must be addressed by reviving
the political process, encouraging national
reconciliation and promoting socio-economic
development in both Chad and the Sudan.

