Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, the delegation of the Republic
of Equatorial Guinea would like to thank the delegation
of Kuwait for organizing this important briefing on
missing persons in armed conflict, as well as for its
excellent leadership with respect to resolution 2474
(2019), which the Council has just adopted and which
we were proud to sponsor. I would also like to take
this opportunity to express our thanks to Mr. Peter
Maurer, President of the International Committee of
the Red Cross, and Ms. Reena Ghelani, Director of
the Operations and Advocacy Division of the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, for their insightful briefings.

As we in the Council can confirm, the growing
complexity of armed conflicts increases their
multidimensional impact on the civilian population
while making the work of States, humanitarian and
peacekeeping personnel to protect civilians in those
contexts more difficult. As we have seen in the
work of the Council, one aspect of armed conflict's
impact on people is the increased vulnerability of
the groups that most need social protection in these
circumstances, such as children, women, the elderly,
persons with disabilities, and minorities. Another is
the impact that people's disappearance has on their
loved ones. It is one of the most harmful and lasting
humanitarian consequences of armed conflicts, not
only affecting people and families who face economic,
legal and mental health challenges, but also with
significant repercussions for the resolution of conflicts,
the sustainability and consolidation of peace and
sustainable development.

We know that although the available data on people
who have disappeared during conflict is not exhaustive,
the International Committee of the Red Cross estimates
that some 140,000 people have disappeared around the
world, 36,000 of them in Africa, and many of them as a
result of armed conflicts. Accordingly, the Republic of
Equatorial Guineajoins the Secretary-General's call for
the parties to conflicts to ensure respect for international
humanitarian law in relation to disappeared civilians,
prevent enforced disappearances, take all possible
measures to account for persons reported missing and
defend their families' right to receive information about
their fate and whereabouts.

The primary responsibility to protect the civilian
population belongs to individual States. However,
when that is not possible, and when States request it,
the international community, including humanitarian
organizations, can provide support, in accordance with
the principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations, including full respect for the sovereignty of
States and based on a just and legitimate cause. There
are obligations under international humanitarian
law designed to prevent people's disappearance,
hold accountable those who are responsible for such
disappearances, and ensure that those obligations are
met during an armed conflict, not just after hostilities
have ended. That includes being committed to finding
the disappeared through records and the appropriate
handling of human remains, among other measures.

In that regard, it is the responsibility of the
conflicting parties to establish effective mechanisms
and measures to determine the whereabouts of
disappeared civilians and refrain from using
disappearance as a military tactic, so that the families
and communities of the disappeared can move forward,
without underlying tensions and with trust between
communities and institutions. In that context, we would
like to acknowledge the commendable commitment and
work of the International Committee of the Red Cross
to make visible at the global level the experiences of
associations of missing persons in the world and its
initiatives to find solutions to the problem of disappeared
people across the globe, particularly through its Central
Tracing Agency. We encourage States to continue to
collaborate and support it in that regard.

This meeting is a step forward in terms of
strengthening the Security Council's work in the
area of the protection of civilians in armed conflicts.
We believe that focusing on disappeared persons in
armed conflicts is a key element in that area because
of its impact on international peace and security, for
which the Council is responsible. In that regard, we
appreciate the good work being done by governmental,
humanitarian and human rights organizations and
peacekeeping missions in searching for and identifying
missing civilians, and we encourage them to strengthen
those efforts. We also request that this be reflected
in the annual reports of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.
