I begin by thanking the German presidency and other co-sponsors - Belgium, the Dominican Republic, Estonia, France, the Niger, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Tunisia, the United Kingdom and Viet Nam - for organizing this ministerial open debate on the theme of climate and Security. I also wish to thank the briefers for their insightful briefings. The threats to international peace and security can emanate from anywhere, and they can transcend national boundaries. Moreover, non-traditional and emerging threats pose serious challenges to international security and stability. The current coronavirus disease pandemic is a stark reminder that many security threats flow from rather invisible enemies. It has also taken the lid off the complacency in global cooperation and exposed our sheer lack of preparedness. The hazardous and existential threats of climate change, particularly to small island developing countries and other vulnerable countries, are long established. Climate-induced disasters, such as sea-level rise, hurricanes, landslides, torrential rains and extreme weather conditions, among others, have impacted food security and biodiversity, increased environmental migration and destabilized the economic orders of such countries. Such a scenario and escalation of hardship is a recipe for conflicts. The countries in special situations, such as least developed countries (LDCs), landlocked developing countries (LLDCs) and small island developing States (SIDS), bear the brunt of the climate catastrophe. No country alone - no matter how powerful it is - can address this issue. This warrants concerted and comprehensive efforts at the regional and global levels. The countries in special situations - LDCs, LLDCs and SIDS - must be supported through easier, transparent and direct access to climate finance and technology to fight the climate crisis. The Security Council can play an important role in addressing the threat of climate change simply by sending a message of its collective commitment. Council members must lead by example. Equally important is the expressed political support of the five permanent members of the Council to the prevalent climate-change frameworks. The Paris Agreement on Climate Change speaks of the collective commitment to a safe shared destiny on the planet. However, the challenge of implementation looms large. Our inability to upscale climate action will not only jeopardize the health of the planet but also the safety and security of the people. Climate action should therefore be treated not just as an afterthought or an add-on to our policies. It must be part of the core, if we are to ensure a secure world and the safety of humankind. As a mountainous country, Nepal remains vulnerable to the adverse impacts of climate change. We are burdened disproportionately, despite our negligible emissions. A report on the Hindu Kush Himalaya region published last year by the International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development cautioned that up to two thirds of the glaciers in the region will melt away by 2100 if the business-as- usual approach continues. This can have repercussions in the availability of water and other resources, including food outside the mountain areas, such as in the river basins, which sustain more than | billion people. Adverse effects like the receding snowcap of the Himalayas, glacial-lake outburst floods and the extinction of some rare flora and fauna are already being experienced. In conclusion, Nepal would like to urge all countries to pay heed to the silent call of the disastrous effects of climate change on peoples and the planet, and to genuinely respond to the crisis for the sake of humankind.
