Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic):
I would first like to thank Mr. Jean Arnault, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia,
for his valuable briefing, in which he informed us of the
most important achievements and challenges facing the
peace process and ceasefire in Colombia.

I also welcome His Excellency Mr. Oscar Adolfo
Naranjo Trujillo, Vice President of Colombia, to the
Security Council. His presence here today is in itself
a testament to his Government's interest in achieving
stable and lasting peace in Colombia and a confirmation
to the Council of the importance that the Colombian
Government attaches to that peace. I also thank and
acknowledge his important and vital role in the current
peace process in Colombia.

Regarding the Final Agreement for Ending the
Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace,
we take this opportunity to praise the significant
achievements realized since it was signed by the
Government and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia (FARC), ending a conflict that had lasted
more than half a century. Meanwhile, we emphasize
the importance of ensuring that both sides continue to
honour their commitments.

After 50 years ofconflict, achieving peace will face
difficulties and obstacles. We welcome the temporary
bilateral ceasefire between the Government and the
Ejercito de Liberacion Nacional (ELN), which expired
yesterday, 9 March, and which has facilitated a number
of achievements on several fronts, as acknowledged
by both parties, the Catholic Church and the United
Nations Mission, including a significant reduction in
armed clashes between Government forces and those
of the ELN, bringing with it a reduction in the level
of violence and improvements in the humanitarian
situation. We have also seen the participation ofa wide
group of social organizations in public meetings with
a View to convening a national dialogue in the future.

However, we are concerned about reports received
this morning, indicating that the ELN has resumed
fighting after the expiry of the ceasefire deadline. We
urge both parties to extend it and to put the best interests
of Colombia and the Colombian people first. We
support the Secretary-General's recommendation that
the mandate of the United Nations Verification Mission
be renewed to ensure the continuation of the ceasefire
between the Government and the ELN, in View of the
Mission's important role in achieving stability in the
interests of the Colombian peace process.

In this regard, I thank the countries that have
contributed international observers; Cuba and Norway,
the two guarantors of the peace process; and the two
supporting countries, Chile and Venezuela, as well
as Colombia, for their Vital and important role in
sponsoring the ceasefire negotiations. We reiterate our
commitment to continuing to support the Colombian
Government, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the United Nations Mission in
their endeavours to bring peace to Colombia.

Finally, I wish the Ambassador of the United
Kingdom, Matthew Rycroft, every success in the new
role that awaits him.

