Mr. Martinez Blanco (Honduras) (interpretation from Spanish): A political stalemate and a serious humanitarian
situation prevail in Somalia, threatening to thwart the
achievement of the goals of national reconciliation and
lasting peace in that country.

The Somali factions have not yet fulfilled their
commitments to hold an international reconciliation
conference and to form a broad-based government. The lack
of a negotiated settlement among the Somalis continues to
be the cause of political instability, insecurity and far-
reaching deterioration of the economic, social and
humanitarian situation in that country.

The neglect of the consultation and negotiation process
for achieving peace and national reconciliation and the
Somali parties' lack of cooperation on security issues are
the very factors that last year hampered progress towards
the goals of the United Nations in Somalia and prevented
the renewal of the mandate of United Nations Operation in
Somalia (UNOSOM. II), whose timely intervention in 1992,
together with international humanitarian assistance,
contributed to saving many lives and to alleviating the
suffering of the civilian population.

We find it disheartening that, since the withdrawal
of UNOSOM. II, security conditions in Somalia have
continued to deteriorate. The occupation of Baidoa and
the fighting near Kismayo in September and December
1995 delayed all the efforts aimed at national
reconciliation that were being made by the Somali
Salvation Alliance and the Somali National Alliance, and
also affected the personal safety and work of United
Nations officials and agencies working in those areas.

It is a source of concern to my delegation that no
tangible progress is being made towards national
reconciliation and the establishment of a broad-based
national government in Somalia. We are concerned also
at the situation of insecurity, the difficulties in distributing
emergency assistance and in rehabilitating several areas of
the country, and the obstacles faced by the agencies of
the United Nations and its associated international entities
in the course of their normal work.

We therefore believe that the international
community must continue assisting the Somali people,
firstly by helping them achieve a political solution to the
conflict and, secondly, by committing enough resources
to alleviate their urgent humanitarian needs.

Accordingly, we recognize the importance of the
continued efforts by the Organization of African Unity,
the Organization of the Islamic Conference, the League of
Arab States, the European Union and Somalia's
neighbouring States to promote national dialogue in the
context of the search for a solution to the crisis in
Somalia, and recognize also the importance of the
willingness on the part of the international humanitarian
and the non-governmental organizations to go on
providing assistance for rehabilitation and reconstruction
in those areas where the Somalis are guaranteeing security
and offering their cooperation. We recognize further the
importance of maintaining and upgrading the United
Nations Political Office for Somalia so that it can
continue its contacts with the Somali factions and
neighbouring governments, keep up close cooperation
with the regional organizations and monitor events in
Somalia.

This willingness on the part of the international
community demonstrates its increasing interest in re-
establishing peace in a country that has been laid low by
violence and political ambitions, and deserves to be

 

reciprocated by the leaders of the Somali factions, who
should set aside their differences and restart the process of
consultations and negotiations towards national
reconciliation and the establishment of a broad-based
representative national government.

As the Council has stated on a number of occasions,
the international community can only facilitate, promote
and cooperate with the parties to the process; it cannot
impose solutions. Responsibility for reconciliation and for
restoring peace lies ultimately with the Somalis themselves.
My delegation therefore urges them to settle the conflict by
peaceful means and cooperate fully with the international
community. We also call on them to cooperate with a View
to ensuring that emergency assistance can be distributed
without difficulty and, towards that end, to reopen, without
conditions, the seaport and airport at Mogadishu.

Lastly, my delegation believes that, in light of the
situation in Somalia, the arms embargo imposed under
resolution 733 (1992) must be kept up. We believe also that
communication with all the Somali factions and with well-
known Somali figures must be maintained, and my
delegation would therefore support sending a Security
Council mission to Somalia to meet with the faction leaders
and convey to them a message from the Council urging
them to resume negotiations.

