Mr. Omaish (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Abou Moussa, for the
information he presented to us this morning on the work
ofthe United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA), as well as for his efforts during the most
recent reporting period. We look forward to working
with his successor. We express our appreciation to the
UNOCA staff, given their considerable responsibilities
in dealing with the various issues in the region.

Undoubtedly, the volume of challenges facing the
Central African region greatly exceeds the ability of
its States to deal with them. Despite the international
involvement in addressing the region's multiple
and interconnected problems, the lack of sufficient
international efforts to address their root causes leads
us to continuously seek tentative and partial solutions,
instead of achieving sustainable solutions.

My delegation agrees with the contents of the
Secretary-General's report (S/2014/319) on the impact
of the crisis, which has ravaged the Central African
Republic, on the sociopolitical and security situation of
the region. While we hope that the general situation in
the Central African Republic will subside, particularly
after the entrenchment of the troops of the African-led
International Support Mission in the Central African
Republic and the imminent deployment of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic, addressing the
consequences ofthe crisis, such as regional displacement,
the growing menace posed by extremist groups and the
persistent illicit trade in natural resources, will require
cooperation and coordination among international and
regional efforts and a full commitment by States of the
region to fulfil their responsibilities and carry out their
work to achieve security and stability.

My delegation would like to emphasize that
successfully dealing with the threat of terrorist groups

revolves around three cardinal points, that is, depriving
them of a supportive environment and the ability to
recruit; drying up their sources of financial support;
and conducting targeted operations against such
groups in order to weaken their structural capacities
and institutional coherence. Concerted regional efforts
must continue with a View to preventing those groups
from utilizing the deteriorating situation in the Central
African Republic and South Sudan and focusing on
border control and full coordination among the States of
the region and regional and international organizations.

With regard to terrorist groups, we condemn the
abduction of schoolgirls by Boko Haram, and we extend
our sympathy to the Government and the people of
Nigeria and the families of the girls.

As mentioned in the Secretary-General's report,
there has been a remarkable decline in the operations of
the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA), with an attendant
decline in murders and abductions. Yet the LRA has
reorganized into small groups that are capable of
moving swiftly. That shows the continued ability by the
LRA's command and control to adapt to the situation on
the ground in order to launch isolated border attacks.

The Regional Cooperation Initiative for the
Elimination of the Lord's Resistance Army must be
fully launched, and the composition of the Regional
Task Force should be finalized so that it amounts to
5,000 troops. That will enhance the ability to pursue
and track LRA remnants and its leadership in the
various areas. There must be logistical and material
support for the Regional Task Force so that it is able
to fill the preparedness gaps suffered by some troops.

In conclusion, in the framework of this discussion
on the LRA, the report of the Secretary-General refers
to certain cases of defection by LRA members. We
request further information about those cases. We want
to know whether the reasons for defection have been
studied in a manner that gives a clearer picture of the
LRA's organizational situation.

