Mr. Gata Mavita wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, and expressing our
satisfaction to see you preside over the Security Council
in September. You are the representative of the United
States of America, a country with which my country,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, enjoys excellent
relations, marked by reciprocal respect. I would also
like to thank you for convening this important Security
Council meeting on children and armed conflict, a
subject that gives my country, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the opportunity to speak on an issue that
is now one of my Government's top priorities.

My delegation takes due note of the Secretary-
General's report on children and armed conflict
(S/2014/339). I also note that it is my country's continued
relapses into war that have produced the phenomenon of
child soldiers in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

However, with time and on the initiative of our Head of
State, my Government decided to end this phenomenon
within our armed forces by taking various actions,
including setting up biometric files for identifying
military personnel in order to keep better track of army
units' personnel data, including their age. For the same
reasons, and to clearly express our political commitment
and firm determination to eradicate the phenomena
of sexual violence and child soldiers, on 9 July the
President of the Republic, Mr. Joseph Kabila Kabange,
appointed Mrs. Jeannine Mabunda to be his personal
representative on combating sexual violence and the
recruitment of children. Last week Mrs. Mabunda ended
a visit to New York to consult with key stakeholders
from the international community in this area.

My country supports the United Nations Children,
Not Soldiers global campaign launched earlier this
year by the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, together
with UNICEF, aimed at eradicating the recruitment and
use by Government security forces of children in armed
conflicts by the end of 2016. It should be emphasized
that the objectives of this campaign, as outlined in
resolution 2143 (2014) of 7 March, are already part of
a series of initiatives that my Government is working
to implement effectively. The progress that has been
made on the ground in this area no doubt figured in the
Secretary-General's commendation, in his report, ofmy
Government's efforts to combat this phenomenon, and
in his encouraging my country's military authorities
to further strengthen the procedures for verifying the
age of prospective recruits during future recruitment
drives.

It is important to emphasize that my Government's
efforts are supported by various international partners,
including the United Nations. In October 2012, in
fact, the Congolese Government and the United
Nations signed an action plan consisting of a series of
commitments aimed at ending the recruitment and use
of children by the armed forces and security services
as well as sexual violence against children. To ensure
the plan's effective implementation, my Government,
together with its partners, has committed to assessing
the progress made in this situation every six months.
I would point out that significant progress has indeed
been made since the plan was signed.

Furthermore, the Congolese authorities have

issued two directives, of which the first, decreed by the
Minister of National Defence and Veterans' Affairs, is
intended for the armed forces. It instructs commanders
of military training centres to facilitate access to
military encampments for the United Nations special
Task Force on children and armed conflict and for child
protection agencies for the purpose of verification. It
also instructs the military leadership to take severe
disciplinary and punitive action against anyone
committing a serious violation of children's rights. It
also provides for awareness and traning campaigns
in every military garrison in the country in order to
enable all military personnel to absorb the action plan's
directives and resulting obligations.
The second directive, issued by the Director-
General of our national intelligence agency, grants
members of the United Nations special Task Force and
child protection agencies access to the intelligence
service's staff, documents, sites and facilities and
authorizes the release of all children associated with
armed groups and their referral to child protection
agencies. Thanks to these orders, the United Nations
Task Force and child protection agencies have been
able to visit five military training centres and to
identify without hindrance about 5,000 recruits. Two
coordinating bodies have also been set up to monitor
implementation of the action plan, with encouraging
results. According to the Government's interim report
on the plan, covering the period from 4 October 2012 to
30 June 2013, 2,894 children were separated from the
military and from armed groups by June 2013, while
during the same period 2,824, including 365 girls, were
taken in charge through transitional host centres.

Combating impunity for serious crimes against
children has entered a new phase with the establishment
of new juvenile courts in 10 of the country's provinces.
Again with the aim of strengthening the protection of
children, the Government has decided to disqualify
anyone who has committed six serious violations
of children's rights during a conflict from joining
the armed forces. These strong measures targeting
children's rights have had significant results.

To avoid confusion, my delegation would like to
make it clear to the Council that since the defeat of
the Mouvement du 23 mars, and in accordance with
President Kabila's appeal to the armed groups to lay
down their arms, some of the national armed groups
have responded to that appeal. The findings show that
as these groups give themselves up, their ranks include
children, whom our armed forces systematically remand
to child protection services. This could be interpreted
to mean that these children have come from our army,
when in fact there are no more child soldiers in the
ranks of our armed forces today.

Among major actions taken by the authorities to
combat sexual violence was the law of20 July 2006. This
law, by comparison with the old Congolese criminal
code, has made important innovations, including raising
the age threshold for victims of sexual abuse from 14
to 18. It severely punishes practices such as forced
marriage and prostitution, exploitation of children,
sexual slavery, bestiality and genital mutilation, which
are subject to stiff penalties. Nonetheless, the new law
on sexual violence both retains these offences and adds
16 more, based on international humanitarian law.
In conclusion, my Government is determined to
build on the efforts already made in implementing its
action plan for eradicating sexual violence and the
recruitment and use of children in armed forces and
groups, as well as other serious violations of children's
rights. In that regard, my country would like to thank
Ms. Leila Zerrougui, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
and Ms. Sylvie Lucas, the Permanent Representative of
Luxembourg and Chair of the Council's Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict, for their dedication to
the cause of children. My country also welcomes the
excellent cooperation that has evolved with the Office
of the Special Representative, the United Nations
special Task Force, the child protection division of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and UNICEF.
To all these partners, my country is extremely grateful.

