Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): We thank the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam for convening this very useful and timely discussion. We extend our gratitude to the Secretaries-General for their insightful remarks on a topic that is dear to the hearts of many across the Caribbean Community (CARICOM). Regional and subregional organizations act as conduits that link our global governance structure to the local and contextual realities found within manyStates across the world. For small island developing States like ours, regional cooperation creates much- needed buffers that insulate us from the rigours of a rapidly changing, and often tumultuous, global political economy. Indeed, threats to international peace and security are transnational in character and necessitate collective action in order to yield just and equitable outcomes. Such threats include climate change, cross- border terrorism, mass human displacement and other hazards that hold no regard for territorial integrity and easily overwhelm the capacity of many States. For small States like ours, the sharing of such burdens on a regional basis is the only feasible option. Justice and equity are often born through a shared history of struggle and solidarity. Collective struggle shapes collective identities, which in turn fosters deep- rooted and meaningful relationships. In the case of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), those relationships are conditioned by culturally determined modes of interaction among member States and mediated in line with the principles of sovereignty, non-interference and mutual respect. In the context of CARICOM, our regional identity takes the form of unity in diversity, embodied across our shared institutions, fostering trust, confidence and a spirit of partnership. In both cases, a normative "togetherness" is nurtured without impeding the local cultures and values from which member States draw their national identities. For both CARICOM and ASEAN, full respect for sovereignty is an essential condition for peace. What makes ASEAN distinctive from many similar organizations, however, is its unique method of conflict prevention and conflict resolution, knownas the ASEAN Way. Based on the norms of pragmatism, reciprocity, compromise, discretion and _non-confrontational negotiating styles, ASEAN has been able to craft a zone of stable peace without transcending the traditions of statehood that regionalism intends to enhance. At a time when many conflicts seem to stem from clashes of identity along ethnic, communal or political lines, the ASEAN Way might offer the United Nations a template from which we can settle our many differences. Similarly, the unity in diversity model fomented across CARICOM can instil in the United Nations a spirit of togetherness, while allowing local cultures and national values to flourish. If we truly want to craft a more peaceful and prosperous world, we can look to regional groups, such as ASEAN, that have found ways to integrate their differences into a singular diverse fabric. That calls for, above all else, full respect for each country's right to self-determination, no matter what political, social or economic path it may choose. We stand at a dangerous crossroads today. Some parts of the world are being consumed by fire, while others are engulfed by water. As the climate crisis continues to grow in scope and complexity, we must all join together nationally, regionally and globally so that we may weather this storm. As a former Caribbean regionalist, Forbes Burnham, once said: "Either we integrate, or we perish." We must work together in the interest of our common humankind.
