Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): One year ago, Portugal
was one of the sponsors of the resolution before this
Council on the constitution of the United Nations Civilian
Police Mission in Haiti (MIPONUH).

Despite considerable progress, serious problems
persist in Haiti that require the continuation of the
assistance of the United Nations. We are concerned at the
continuation of Violence and unrest, the difficult economic
situation, the high level of unemployment, the rising cost
of living and the slow pace of change in Haiti.

Moreover, we are distressed to know that the
parliamentary and local elections due to take place this
month were postponed, prolonging the present political
stalemate. This impasse is having a major impact in terms
of eroding public confidence in the capacity and
willingness of the authorities to solve the pressing
economic and social problems facing the country. We
strongly appeal to the Haitian authorities and political
leaders to embark urgently on a negotiated solution to the
crisis in a spirit of tolerance and compromise. The tasks
ahead will be of crucial importance to the consolidation
of democracy and national reconstruction. For that reason,
we believe that comprehensive and sustained long-term
assistance by the international community is vitally
important.

A continued commitment, in particular from the
international financial institutions and other United
Nations agencies, is necessary to promote a successful
and sustainable development that will underpin political
stability in the country. We want to help Haitians build a
country where democracy and progress will be a reality.
That can be achieved only if the rule of law and respect
for human rights are ensured.

The continued presence of the United Nations
operation in Haiti, and of MIPONUH in particular, has
proved to be an important element for that country's
transition to democracy by assisting the Government to
form a public force respectful of legality and capable of
maintaining public order and security. The Secretary-
General in its last report underlines that the Haitian
National Police has not yet reached the level of
professionalization required to tackle successfully the
various problems in daily activities. In fact, a self-
sustained and fully functioning police is essential to
ensure a secure and stable environment and the economic
rehabilitation and consolidation of democracy in Haiti.

 

We believe that the maintenance of the presence of the
United Nations, as requested recently by President Preval,
is of the utmost importance. Indeed, the United Nations
should continue to help the Government of Haiti to
professionalize its police force. We urge Haiti's authorities
to pursue their efforts to form a public force respectful of
legality and also to pursue their efforts to revitalize Haiti's
justice and penal systems.

For all these reasons, Portugal will vote in favour of
the draft resolution before us today.

