Ms. Vargas de Losada (Colombia) (interpretation from Spanish): In his report on agenda item 70 of the
fiftieth session of the General Assembly, contained in
document A/50/701 of 3 November 1995, the Secretary-
General states that

"Land-mines are in reality a weapon of mass
destruction, in slow motion, because they
indiscriminately kill or maim massive numbers of
human beings over a long period of time."
(A/50/701, para. 5)

There could be no more appropriate or poignant a
definition.
Land-mines not only cause mutilation and death
during and after conflicts, but have devastating effects on
entire nations, impeding the work of economic
reconstruction and normalization. Mines do not recognize
peace agreements or cease-fires, continuing to wage a
perpetual war against everything and everyone.

More than 110 million land-mines are scattered
throughout 64 countries, almost all of them developing
countries. Between 2 million and 5 million additional
mines are laid every year. In addition, between 100
million and 150 million are stockpiled. Given the fact that
in recent years there has been a large increase in internal
conflicts, the problem of mines has acquired a new
dimension, and their indiscriminate effects affect more
and more people. More than 65 million mines were laid
during internal conflicts in the past two decades.

 

According to reports of the International Committee of
the Red Cross (ICRC), more than 800 people die every
month as a result mines, most of them civilians - farmers,
women and children - and thousands more are wounded
or maimed. Mine clearance is therefore imperative, and it
calls for a huge effort in overcoming great economic, social
and technical difficulties.

Each mine yields a profit of between $3 and $15 to
the seller and costs the country affected between $300 and
$1,000 to remove it. At this rate, clearance of the 110
million mines already laid would cost between $33 billion
and $110 billion. This does not take into account the
irreparable losses in terms of human life and mutilation, or
the huge costs of medical treatment, prostheses and
rehabilitation. It is estimated that today more than 250,000
disabled or maimed people require prostheses.

The real magnitude of the problem is shown by the
fact that, if land-mine proliferation were halted in 1996, at
current rates of funding and clearance it would take more
than 10 centuries to eliminate all mines from the face of the
Earth.

I should like to refer briefly to the report of 6
September 1995 on assistance in mine clearance, presented
by the Secretary-General in document A/50/408, in
particular chapter V, entitled "Actions for a political
solution". That document reiterates that

"during the past year, approximately 100,000 land-
mines were removed, while between 2 and 5 million
mines were newly laid. These figures emphasize that
this is not a static problem, but a humanitarian crisis
that is growing rapidly. They also indicate that mine
clearance alone, even at the increased rate that it is
hoped to achieve, will not solve the problem. Equally
important are increased and concerted political efforts
to stop the further proliferation of land-mines."
(A/50/408, para. I 00)

It is clear that it will be impossible to resolve this
global problem of land-mines unless this proliferation is
stopped. The best and most effective way of carrying out
this mission is the complete ban on the production, use and
transfer of all land-mines. While we wait for this ban to
come into force, time is running out, tragically, for all of
us.

In the meantime, we welcome all measures designed
to slow the proliferation of land-mines. On the domestic
front, every State, in exercising its sovereignty, is doing
whatever it can with its limited resources and the
technology that it can afford. However, in view of the
magnitude and nature of the problem, effective
international cooperation is urgently required. In this
context, I should like to say that Colombia has been
cooperating on demining projects in Central America
within the framework of the Organization of American
States.

We believe that the establishment of the Voluntary
Trust Fund for Assistance in Mine Clearance is a positive
step forward. The international community awaits an
increase in generous contributions to this Fund from those
who in the past have profited from trade in mines and
who, at the very least, have a moral responsibility in this
regard.

Our Organization must play an effective and active
role to help the States affected and must coordinate
efforts with regional organizations that are already doing
similar work. However, first and foremost it must, clearly
and forcefully, promote the basic solution: a complete ban
on the production, use and transfer of all land-mines.

