At the outset, allow me to thank the briefers, Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under- Secretary-General for Peace Operations; Ambassador Smail Chergui, African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security; and Mr. Koen Vervaeke, Managing Director for Africa at the European External Action Service. I also welcome Her Excellency Ms. Sylvie Baipo Temon, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Central African Republic. Before I begin, allow me to offer my heartfelt condolences to the families of the victims of the ambush on the joint United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) and Armed Forces of the Central African Republic patrol yesterday in Nana-Mambere prefecture. Allow me to focus on three points. First, we need to ensure the implementation of the Bangui agreement by all parties. Allow me to congratulate you, Madam Minister, and the people of the Central African Republic, on the first anniversary of the Bangui Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic in February. The Agreement remains the primary framework for restoring and sustaining peace in the country. We join the Secretary-General in commending the efforts made by the Government and other signatories to utilize the Agreement's implementation mechanisms, as well as their proactive and constructive engagement to build trust. National ownership is the key to success. The presence and ability of the Government to enforce the Agreement are indeed crucial. We welcome all efforts to enhance the Government's capacity and acknowledge MINUSCA's crucial role in ensuring the country's stability. Secondly, upon hearing the updates from the briefers, it is apparent that the role of MINUSCA is more important than ever, as it must support Central African stakeholders in creating an environment conducive to a peaceful electoral process this year. MINUSCA should continue its efforts to win the hearts and minds of the people, including through community engagement. We are concerned about the humanitarian situation in the country, including the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) in the country. The situation requires ongoing humanitarian support from international partners. We commend MINUSCA's continued efforts to carry out its mandate despite virus-related restrictions. In addition, we are deeply concerned about the number of attacks against MINUSCA's uniformed and civilian personnel. We also concur with those who have emphasized the importance of making the safety, health and security of peacekeepers a top priority. We have to ensure that they are safe during the COVID-19 pandemic. There are some Blue Helmets who have contracted the virus. We wish them a speedy recovery and hope they can soon resume their noble duties. As the Council's largest contributor of peacekeepers to MINUSCA - with 358 peacekeepers, including 18 women - Indonesia will continue to make the safety, health, and security of peacekeepers a top priority. Thirdly, given what has transpired in the region, we need to provide the necessary support and space for democratic elections to take place in the Central African Republic. As the country prepares for the elections, we urge partners to increase their financial assistance. As an archipelagic State, Indonesia has witnessed first-hand the logistical complexity of organizing democratic elections. The democratic process is anything but easy. It is a vast logistical undertaking that requires thorough planning to anticipate all challenges, especially amid the COVID-19 pandemic and its aftermath. We look forward to hearing updates on the preparations leading up to the election and MINUSCA's role in supporting the country. We should continue to pursue the path of peace in the Central African Republic and the region, as laid out last year. For its part, Indonesia renews its commitment as a true partner for peace, including in the Central African Republic.
