Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): I thank you, Sir, for
convening this important open debate on the working
methods of the Security Council. We also thank you for
circulating the concept note that guides our discussion
today (S/2012/853, annex). And we take this opportunity
to thank Ambassador Jose Filipe Moraes Cabral for his
briefing and to congratulate him on his commitment to
increased transparency and openness on the part of the
Council.

Brazil has been a long-standing supporter of
measures to promote the transparency, inclusiveness and
accessibility of the Council to the wider membership.
We actively worked to further this goal during our most
recent term in this body, including when we held its
presidency in February 2011.

There is a strong desire on the part ofMember States
to be better informed about the Council's deliberations.
The call for a less opaque Council was once again
reiterated in the General Assembly during the recent
discussion of the Security Council's annual report
to that body (A/67/2). There is, in particular, a wide
recognition of the need to promote closer ties between
the Security Council and the General Assembly. We
would welcome more frequent interactive briefings
and the presentation of special reports, in line with the
relevant Articles of the United Nations Charter. The
Council should also consider mechanisms to follow
up on suggestions made by non-members during the
debate of its report to the General Assembly.

We welcome recent initiatives to enhance the
relationship between the Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission. The informal interactive dialogue held
in July, under the Colombian presidency, brought
up interesting suggestions on how the Council could
benefit from the advisory role of the Peacebuilding
Commission. However, there is much room for
improvement. We encourage a dialogue between the
Council and the country-specific configurations on
a regular basis and in the context of the renewal of
mandates.

We commend the recent steps taken by the
Council to strengthen its relationship with regional and
international organizations, including through their
active participation in open debates.

It is important that the presidency of the Council
hold informational briefings, not only at the beginning
of its monthly work, but also at the end of each
presidency in the format of wrap-up sessions. Brazil
and Portugal recently held such meetings, which we
hope will soon become a regular practice. The growing
availability of information on the Council's website,
including on mandate cycles, is also positive.

The same should apply to the Council's subsidiary
organs. Informative and interactive briefings with
Member States have the potential to add transparency
to their activities, while offering an opportunity to all
interested delegations to provide input to the work of
those bodies.

Another issue that stands out as an important part
of the discussion on working methods is the question of
the interpretation and implementation of the Council's
decisions. In many circumstances, especially when
the use of force is authorized, objective parameters
should be established. This would be indispensable
to increasing the accountability and effectiveness
of the Council's decisions and avoiding the loose
interpretation of mandates.

Finally, allow me to stress that improving the
working methods is only a part of the broader need to
adapt the Security Council to the new international
reality. We reiterate our view that only a real reform
of the Council's structure will make this body more
representative, transparent, efficient and legitimate. It
is our hope that Member States will, sooner rather than
later, take steps to promote a comprehensive reform
of the Security Council, with an enlargement in both
categories of membership.

