Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I am
grateful to Under-Secretary-General Gambari for his
briefing and to the Secretary-General for his report on
the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006)
(S/2006/670).

The United Kingdom aligns itself with the
statement to be delivered shortly by the representative
of Finland on behalf of the European Union.

On Lebanon, the objectives of resolution 1701
(2006) are clear: to bring about a full cessation of
hostilities, to create the space for an urgent
humanitarian relief effort, and to begin a process
leading to a permanent ceasefire and lasting peace.

The United Kingdom welcomes the progress
already made towards achieving those objectives. The
cessation of hostilities has largely held. The Secretary-
General reports that this has greatly improved the
frequency and quantity of humanitarian assistance to
Lebanon, and we underline our full support for his
efforts to secure the political agreement necessary for a
long-term solution, including through the current Visit
to the region by Terje Roed-Larsen and Vijay Nambiar.

The progress in planning for the enhanced United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
deployment is encouraging. The priority now is to give
UNIFIL the resources to do its new job and to turn the
many welcome offers to contribute into forces on the
ground, as some have already done. The United
Kingdom has already made a firm offer of air and
naval assets and stands ready to deploy them quickly if
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO)
takes up our offer.

But recent events have underlined the fragility of
the cessation of hostilities and the need for both sides

and others in the region to avoid any action which
could undermine it. It is also clear that the
humanitarian effort faces serious challenges, not least
in securing access to all those parts of Lebanon
affected by the conflict. In that context, we support the
Secretary-General's call for the air and sea blockade on
Lebanon to be lifted as soon as possible.

No one should underestimate the difficulties
inherent in securing political agreement on issues
where the two sides have such divergent views. In this
context, it will be important to find arrangements that
facilitate direct contacts between the two Governments.

However, the progress reported by the Secretary-
General is grounds for cautious optimism. It also
reminds us why it was right to work for a resolution
that had a realistic chance of making an immediate
impact on the ground and that also looked beyond the
short term and held out the prospect of a lasting
solution. At the heart of that lasting solution, and at the
heart of resolution 1701 (2006), is the need to pursue
the twin objectives of Lebanese sovereignty and Israeli
security. We need to achieve both if we are to deliver a
lasting peace. That is why the Council unanimously
adopted a resolution setting out a framework for re-
establishing peace, security and stability in southern
Lebanon on the basis of extending the Government of
Lebanon's control throughout its territory, and in
particular through implementation of resolutions 1559
(2004) and 1680 (2006).

To achieve that, we look first and foremost to all
the parties to respect the terms of resolutions 1559
(2004), 1680 (2006) and 1701 (2006). But we also look
to others with influence to play their part. This includes
Syria and Iran. A key provision of resolution 1701
(2006) is the requirement to ensure an end to all arms
shipments into Lebanon other than those destined for
its sovereign Government. The attitude of Syria and
Iran, as well as that of others in the region, will be
central to our success in implementing this and other
provisions of resolution 1701 (2006).

We have also heard today about the continuing
crisis in Gaza. During the past month, the focus of the
Council and of the international community has,
inevitably, been mainly on Lebanon, but today's
briefing reminds us that the suffering of those caught
up in this conflict has not been any less simply because
the focus of our attention may, understandably, have
been elsewhere. We continue to be deeply concerned

about the deteriorating security and humanitarian
situation in Gaza. The United Kingdom has just
announced a £3 million contribution to the temporary
international mechanism.

But, more generally, it is vitally important that all
sides act to de-escalate this conflict and create the
space for negotiations to resume. In particular, we call
for the immediate and unconditional release of
Corporal Shalit and an end to the firing of rockets into
Israel. We underline the need, on the other hand, for
Israel to act in accordance with international law and to
protect civilians. Those members of the Palestinian
legislature detained in Israel should be either released
or charged and accorded due legal process. We are
particularly concerned about the kidnapping of the
New Zealand and United States journalists and call for
their immediate and unconditional release.

Under-Secretary-General Gambari's briefing is
also a reminder that real peace in the region, and,
indeed, real sovereignty for Lebanon and real security
for Israel can be achieved only on the basis of a
lasting, comprehensive settlement in the Middle East.
There is no military solution to these problems;
negotiation is the only viable way to bring peace and
prosperity to peoples throughout the Middle East. The
Middle East remains a top foreign policy priority for
the United Kingdom. Our Prime Minister is committed
to doing what we can to help re-energize that process
and plans to visit the region soon.

Our priorities in the medium term will rightly be
Lebanon and Gaza. But ultimately, however, those
issues cannot be solved independently of a solution to
the broader problems in the region. But nor should
progress in those two areas be held hostage to the
overall objective. It is therefore vital that we work in
parallel to resolve specific issues as soon as we can
and, more broadly, to re-energize the Middle East
peace process and create the conditions for an early
resumption of negotiations based on the Quartet road
map.

