Mr. Kamara (Sierra Leone): Permit me to
express Sierra Leone's delight at seeing you, Sir, chair
such an important meeting of the Council at the
inception of Colombia's presidency for the month of
August. My delegation wishes to express its gratitude
and appreciation to your predecessor, Ambassador
Wang Yingfan, for a job well done during the month of
July. May I also take this opportunity to proffer
congratulatory sentiments through you to Ambassador
Camilo Reyes Rodriguez for the exemplary manner in
which he conducted the affairs of the recently
concluded United Nations Conference on the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects.

Sierra Leone attaches great importance to the
outcome and future effective implementation of the
provisions of the Programme of Action emanating from
that timely Conference, which emphatically highlighted
the concerns of my Government, which is only now
coming to grips with the scope and magnitude of the
former rebel insurgency. It is apparently all too evident
that the proliferation and illegitimate utilization of
small arms, which caused major devastation and
carnage in Sierra Leone for over a decade, indeed lends
credence to their being termed the real weapons of
mass destruction. It has been noted that, within the
West African subregion, there are an estimated
7 million deadly weapons in circulation, and the
incessant raging conflicts continue to provide the
perfect milieu in which the illicit trade in small arms
continues to thrive.

The general debate and technical meetings of the
Conference have now subsided, but the issue of follow-
up has only just begun. In the words of Ambassador
Reyes,

"while it is critical that Member States take

concerted action against the illicit trade in small

arms as soon as possible, they must understand
that the Conference and its outcome were only
first steps in a process".

It has also been noted that, in the quest to
prevent, combat and eradicate this illicit trade,
Governments have committed themselves to
considering all aspects of the small arms problem,
particularly to brokering, tracing and providing
financial and technical assistance. While we
acknowledge the fact that considerable effort has been
made at various levels in all parts of the world to deal
with all aspects of the problem, we must now
strengthen and build on those foundations.

It is therefore in this vein that we call upon the
Security Council to harmonize the positions of Member
States in accordance with the provisions adopted in the
Programme of Action. The Council must critically
emphasize the need for Member States to pursue
radical programmes within their respective territories,
subregions, regional groupings and elsewhere, aimed at
building a greater consensus on the prevention, combat
and virtual eradication of the illicit trade in small arms.
The Council could maximize its objectives in this
sphere by utilizing its many and varied peacekeeping
forces in sensitive conflict areas to effectively address
the issue of collection, storage, control and destruction
of light weapons, also liaising with other actors within
the United Nations system, such as the United Nations
Children's Fund, the United Nations Development
Programme and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, to name but a few, as well
as through non-governmental organizations and civil
society, to implement programmes designed to put the
message across.

We regard the Security Council as the forerunner
in the global pursuit of the maintenance of international
peace and security. The recommendations proposed in
the various reports of the Secretary-General should be
given much more attention and introspective
consideration by the Security Council if the Council is
to succeed in that pursuit, especially with regard to the
issue of the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons. It is simply not good enough to issue
presidential statements and resolutions that have very
little meaningful effect on their intended recipients. My
delegation would like to see much more potent action
emanating from those statements and resolutions,
which would have an appropriately direct bearing and
reverberating effect on those recipients. It is the view
of my delegation that the Security Council should
develop the capacity to have greater leverage over
those parties directly responsible for the propagation of
conflicts caused by the proliferation of small arms. In
short, we wish to see a Security Council that dishes out
sterner, more robust and more resolute measures in
order to attain its desired Charter objectives.

My delegation also wishes to note that by
dispatching advisory missions to conflict areas, the
Security Council has invariably grasped in greater
detail the full frontal effect, as it were, of the problems
involved in many situations. The Council's interaction
with high-level delegations ensures complementary
cooperation. Regional actors have become more
attuned to the inner workings of the Council, to the
extent that they look to the Council for guidance and
approval with regard to their respective intended
measures and aspirations, which do not necessarily run
counter to the thinking of the wider international
community. With that in mind, my delegation is of the
view that the Council should markedly and
continuously flex its muscular authority over the form
and content of the provisions of the Programme of
Action, and more specifically over the question of
compliance with arms embargoes.

Sierra Leone calls on other delegations,
especially those that are embroiled in conflict
situations, to be constant advocates of stricter
compliance with the norms of international law as a
measure aimed at putting an end to the culture of
impunity. Otherwise, the highly lucrative illicit trade in
small arms will continue unabated. It is also the view
of my delegation that the Council should adopt far-
reaching measures to ensure that Member States and
their respective authorized entities involved in the
production and marketing of small arms are forced to
comply with relevant legally binding instruments. It
should also effectively cause the strengthening of
established moratoriums and similar initiatives and
programmes specifically aimed at combating and
preventing this trade, which would lead to the eventual
eradication of these weapons of mass destruction.

