Mr. Zhukov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Abou Moussa for his informative
briefing on the activities of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) and the
situation in the region with respect to the Lord's
Resistance Army (LRA). We listened with interest to
the statements made by the Secretary-General of the
Economic Community of Central African States and
the Permanent Observer of the African Union.

We are pleased to note some recent progress in
the consolidation of democratic processes and in the
organization of the work of State institutions in a
number of countries of Central Africa. The situation in
some conflict zones is being normalized.

However, there are obvious factors militating
against stability in the region, including the growth in

the scope of organized crime, banditry and armed
Violence, and the deterioration of the humanitarian and
human rights situations. Moreover, new, common
regional problems are emerging. We share the
conclusions of the Secretary-General's report
(S/2011/704) concerning the need for active efforts to
avert the regional proliferation of the consequences of
the Libyan crisis, including preventing the illegal flow
of weapons and combatants.

A comprehensive approach is required to curb the
criminal activity of the LRA in the region and to
identify solutions to the problem of piracy and armed
robbery in the Gulf of Guinea. In that regard, there is a
growing need for UNOCA to develop a comprehensive
approach to preventing conflicts, ensuring peace and
security, peacebuilding and promoting economic
integration and sustainable development throughout
Central Africa. We see UNOCA as a key link in the
work of the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations in that part of the African
continent. Strengthening the coordination of their
efforts will help us to meet the challenge of enhancing
the effectiveness and success of their work and will
redound to the benefit of the States and peoples of the
subregion.

We agree with the recommendations contained in
the report of the Secretary-General on the issue of the
LRA (S/2011/693). Despite the fact that, thanks to the
joint efforts of countries in the region, it has been
possible to significantly reduce the military capability
of that armed group, the LM. continues to remain a
serious destabilizing factor in remote and regions of
difficult access in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the Central African Republic and South Sudan.

We are deeply concerned about the truly terrorist
nature of the LRA's actions. We welcome the increased
efforts of and developing coordination and interaction
among the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda,
the Central African Republic and South Sudan in
countering that threat. We support the development of a
coordinated strategy within the African Union to
combat LRA initiatives and to establish a joint
mechanism to respond to the issue. In our View, such
steps should become systemic, with the active support
of the international community and UNOCA's political
coordination.

We are convinced that the LRA issue is unlikely
to be resolved solely by military means. All prior
military operations against that group have not helped
to eliminate the threat. We must maintain a
comprehensive cross-cutting approach. Along with
keeping up military pressure, the challenge of
encouraging LRA members to voluntarily disarm and
of demobilizing, repatriating and reintegrating them
remains relevant. Certainly, strengthening State
authority institutions, national security and law
enforcement bodies and economic development in the
regions affected by the group's activities would help
address the issue. Of course, in the conduct of military
operations to deactivate the LRA, priority attention
must be given to the protection of civilians.

We are grateful to the United Kingdom delegation
for preparing the draft presidential statement for the
Council, which we support.

