Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): We are grateful to
the Secretary-General for submitting the report on
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) (S/2013/493), as well as providing an
update on progress made during the reporting period
towards the implementation of the mission consolidation
plan outlined in his previous report (S/2013/l39). We
welcome the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Ms. Sandra Honore, to the Council and thank
her for presenting the report of the Secretary-General.

I would like to take this opportunity once again to
commend MINUSTAH and the United Nations country
team, which continue to play an important role in
supporting the recovery and stabilization of Haiti.

As the Secretary-General emphasized in his report,
the progress made in the stabilization of Haiti since
the initial deployment of MINUSTAH, in 2004, has
been considerable. The overall security situation in
the country remained relatively stable throughout the
reporting period, with a decrease in both civil unrest
and major crimes. The performance of the Haitian
National Police (HNP) continues to improve as it
assumes increased responsibility for the provision of
internal security. We also commend the Government
for its efforts to move forward with socioeconomic
development that has resulted, inter alia, in a significant
increase in economic partnership.

At the same time, Haiti continues to face numerous
challenges. As the Secretary-General pointed out, the
democratic process in Haiti remains vulnerable to
setbacks linked to political instability and infighting
among the branches of the Government. It is important
that all political actors in Haiti engage in a constructive
dialogue to preserve the progress achieved so far and
address their differences in a spirit of compromise.
Such dialogue is particularly important for reaching a
minimum political consensus on holding long-overdue
elections as soon as possible and on the key legislative
priorities. It is essential that the United Nations continue
to support the upcoming elections and contribute to the
progress on the launch of the electoral process.

It is also important to maintain progress made in
building the capacity of the HNP. Further efforts are
needed to strengthen key rule-of-law institutions,
reform the security sector, attract investments, promote
sustainable development and advance the democratic
agenda. The protection of vulnerable groups, particularly
women, children and internally displaced persons,
should remain the priority. Significant strides were
made regarding the resettlement of persons displaced
by the 2010 earthquake, although their protection,
along with food insecurity, rapidly decreasing
humanitarian funding and continuing deep institutional
and structural weakness, remains a concern. Continued
strong international engagement and efforts by the
Haitian authorities are crucial to improve the current
humanitarian situation, in particular with regard to the
ongoing cholera epidemic.

In conclusion, we take note of the information
provided in the report of the Secretary-General that, in
accordance with resolution 2070 (2012), the military and
police components completed the mandated reduction
of their personnel during the reporting period. The role
of MINUSTAH in the maintenance of overall security
and stability in the country remains Vital. Azerbaijan
supports the extension of the Mission's mandate for
an additional year. It is important that the possible
further reduction in the Mission's uniform strength,
as recommended by the Secretary-General in his
report, be based on the security and political situation
on the ground. We look forward to the next report of
the Secretary-General and the proposals on the way
forward.

