Mr. Kanu (Sierra Leone): We thank you, Sir, for
convening this important meeting on the Special Court
for Sierra Leone. We also welcome the presence here
of the President of the Court, George Gelaga King; the
Prosecutor, Mr. Stephen Rapp; and the Acting Registrar
of the Court, Mr. Herman von Hebel. We also welcome
the participation of the Deputy Secretary-General in
this debate.

It has now been five years since the Special Court
for Sierra Leone was established and seven years since
the President of the Republic of Sierra Leone, Alhaji
Ahmad Tejan Kabbah, requested the assistance of the
United Nations and the international community to
help our country answer the cries for justice from our
people.

We remain grateful for the quick response to His
Excellency's request and we are proud to have seen the
Special Court develop into a fully fledged international
court, with many of its practices recognized as an
example of how international criminal justice could
and should be administered and of how to engage the
population and maximize the impact of its work on
those who suffered so dreadfully during those terrible
years of conflict.
My Government has never wavered in its support
for the Special Court, as we believed and continue to
believe that justice is necessary for Sierra Leone to
address and overcome its past and again become one of
the brightest jewels of West Africa. That support has
been grounded on the equally strong belief that, in
order to do its work, the Special Court must both be
and be perceived as being independent, impartial and
fair. I will not address the last two matters because they
are for history and legal historians to judge, but I will
say that, from our perspective, the independence of the
Court has been a critical factor in its ability to do its
work and to reach the people of Sierra Leone.

That has not come about by chance. From the
very beginning, the people of Sierra Leone were at the
forefront of those who called for the establishment of
the Special Court. That is why the Special Court is
based in Freetown, and that is why the Court was
called upon to implement a robust outreach programme
which has grown from strength to strength under the
leadership of the Court's outreach coordinator. That is
why, in answer to the calls from ordinary Sierra
Leoneans, the Court has been looking at its legacy and
at what added benefit it can bring beyond its judicial
work.

The mere presence of the Special Court, with its
mandate to identify those who bear the greatest
responsibility for the crimes committed in Sierra Leone
and to apply the rules to them equally, no matter who
they are, has been a catalyst for the establishment of
the rule of law in my country. But the Special Court
has gone one step further, establishing a working group
on legacy to strengthen its impact on the rule of law
and to play an active role in promoting initiatives to
reach the same goal. At the end of 2006, for example,
as part of its legacy work, the Special Court was
instrumental in the holding of a national consultative
conference organized by the international non-
governmental organization No Peace Without Justice
and the Sierra Leone non-governmental organization
Manifesto 99, with the active support and participation
of the Government of Sierra Leone, on implementing
legislation for the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court. As a result of that Conference, draft
legislation has now been prepared and we anticipate
that it will become part of the laws of Sierra Leone
early next year. That is a real and tangible example of
the legacy of the Special Court for Sierra Leone, which
will serve the people and indeed the world for decades
to come.

The Special Court began its work in mid-2002,
just a few months after the last presidential and
parliamentary elections in my country. We had just
secured peace at that time and there were some who
voiced concerns that the situation was not stable
enough to support the work of the Court; others were
concerned that the Special Court would undermine the
peace process we had worked so hard to secure.

Neither fear came to pass. Now, in just a couple
of months, we will again have general elections in my
country, in an atmosphere of stable peace. As His
Excellency President Ahmad Tejan Kabbah said earlier
this year during his address to the nation on the
occasion of the forty-sixth anniversary of the
independence of our beloved country, Sierra Leone has
come a long way and should be proud, and it has
remained united in the face of adversity. We have
remained united as a democracy, and the basic
democratic principles by which we live our lives have
been, to a very large extent, enhanced by the presence
of the Special Court, as an independent institution
seeking to administer the rule of law.

For all our strength and for all our determination
that Sierra Leone should never fall back into those days
of despair, we have not achieved our goal of
sustainable peace on our own. I would be remiss were I
not to highlight the critical role that the Special Court
has played in helping us to maintain and strengthen
peace in our country. Even before it came into
existence, the very idea of the Special Court was an
important factor in the cessation of hostilities. Indeed,
the weapons-burning ceremony marking the end of the
war took place only a few days after the signing of the
Agreement on the establishment of the Special Court
by the then Attorney General and Minister of Justice of
Sierra Leone, who is now the Vice-President,
Mr. Solomon Ekuma Berewa, and Mr. Hans Corell,
who at the time was the Under-Secretary-General for
Legal Affairs. Never before has the link between peace
and justice been so clear. Let it stand as a reminder and
as an admonition to those who would seek to drive a
wedge between the two.

The life of the Special Court has been
characterized by milestones and challenges. Its latest
milestone, just a few days ago, was the commencement
of the trial of a former head of State - the first African
head of State to be brought to trial for serious
violations of international humanitarian law - whose
antics threatened not only his own country but also its
neighbours, including Sierra Leone. But that milestone
brings with it its own challenges, as the trial is taking
place not in Freetown but in The Hague. It brings
challenges of ensuring that the people of Sierra Leone
have the access they have come to expect to trials
being conducted on their behalf. It brings challenges of
ensuring its ongoing independence and its perception
of being independent, given that the trial is taking
place on the premises of the International Criminal
Court. It brings challenges of logistics and challenges
of the law. We are confident that the Special Court will
rise to those challenges, as it has risen to other
challenges in the past. But the one challenge it has
always faced, and one which it continues to face, is a
challenge that the Special Court cannot overcome
alone. The administration of justice does not have to be
expensive; we hear too much about money. One of the
distinguishing features of the Special Court has been
its ability to do its work on a limited budget, a budget
that has consistently been far lower than those of other
international courts and tribunals. But we must all bear
in mind also that the administration of justice is not
free.

When my President called for justice, and when
that call was answered by the international community,
it raised the expectations of the people of my country.
They expected, and continue to expect, fair justice,
impartial justice and independent justice. They expect
cases to be concluded, judgements to be issued and
appeals to be heard and decided upon, so that we will
finally have acknowledgement of the responsibility of
those who planned and unleashed horrific crimes upon
the people of Sierra Leone.

The promises made just seven years ago must be
honoured. We call upon all present here, and upon the
international community as a whole, to honour those
promises. We - the Government, the people and the
Special Court itself - have all played, and continue to
play, our part to bring an end to impunity in Sierra
Leone. The Council has also played its part.

The journey has been long, but it is not over yet.
The international community, and in particular the
States that make up the international community, must
give the Special Court the financial stability it needs to
see the trials through to the very end of the appeals
process, to support the legacy work of the Court and to
ensure its ability to engage the people of Sierra Leone,
particularly now that an important part of its work is
taking place so far away from home.

In conclusion, we are convinced that no one State
or group of States can mobilize resources all by
themselves. As part of the cooperative efforts, my
delegation has taken the initiative to solicit financial
support from African States and States members of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference.

That is the message from Sierra Leone.

