Mr. Ferrarin (Italy): At the outset, Sir, allow me to
express my deep satisfaction at seeing you presiding over
the work of the Security Council for the month of May.
We are sure that under your skilful guidance, and thanks
to your well-known qualities, our work will be most
effective.

At the same time, I would like to express our
appreciation to Ambassador Juan Somavia and the entire
Chilean delegation for the excellent work they did leading
the Council's activities in April.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. The following countries associated with
the Union join in this statement: Bulgaria, Cyprus,
Hungary, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Romania and
Slovakia.

In the period since the previous renewal of the
mandate of the United Nations Angola Verification
Mission (UNAVEM. III) the general situation in Angola
has improved, and the peace process is showing signs of
progress. The most encouraging aspects are the meetings
between the two leaders and the regular political contacts
between the parties in the framework of the Joint
Commission. The decrease in violations of the cease-fire
and the gradual stabilization of the military situation also
give cause for cautious optimism for the future.

But the peace process is far from being completed,
and the parties, the Uniao Nacional para a Independencia
Total de Angola (UNITA) in particular, have yet to
demonstrate an unreserved commitment to the peaceful
settlement of the civil war which has ravaged the country
for so long.

The European Union is deeply concerned by the
slow pace of the quartering of UNITA troops, which has
accelerated only in the past few days on the eve of the
expiration of the UNAVEM. III mandate. A crucial
problem in this context is the fact that so many of the

 

troops being quartered either lack arms or hand in weapons
of poor quality. Only two weeks ago, in a presidential
statement, the Security Council declared that

"the quartering process is a crucial component of the
peace process and [stressed] the need for quartering to
be credible and fully verifiable". (S/PRST/I996/19)

The Secretary-General's report has cast new doubts on
UNITA's will to comply fully with the commitments it
undertook in the Lusaka Protocol, and this only adds to our
concerns. The Council today must send a clear message that
at this crucial stage in the peace process, no hesitation or
delaying tactics will be tolerated or remain without
consequences.

The Government of Angola should fully comply with
its own obligations under the Lusaka Protocol by continuing
the withdrawal of its forces to the nearest barracks and by
completing the quartering of the rapid reaction police under
UNAVEM. monitoring.

We welcome the promulgation today by the President
of the Republic of Angola of the amnesty law.

The European Union appeals to both parties to
undertake without delay the disarmament of the civilian
population and to show better cooperation with the civilian
police component of UNAVEM. III.

The Joint Commission calendar of the tasks to be
accomplished in May by the parties, either jointly or
individually, and by UNAVEM. III must be promptly and
thoroughly implemented. The commitments provided for in
that document, freely undertaken by the parties, are
indispensable to creating the conditions for the next two
fundamental steps in the peace process: the incorporation of
UNITA personnel in the joint armed forces, and the
formation of the Government of National Unity and
Reconciliation.

The slow progress in demining activities is also of
great concern. The parties must cooperate fully, in the first
place by destroying their stockpiles of landmines, by
allowing UNAVEM. III and the demining companies to
operate unhindered and by transmitting all the information
they have available on the location of minefields. Graduates
of the demining courses run by the United Nations should
be promptly employed in operations in the field. The
demining activity is of vital importance - naturally for the
safety of the population, but also for the economic recovery
of the country.

The Secretary-General's report mentions various acts
of aggression on United Nations personnel and other
international officials. The most serious one took place in
Catengue, in the province of Benguela, causing three
deaths and the serious wounding of a fourth person. The
parties must renew their commitment to guarantee the
security of such personnel, who are working on behalf of
the entire country.

As the peace process gains strength. The need grows
to focus on human rights as an essential component of a
democratic society. The European Union welcomes the
decision of the Secretary-General to instruct his Special
Representative to give priority to human rights issues.
Moreover, the numerous displaced persons in the country
are increasingly expressing the desire to return to their
places of origin. Certainty that their rights will be better
safeguarded, together with a minimum of economic
resources through the gradual resumption of productive
activities, can only facilitate this process.

Today the Security Council is renewing the mandate
of UNAVEM. III for two months. This is an unusually
brief mandate for the largest peace-keeping operation of
the United Nations, but many uncertainties still exist,
particularly in relation to the pledges made by UNITA's
leadership. We believe that compliance with the
commitments undertaken in the Lusaka Protocol will be
ensured only by constant international pressure. The
European Union fully backs all diplomatic efforts aimed
at preserving the spirit of Lusaka, and is itself directly
committed to the objective of a long-lasting peace in
Angola.

Finally, let me express the heartfelt thanks of the
European Union to all those who have contributed to this
peace-keeping operation, which after far too long is
beginning to show signs of success: the Secretary-General
and his Special Representative, Maitre Alioune Blondin
Beye, the personnel of UNAVEM, the troika of observer
States, and the neighbouring States.

