Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the Chairman-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Lithuania,
Mr. Azubalis, and thank him for his detailed briefing.

The Russian Federation is in favour of improving
and comprehensively developing cooperation between
the United Nations, the Security Council and regional
and subregional arrangements, among which the OSCE
holds an important place. Such cooperation should be
based on the strong foundation of the Charter of the
United Nations, in particular Chapter VIII, and take
into due account the comparative advantages of the
universal Organization and these mechanisms. There
must be no doubt about the fact that it is the Security
Council that holds the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
As set forth in the declaration of the OSCE
Summit held in Astana, the basic mission of the
Organization is to ensure equal and indivisible security
for all member States. To that end, Russian President
Dmitry Medvedev is pursuing an initiative aimed at the
conclusion of a legally binding treaty on European

security.

We agree with the OSCE Chairman-in-Office's
assessment of the Geneva discussions on security and
stability in the Transcaucasus, which are co-chaired by
the European Union, the OSCE and the United
Nations. That forum is an important platform for
dialogue for Abkhazia, Georgia and South Ossetia. We
agree on the importance of the full participation of a
representative of the United Nations in this work. That
was the objective of the decisions of the Secretary-
General, in accordance with United Nations practice, to
finance the Turunen group from the United Nations
regular budget.

We welcome the activities of the OSCE Mission
in Kosovo which, as the Minister mentioned, continues
to carry out its mandate in the framework of resolution
1244 (1999) and in close cooperation with the United
Nations Mission. We share his concern over incidents
of illegal trading in human organs, and we fully
support calls for an independent investigation. We
believe that the OSCE Mission in Kosovo should
provide assistance to such an international
investigation.

With regard to resolving the situation in
Afghanistan, we see the OSCE's role in curbing the
illegal trade in Afghan narcotics as vital. Drug
trafficking has been identified as a threat to
international peace and stability in decisions of the
Security Council and General Assembly. An important
element here is the implementation of the OSCE
framework for combating the illegal narcotics trade
and trade in chemical precursors. The draft of that
framework was put forward by Russia, together with
Armenia, Belarus, Kyrgyzstan, the United States of
America, Tajikistan and Turkey.

We welcome the intention of the Chairman-in-
Office to establish cooperation with the African Union,
the League of Arab States, the Conference on
Interaction and Confidence-Building Measures in Asia,
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations Regional
Forum, and the Organization of American States.
However, primary attention should be given to

developing cooperation with influential regional
organizations in areas under the direct responsibility of
the OSCE, such as the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization, the Collective Security Treaty
Organization and the Eurasian Economic Community,
which have useful experience and strong potential to
help ensure peace and security.

In our view, the establishment of normative
foundations for all its work is key to enhancing the
OSCE's future effectiveness and to transforming it into
an intergovernmental organization. Our proposals
based on the OSCE Charter remain on the negotiation
table. We hope that the vision for the work of the
Lithuanian chairmanship set out today by Mr. Azubalis
will help to overcome the crisis mentality of recent
years in the OSCE and adapt it to current realities.

