Greece would like to congratulate the Dominican presidency of the Security Council for organizing today's video-teleconference on youth, peace and security. Greece would also like to thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Antonio Guterres, for his thorough and comprehensive - and first-ever - report on the subject (S/2020/167). While aligning itself with the statement submitted on behalf of the European Union, Greece would like to point out the beneficial role that young people can play as drivers of peaceful change in building democratic, resilient and gender- equal societies, very often by engaging informally in peace activism, grass-roots peacebuilding and online human rights campaigns. Nonetheless, as the report of the Secretary-General sadly illustrates, despite certain progress accomplished so far, meaningful youth participation in the maintenance of peace and security and in governance and political processes remains a serious challenge. In addition, very often, in many parts of the world, we are witnessing human rights violations and abuses directed against young people that highlight the urgent need for more effective protection mechanisms that can address threats against young peacebuilders and human rights defenders, journalists, bloggers and media actors; gender discrimination and gender-based and sexual violence, which are often perpetrated in the context ofarmed conflict, disproportionally affecting young women and girls and setting up obstacles to their access to sexual and reproductive-health services and information; and abuses committed against the human rights of young members of such vulnerable groups as refugees and internally displaced persons. Needless to say, the impact of such violations and abuses to human insecurity is further exacerbated nowadays by the outbreak of the coronavirus disease pandemic. Assessing the progress made so far in the implementation of the youth, peace and security agenda suggests the need for the adoption of more systematic, coherent, tailor-made and results-oriented approaches thereto, while maintaining ambitious standards and close links with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the women and peace and security agenda. In this vein, within the context of its first national action plan on women and peace and security, which is currently in the development process, Greece is giving special focus to the protection and empowerment of young women and girls. Moreover, coordinated action in the field of youth, peace and security by all members of the international community enhances the creation of a safe, enabling, gender-responsive, inclusive and diverse global environment, where young people can meaningfully fulfil their right to participate in decision-making at all levels and take part in educational and economic opportunities in a non-discriminatory manner, and where young peacebuilders and human rights defenders can carry out their work independently and without undue interference. Cooperation and partnerships among all stakeholders in this endeavour can serve as fertile ground for cultivating a culture of peace, tolerance and intercultural and interreligious dialogue, all of which better serves in the prevention of violence. Indeed, Greece recognizes that, through culture and sport, young people, as agents of change, can largely contribute to the realization of human rights, sustainable development and peace. Accordingly, Greece, together with a core group of like- minded States, regularly submits a draft resolution to the Human Rights Council on promoting human rights through sport and the Olympic Ideal. It is a truth universally acknowledged that, in order to save future generations from violence and conflict, primary focus should be placed on building and sustaining peace by means of preventive diplomacy, mediation and peacekeeping, while investing in the capacities and leadership of young people. Finally, yet importantly, only by putting in place institutional frameworks that effectively address the structural obstacles to meaningful youth inclusion and promote fruitful synergies can young people substantially contribute as equal partners to shaping in future a more peaceful, resilient and secure world, with fewer or no armed conflicts and pandemics.
