Mr. Garcia Margallo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, allow me to thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this debate and for the invitation to
participate to address the grave threats currently faced
by Iraq - and not only Iraq.
Jihadist terrorism poses a threat to the entire
international community. Spain knows that well
through its own experience. It is the duty of the Security
Council to provide a resolute and effective response to
a threat that concerns all of us. We therefore commend
the members of the Council on today's adoption of
presidential statement S/PRST/2014/20, which Spain
fully endorses.

At this historic moment, we cannot remain
impassive before the systematic elimination of entire
communities and religious minorities and the ruthless
murders of hostages such as James Foley, Steven
Sotloff and David Haines, the abject cruelty of which
is shocking. The perpetrators of those crimes must be
brought to justice.

Experience teaches us that an efficient fight against
jihadist terrorism must be based on three essential
elements. First, all international interventions should
be carried out in accordance with the principles that
inspire the Charter of the United Nations and respect
for international law. The Security Council has already
taken a very important step in adopting resolution 2170
(2014), which makes unequivocally clear the will to act
against the terrorist groups Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) and the Nusra Front. The resolution
provides legitimacy beyond any question. It introduces
important elements such as the prosecution of foreign
terrorist fighters and the need for the close cooperation
of States to prevent recruitment. Spain trusts that
the Council will take another significant step in that
direction in the upcoming debate next week on foreign
terrorist fighters. Spain is currently working to reform
its penal code to categorize as a crime of terrorism the
participation of radicals in foreign conflicts.

Secondly, the international community must
respond to the request of the legitimate Government
of Iraq. Prime Minister Al-Abadi has managed to
form an inclusive Government. We must support him
in strengthening Iraq's sovereignty and territorial
integrity based on solid, participatory institutions. That
condition is a sine qua non in the efforts to join forces
and goodwill in the fight against the terrorist group that
calls itself the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria.

Finally, we must adopt a strategy based on a broad
consensus among all regional and international actors.
A very important first step towards such a coalition
was taken at the Paris conference held on 15 September,
in which I was honoured to participate.

The Kingdom of Spain, which maintains close
friendship ties with the Iraqi people, assumes its
responsibility in this joint endeavour. We intend
to assist the Iraqis on their path - which is now
threatened - towards democracy, stability, prosperity
and peace.

We must strengthen efforts in preventive
diplomacy, political dialogue and building institutional
capacity. Initiatives such as the Alliance of Civilians
and Mediation in the Mediterranean - which Spain
leads - are examples of that approach. With regard to
dialogue, my country has convened meetings with the
moderate Syrian opposition and will convene others in
future.

As an example of strengthening institutions, we
highlight our programme called "Masar" - Arabic
for "path" - to support transition in the Arab world.
With the same goal and to confront the jihadist threat
in northern Africa, on 17 September Spain hosted a
conference on stability and development in Libya.

To date, the Spanish Government has contributed
significant sums towards helping meet the needs of the
Iraqi people. We will continue such efforts in future.
Furthermore, we wish to address the following issues
with regard to that joint undertaking.

First, we will support operations by providing the
use of Spanish bases; support and participate in strategic
transportation efforts; contribute capacity, including
air support, leadership, security and intelligence;
participate in advising and standing up military units,
in keeping with the priorities of the Iraqi military;
and facilitate the supply of military equipment to the
legitimate Government of Iraq.

The sophistication and the growing strength of
jihadist terrorism places us before a very demanding,
long-term challenge. There is no place for shortcuts or
discouragement. We must fight with intelligence and
perseverance. Above all, we must remain united and act
together. The people and the Government of Iraq and
the international community can count on Spain's full
willingness and experience on behalf of this just cause.

