Mr. Ramirez Carreflo (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela reiterates its support for the work of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID). We acknowledge its valuable
contribution to achieving the strategic priorities of
the mission, especially regarding the protection of
civilians, the facilitation of access to humanitarian
assistance and mediation, including through its conflict
prevention and mitigation strategy and its promotion of
grass-roots dialogue.

We also categorically condemn attacks on
UNAMID, its personnel and its facilities, whose
inviolability must be respected in accordance with
international law. We also like reiterate our call on the
parties to the conflict to give their full support to the
work of UNAMID so that it can fully and effectively
implement the mandate entrusted to it, in the framework
of close cooperation with the Government of the Sudan.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela voted in
favour of resolution 2296 (2016), which renews the
UNAMID mandate for one year. We are convinced
that it is essential to maintain the unity of the Security
Council in addressing this important issue and our
support for UNAMID. We hope that the same positive
spirit will prevail in promoting a negotiated political
solution to the prolonged conflict that continues to
affect this brotherly African country, in particular in
the region of Darfur.

In that sense, Venezuela reaffirms that a political
rather than military solution is the only way to end
the conflict in Darfur through a direct and inclusive
political dialogue between the parties to the conflict
without preconditions of any kind, which would promote
stability, development and lasting peace in that country
and resolve the very complex humanitarian situation
there. We therefore call on the parties that have not yet
done so, particularly the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul
Wahid, to subscribe to the road map agreement, which
we believe will serve as the basis for achieving lasting
peace. We also think that the Doha Document for Peace
in Darfur establishes a framework that should be used
as a foundation for negotiations between the parties
to the conflict, complemented by initiatives such as
the national dialogue convened by the Government in
Khartoum and the internal dialogue and consultations
in Darfur.

In that regard, and considering the implementation
of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur to be a
positive step, our delegation welcomes the referendum
on the administrative status of Darfur, held from 11 to
13 April, in which more than 90 per cent of eligible
voters took part, and for which the African Union
and the League of Arab States served as observers.
We also believe that the efforts of the AU High-Level
Implementation Panel, led by former South African
President Thado Mbeki, as the primary mediation
group, are critical to revitalizing the peace process and
putting an end to the conflict, for which we would like
to reiterate our full support.

Lastly, we call on the parties to respect the human
rights and international humanitarian law, in line with
the relevant legal instruments. We also express our firm
support for the work of the African Union, based on the
search for African solutions to African problems.

