Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): We welcome the
prompt and unanimous adoption of this resolution. "We
shall not live in fear" was the proud and heart-rending
response of Parisians in the midst of tragedy last week.
And indeed, we cannot and we must not give in to fear,
but act with the full force of conviction against the evil
that Daesh represents.

As we stand together in solidarity with the people
of France we also share the sorrow and grief of all
those affected by the carnage and slaughter perpetrated
by Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), Boko
Haram and other terrorist mutations. Nothing can
ever, ever, justify terrorism. Earlier today, Lithuania's
President, Dalia Grybauskaite, reaffirmed my country's
commitment to working together with our anti-ISIL
coalition partners in the fight against terrorism.

The evolving nature and intensity of the threat of
terrorism and violent extremism put existing counter-
terrorism measures to an unprecedented test. While
primitively barbaric and brutal, today's terrorists are
outpacing us and our high-tech advances. We find
ourselves increasingly running against and behind
time. There can therefore be no room for complacency
or business as usual in our responses.

On the contrary, we need to take an honest look
at the impact our actions have on the ground and
rise up to the new urgency of the task. Inter alia,
that requires ensuring the full cohesiveness of the
counter-terrorism machinery by putting an end to the
oft-cited silo mentality and making all the parts of
the counter-terrorism system, within and outside the
United Nations, work truly as one, from assessment to
assistance and delivering advice, support and capacity-
building exactly where and when it is needed, with
maximum impact.

As today's resolution 2249 (2015) recalls, tackling
terrorism financing is a high priority. A breakthrough
is urgently needed in that regard as well - no more
piecemeal measures, but a comprehensive approach that
would take into account the increasing diversification
and complexity ofthe sources and channels offinancing,
as well as the nefarious linkages between terrorism and
cross-border organized crime.

Furthermore, we have to find the right answers to
the difficult questions regarding modern technologies
and communications, which bring huge improvements
to our lives but can have deadly effect in the wrong
hands.

We will have to deal with the uneasy questions of
how much of our liberties and freedoms we are ready to
sacrifice to ensure our safety and security in a way that
does not support repression and oppressive regimes and
does not give the satisfaction to the terrorists of having
disrupted our lives.

We have to critically review our battle for the hearts
and minds of potential terrorist recruits by stepping
up the efforts to tackle the many root causes that
push individuals into the hands of Daesh butchers, as
well our counter-messaging efforts. For that, new and
reinforced partnerships are required internationally,
regionally and locally, where the voices of women,
youth and vulnerable groups are well heard and heeded.

Finally, the importance of resolving the Syria crisis
could not be more urgent. We must restore hope to the
Syrian people. While we cannot see, by any measure,
the regime at the core of this crisis as a partner in the
fight against Daesh, we are encouraged by the Vienna
talks and the new momentum they seem to produce,
with a hope that this will lead to the desperately needed
transition and the full implementation of the Geneva
communique (S/2012/523, annex) of 2012.

