Mr. Ybaflez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): Let me
begin by thanking Minister Selim and Egypt, as
president of the Security Council for this month, for
their initiative to organize this meeting devoted to the
action of the international community to counter the
narratives and ideologies of terrorism.

As occurred on Sunday with Cairo, Today we woke
up to the news of new attacks in Baghdad, which have
caused more than 70 fatalities. Most ofthe victims were
women who were going to do their daily shopping. Once
again, the daily lives of citizens have been tragically
cut short. I offer my most heartfelt condolences to the
people and the authorities of Iraq, and its Ambassador
here present.

Throughout history, it is has been noted that for
evil to triumph it is sufficient for good men to do
nothing. That is not an option. We have acted and
will continue to do so. And we will act together. I
therefore wish to congratulate the Egyptian Presidency
for presidential statement S/ /PRST/2016/6, which we
have just adopted. With it, we move from words to
deeds.Today we are taking a step forward to address
the perverse narrative of terror. Today we also begin
to take concerted measures that will allow us, as we
agreed a few moments ago, to present a proposal by
30 April 2017 for a "comprehensive international
framework", with recommended guidelines and good
practices that will endow the international community
wth an effective tool for presenting a common front. As
skilful as terrorists have shown themselves to be, we
cannot send a more attractive message than if we act
together. To that end, we need to act on several fronts,

First, with respect to terrorism, States have an
obligation to prevent their propaganda and self-
aggrandizement, starting by criminalizingjustifications
of incitement to terrorism. In that context, it is
necessary to monitor and prevent the action of those
engaged in justifying and inciting terrorism within
social organizations, schools or religious centres. We
must also prevent such action in the new information
technologies, the Internet and social networks. To do
so, we will need both appropriate legislation and the
decisive action and support of social partners. In the
case of new information technologies, it is essential
to ensure the cooperation of suppliers of services in
removing contents of a criminal nature. Today, we have
made specific commitments to that end.

Secondly, it is clear that the international
community must also engage and win the battle ofideas.
In this context, we must address both the dissemination
of proposals that directly serve and support terrorism
and the narratives of violent extremism that, at least
sometimes, do not qualify in themselves as criminal.
In this case, the action that we must undertake is of
a different character; we need to challenge ideas and
counter them with a positive narrative.

It is necessary to counteract and destroy the image
that terrorists seek to depict of themselves and their
sympathizers. In the case of terrorists and violent
extremists who cite religious belief as the foundation
of their activities, it is necessary to counter them
with the testimony of true religious leaders. The aim
is to point out the falsity of the arguments of those
terrorist groups, their lack of a genuine religious basis
and the fact that they distort the messages of religion
to serve their purposes and objectives of totalitarian
political domination.

Along with this, the international community must
promote the positive values that underpin it: peaceful
coexistence, pluralism, the freedom of each person to
choose the ideas and principles that to guide his or her
life, the freedom of belief and ideas, and the freedom
of opinion. These are the values that most humans
cherish. It is important to put them on the front line
of the defence of our societies and to set them against
the intolerance and hate propaganda of terrorists and
violent extremist groups.

In that respect, our task remains mainly in the
context of combating and preventing violent extremism.
The question is to counter false ideas with the concepts
of coexistence and pluralism championed by our
citizens and our societies. This is therefore a long-term
objective whose results will be seen after a lengthy
process, but we need to start today. in undertaking
this task, we need to rely on the support of community
leaders, religious leaders, teachers and educators,
opinion-makers, human rights activists and the media,
as well as families.

We know that in society itself - in civil
society - there are moral forces and authoritative
voices that rise against terrorism and violent extremism,
and we must identify those voices. Besides having
leaders and credible and authoritative voices, it is
important to integrate the groups and communities that
undertstand the problems and wish to contribute their
proposals: young people, women, students and civil
society organizations. Governments should not only
consult each other, but also provide to social agents that
promote peace and understanding with the support and
platforms they need.

Here I wish to make special mention of the
important role that victims of terrorism can play in
the development and implementation of an effective
counter-narrative through a threefold approach:
ending the suffering; stopping the cycle of hatred by
renouncing revenge; and giving moral force to the rule
of law and its institutions, in which they place their
trust for justice. On the basis of the national experience
of my own country, Spain, I would like to present some
concrete proposals towards that end.

In the field of prevention, Spain as sponsor of
the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations and a
founding member of the King Abdullah bin Abdulaziz
International Centre for Interreligious and Intercultural
Dialogue, attaches great importance to intercultural
and interfaith dialogue as a tool for the prevention of
violent radicalization and for countering the narrative
of extremism violence and terrorism. In this sense, the
recent Global Forum of the Alliance of Civilizations,
held in Baku, the Foreign Minister of Spain presented
several proposals in this area, of which I would
highlight three.

The first is The creation ofa committee for tolerance
and positive messages on the Internet as a public-
private supranational collegiate body of the major
Internet companies, which would serve for the effective
and rapid dissemination of images, videos and games
promoting tolerance and respect between cultures and
religions. The voices of peace must be heard louder than
hatred. The second is the development of guidelines
for good practices in education and diversity for social
integration so that they can be known and developed by
all countries. The third is a platform of religious leaders
for peace, especially in conflict zones.

There is also great potential for actions within
the framework of United Nations and various regional
structures. In this regard, I stress that it would be
very valuable to proceed to strengthening the United
Nations Victims of Terrorism Support Portal, which is
already widely known and, with the necessary support,
could be a useful tool in the fields of education,
schools and teaching academies for the purpose we are
discussing today.

I believe that this debate cannot be completely
separated from initiatives being promoted and
negotiated almost in parallel, such as the Secretary-
General's Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism
and the forthcoming review of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Moreover, this goal is also
being sought in the efforts resulting from the White
House Summit on Countering Violent Extremism and
the Global Leaders' Summit on Countering the Islamic

State in Iraq and the Levant and Violent Extremism.

In this process, the international community has
come together forcefully on the goals we must achieve
and the most important measures we must take. Those
proposals for the fight against violent extremism also
have direct relevance to the development of narratives
to counter the narratives and ideologies of terrorism
and violent extremism. It is true that there have been
differences over the interpretation of the phenomenon
of violent extremism and the conditions that may fuel
and drive its development driving, but I believe that
even as we continue discussing these differences of
interpretation, it is also important that we focus on the
points of agreement on practical actions. In that regard,
I think it would be important to pursue this joint effort
of reflection through regional conferences, which may
be more fruitful in finding a way to agree on action
programmes on the basis of the broad agreement within
the international community .

It would also be important to convene a dialogue
among neighbouring regions that share the problem of
countering the narratives and ideologies of terrorism- a
dialogue to exchange views on common challenges. In
that regard, as a representative of a European country
and a member of the European Union, I think that
Europe would have a great interest in holding such a
dialogue and serious exchange of proposals with our
neighbours in the southern Mediterranean and other
regions, such as the Sahel, the countries of sub-Saharan
Africa or Asia.

At the same time, similar dialogues and exchanges
in this field could be launched in other regional and
interregional spaces. In Spain, and through our Casa
Arabe, we have begun a special experiment, inviting
Arab countries to present their strategies against violent
radicalism. The first such case was that of Mauritania,
which informed us of the experience of that country,
which has been especially successful in reintegrating
former terrorists through its prison programmes.
Other cases will follow. This process would benefit
from United Nations participation to unify proposals
and follow up on the agreements reached. As noted
in similar contexts, the appointment of a special
rrepresentative of the Secretary-General to counter
and prevent violent extremism would strengthen the
international community's reponse capacities.

I believed that this procedural approach - based
on a simple agreement of the international community,
as reflected in today's meeting, to launch a practical
discussion aimed at developing effective programmes
in a broader regional context - could be the basis
for drafting a comprehensive international strategy
with which to counter the narratives and ideologies of
terrorist groups. In this sense, if the desired results are
obtained, the Security Council could meet again within
a year to finalize and adopt such a strategy.

