Mr. Konuzin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the participation of the
Secretary-General at today's meeting of the Security
Council. We appreciate the efforts being made by
Mr. Pahad and Mr. Doss to resolve the crisis in the
Republic of cote d'Ivoire, and we thank them for their
contributions to this meeting.

The Russian delegation is deeply concerned about
the instability in the situation in Cote d'Ivoire and the
continuing lack of progress in finding a settlement
there. Despite the outstanding, praiseworthy and
vigorous mediation efforts of President Mbeki of South
Africa, the Ivorian peace process continues to be
blocked and the parties are still demonstrating a high
level of mistrust.

The political stagnation there is fraught with the
danger that hostilities might flare up again as the result
of yet another armed incident. There is increasing
concern that the continuing deadlock is undermining
prospects for the timely holding of presidential and
parliamentary elections in Cote d'Ivoire. Everything
possible should be done to ensure that the elections are
held on time, because rescheduling them would have
the most serious consequences. The country and its
State institutions could end up outside the rule of law,
and the constitutional system itself could be threatened.
Other sources of concern are the increasingly negative
economic trends and the further deterioration of the
social and humanitarian situation.

However important external assistance is to a
settlement in C6te d'Ivoire, the full responsibility for
making the hard decisions to find a way out of this
crisis lies with the citizens of Cote d'Ivoire themselves.
We call on the parties to the conflict to demonstrate
political will and immediately to begin to honour their
commitments under the Mbeki road map. There is also
a need for the swift implementation of measures aimed
at preparing for the elections; settling differences
regarding the laws adopted in the context of legislative
reform; adopting a revised article 35 of the
Constitution, which sets out the requirements for
presidential candidates; and launching the disarmament
process.

The situation in Cote d'Ivoire is complex, and is
fraught with the possibility of further deterioration; it
dictates the need for enhanced effectiveness and
coordination of international efforts to promote
progress in the peace process in the country. We note
that neighbouring States could play a particular role in
that regard.

We share the Secretary-General's concern
regarding incitement to hate and violence in the media,
which is again increasing, and the widespread threats
against United Nations and French peacekeepers. The
parties in Cote d'Ivoire must immediately put an end to
those unacceptable activities.

The complex security situation and the new
objective of monitoring compliance with the arms
embargo are clearly complicating the efforts of the
United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI) to
effectively carry out its mandate with the existing
resources. We agree with the Secretary-General's
recommendations that UNOCI be strengthened and that
its mandate be extended for another year, until 4 April
2006.

