Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to express our appreciation
and thanks to the Chairperson of the independent
international fact-finding mission on Myanmar,
Mr. Marzuki Darusman, for attending this meeting
and for his comprehensive briefing. The efforts of
the fact-finding mission are indeed appreciated. We
thank him for his honesty in presenting the facts to the
international community.

What we have listened to today in the briefing ofthe
fact-finding mission reaffirms the conclusions of the
international community on the crimes that have been
committed. The briefing was totally consistent with
what we witnessed during the Security Council visit
to Rakhine state and what we heard from eyewitnesses
to those crimes during our meetings with the Rohingya
refugees at the Cox's Bazar camps. While we strongly
condemn the acts witnessed in Rakhine state, which run
counter to international norms and laws, we reaffirm
the need for the Government of Myanmar to assume its
primary responsibility to protect its citizens and ensure
that military force will not be used against them.

More than 14 months have elapsed since violence
erupted in Rakhine state. Those acts of violence led to
the displacement of more than 720,000 people to Cox's
Bazar in Bangladesh. It is truly regrettable that after all
this time the displacement continues to this day. The
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees confirms the displacement of an additional
168 people from Myanmar to Bangladesh by the end
of September. We express our concern over such
displacement. That reflects the continued deterioration
of the situation in Rakhine state in particular, and other
states of Myanmar in general.

My delegation did not ask for this meeting to be
convened to blame the Government of Myanmar for what
happened. Instead, we asked because of our principled
and firm position in favour of resolving conflicts by
peaceful means, and our belief in preventive diplomacy.
We welcome the efforts of States of the region to resolve
this humanitarian crisis. However, the steps taken by
Myanmar until now have been insufficient, and most
have not been translated into reality on the ground.
The Government of Myanmar has yet to implement
all the steps and demands laid out by the Security
Council in its presidential statement S/PRST/2017/22,
or the recommendations of the Advisory Commission
on Rakhine State with respect to addressing the root
causes of the crisis, the suffering of the refugees and
ensuring their voluntary return in safety and dignity to
their homes in Myanmar.

The return of the Rohingya minority to their homes
can begin only when a series of measures is taken to
build trust and ensure that their return is both safe and
dignified. That includes conducting independent and
transparent investigations into the crimes and violations
committed against the rights of the Rohingya minority
in Rakhine state. Other measures include ending
violence and ethnic discrimination and immediately
closing all camps for internally displaced persons. It
is also imperative to allow United Nations agencies
and other partners access to all affected regions in
Myanmar. All residents of Rakhine state should enjoy
and unrestructed safe freedom of movement.

We firmly believe that addressing the root causes
of the Rohingya minority crisis requires the prompt
handling of two essential issues. The first concerns the
need for the authorities of Myanmar to deal with the
Rohingya minority without discrimination, regardless
of ethnicity or religion, and to grant them their inherent
right to citizenship. The second is the need to guarantee
the right to accountability through transparent and fair
investigations based on the collection of all proofs
and evidences so as to ensure a fair prosecution
of the perpetrators of such inhumane crimes. We
welcome Human Rights Council resolution 39/2 and
the recommendations of the fact-finding mission that
the Security Council should ensure accountability
for crimes in Myanmar, particular because the report
concludes that some serious human rights violations in
Rakhine state constitute the most serious crimes under
international law.
In conclusion, the State ofKuwait reaffirms the need
for the Security Council to address this humanitarian
crisis with the greatest degree of diplomatic flexibility.
The Council must speak in one voice in order to obtain
the necessary results. When the number of displaced
persons reaches 720,000, this proves that there is a
real crisis impacting international peace and security.
When 53 per cent ofthe displaced are children, that
makes us certain that there is a real catastrophe. When
the percentage of children and women combined hits
80 per cent ofthe displaced, that confirms the existence
of a humanitarian crisis that must be addressed.

The reality on the ground in Cox's Bazar and
Rakhine state requires us, as members of the Security
Council, to take specific measures that would serve as
a road map that has been long awaited by a minority
that has suffered from the scourges ofwar, violence and
acts of killing. That minority is still seeking to exercise
its rights and to hold accountable all those who have
violated the most basic human rights and perpetrated
crimes with the intent of forever erasing the identity of
that minority.

Respect for the rule of law, the defence of human
rights, dialogue and resort to peaceful ways to settle
disputes are among the main principles that the State of
Kuwait defends in all forums.

Cases such as those in Myanmar cannot be ignored
by the Security Council. That is especially true for the
refugee issue, which seems to have last a long time,
until ajust and final solution can be found, allowing the
Rohingya minority to enjoy all its rights.

