Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I warmly
welcome His Excellency Mr. Audronius Azubalis,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Lithuania, and
congratulate him on his assumption of the
chairmanship-in-office of the Organization for Security

and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). Let me assure the
Minister that Portugal fully supports his efforts to
promote the OSCE agenda, as well as Lithuania's
endeavours to ensure that all three dimensions of the
Organization's activities are taken forward in a
balanced manner. I also thank the Minister for today's
very comprehensive briefing outlining Lithuania's
priorities for the OSCE in 2011.

Portugal feels encouraged by the follow-up
process to the Astana Declaration, which will build on
the productive discussions that came out of the Corfu
process for a European security dialogue in the
Euro-Atlantic and Eurasian regions. The Astana Final
Declaration unequivocally confirms all dimensions of
the OSCE acquis, and includes clear tasks aimed at
further strengthening and defending the OSCE's legacy
of a comprehensive, cooperative and indivisible
concept of security, including by starting to work on an
action plan.

Portugal warmly welcomes the OSCE
chairmanship's intention to focus on concrete action,
addressing regional issues, early warning, conflict
prevention, arms control, and confidence- and security-
building measures, as well as the economic and human
dimensions. In that regard, I would like to emphasize
the importance that Portugal attaches to the promotion
of close cooperation between the OSCE and other
international organizations.

We attach special importance to the added value
that the United Nations and the OSCE can bring to
each other's work in several regions. For example, the
close cooperation between the OSCE and the United
Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for
Central Asia is vital to diffusing tensions in that
complex region and deserves all our support.

Allow me to refer briefly to some of the main
issues on the chairmanship's programme. All are
relevant to further cooperation between the OSCE and
the United Nations.
First, concerning the human dimension - a
crucial component of the OSCE's comprehensive
concept of security - we welcome the clear reiteration
of fundamental commitments concerning the protection
of human rights, fundamental freedoms, democracy
and the rule of law, and the emphasis on their better
implementation. That is a goal to which we attach great
importance and that we are glad to see at the top of this
year's OSCE priorities.
Secondly, we welcome the Lithuanian
chairmanship's support for further work to solve the
impasse in the field of conventional arms control in
Europe and its commitment to moving forward with
the improvement of the OSCE's important confidence-
and security-building regime.

Thirdly, we are well aware of the threat to
security that protracted, unresolved conflicts in the
OSCE space continue to present. In fact, such conflicts
continue to challenge the OSCE's objective of a stable,
peaceful and prosperous Eurasian space. That is an
area where United Nations-OSCE cooperation is both
useful and indispensable, as the joint participation in
the Geneva talks made clear.

Fourthly, the fight against transnational threats,
such as terrorism and the trafficking in persons and
drugs, as well as the welcome boost to the OSCE'S
profile in cybersecurity, are all areas where there has
been a fair amount of consensus. And as threats evolve,
so should the tools at our disposal to address them.
Also in that context, interaction between the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the OSCE has
enormous potential. The jointly organized July 2010
conference on international cooperation on crime in
Central Asia and Afghanistan is a case in point.

Fifth is the matter of non-proliferation in
connection with the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), with regard to which we can also explore forms
of cooperation between the United Nations and OSCE.

May I also underline the concrete and focused
contribution of the European Union to the OSCE'S
work in all of those areas, both conceptually and at the
operational level, and always on the basis of solid
support for the notion of comprehensive security. In
that sense, we are especially pleased to see that in the
coming two years, the organization will have two
members of the European Union, Lithuania and
Ireland, as its Chairs.

Finally, I would like to reaffirm Portugal's
confidence in Lithuania's leadership. We will continue
to support Lithuania, as Chair of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, in dealing with
old and new challenges, as well as in strengthening
cooperative relations between the OSCE and the
United Nations.

