Ms. L¢j (Denmark): Allow me to congratulate
the presidency of the Council on convening this
workshop on this important and timely topic. I would
also like to thank you, Mr. President, for giving me the
opportunity to participate in this discussion on behalf
ofthe European Union.

I would like to touch upon two points in my brief
intervention: first, the contribution of the European
Union to the Mano River peace process and, secondly,
some thoughts on the way forward. The engagement of
the European Union in the efforts to promote peace and
stability in the Mano River Union area is well known.
Let me just mention a few examples. In July 2001, the
European Union presidency appointed Mr. Hans
Dahlgren of Sweden as its special representative to the
Mano River Union countries. Furthermore, the
European Union sent election observers to monitor the
presidential and parliamentary elections in Sierra
Leone in May 2002. The election and inauguration of
President Kabbah marks another important milestone in
Sierra Leone's return to democracy.

The European Union strongly supports the
ongoing international efforts to promote stability in the
region, including the initiative of the Kingdom of
Morocco to ensure political dialogue among the Mano
River Union countries, as well as the work of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) on conflict prevention and confidence-
building. Looking forward, the European Union will
continue its full support for the Mano River Union
peace process. We share the point put forward in
previous interventions that it is essential that the focus
be maintained on finding a regional solution. In our
View, there is also a need for improved coordination
and dialogue among all international and regional
actors involved in the process - not least between the
European Union and the United Nations, but also with
ECOWAS and others - in order to identify common
objectives. In that context, we note the proposal to
establish a contact group for the Mano River Union
peace process. We should also explore ways of
strengthening the support provided to ECOWAS,
including through the United Nations system.

Another important element is full implementation
and compliance with United Nations sanctions, which
is essential in ensuring that rebel forces are deprived of
the means to wage war. Furthermore, internal conflicts
in Liberia and Guinea must not be allowed to
destabilize the entire subregion by spilling over into
neighbouring countries. Therefore, the need to create
an inclusive political dialogue and a framework for free
and fair elections in Liberia and Guinea cannot be
underlined strongly enough.

Allow me to conclude by reaffirming the
commitment of the European Union to the Mano River
Union process. The outcome of this innovative and
very useful workshop will help us to find new ways of
strengthening international and regional efforts to
promote peace and stability in the region. The
European Union will cooperate fully in that endeavour.

Let me close by saying that just as the European
Union will not hesitate to offer suggestions for action
by other actors involved and interested in contributing
to achieving these goals, we would also welcome
suggestions from others as to the most constructive and
helpful European Union action.
