The President: In accordance with the decision taken
at the 3745th meeting, I invite the representative of Israel
to take a seat at the Council table; I invite the Permanent
Observer of Palestine to take a seat at the Council table; I
invite the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria,
Argentina, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Brazil, Canada, Colombia,
Cuba, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Jordan,
Kuwait, Lebanon, Malaysia, Malta, Morocco, the
Netherlands, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, the Philippines,
Qatar, Saudi Arabia, the Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic,
Tunisia, Turkey, the United Arab Emirates and Yemen to
take the seats reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Peleg (Israel)
and Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) took seats at the
Council table; Mr. Farhadi (Afghanistan), Mr. Baali
(Algeria), Mr. Petrella (Argentina), Mr. Buallay
(Bahrain), Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh), Mr. Amorim
(Brazil), Mr. Karsgaard (Canada), Mr. Garcia
(Colombia), Mr. Nunez Mosquera (Cuba), Mr.
Wisnumurti (Indonesia), Mr. Kharrazi (Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr. Abu-Nimah (Jordan), Mr.
Abulhasan (Kuwait), Mr. Moubarak (Lebanon), Mr.
Hasmy (Malaysia), Mr. Pace (Malta), Mr. Snoussi
(Morocco), Mr. Berteling (Netherlands), Mr. Biorn
Lian (Norway), Mr. Al-Khussaiby (Oman), Mr. Kamal
(Pakistan), Mr. Mabilangan (Philippines), Mr. Al-
Khalifa (Qatar), Mr. Al-Ahmed (Saudi Arabia), Mr.
Erwa (Sudan), Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic),
Mr. Abdellah (Tunisia), Mr. Celem (Turkey), Mr.
Samhan (United Arab Emirates) and Mr. Al-Ashtal
(Yemen) took the seats reserved for them at the side of
the Council Chamber.

The President: The Security Council will now resume
its consideration of the item on its agenda.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/ 1997/ 199, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by France, Portugal, Sweden and the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
vote on the draft resolution before it. Unless I hear any
objection, I shall put the draft resolution to the vote.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

I shall first call on those members of the Council
who wish to make statements before the voting.


