Mr. Ihsanoglu: Allow me first to express our
sympathy and condolences to the people of Haiti and
the affected United Nations staff. We hope that the
calls made here for international solidarity will help
those people.

At the outset, I would like, on behalf of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), to
express our gratitude to the Chinese delegation for
having taken the initiative of organizing this debate. I
think it is very timely and that the decision was a very
wise one.

I would also like to thank the United Nations
Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for his
participation in our debate and to express our
appreciation to him for the pertinent and timely
initiative of organizing a retreat for the heads of
regional organizations, which was held over the past
two days. The retreat proved to be a good occasion for
participants to get acquainted with one another and
exchange views and ideas that enriched our knowledge
on many important issues. I can say that the potential
we have has been shown in a very important way. I am
glad to say that the OIC will increase its cooperation in
this framework.

The new OIC Charter, adopted in 2008, stresses
the importance of all member States adhering to the
principles of the maintenance of international peace
and security and of respecting the national sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of other member
States. An OIC road map document entitled "Ten-Year
Programme of Action", adopted in December 2005,
which parallels the Millennium Development Goals, is
a document that we consider to be a blueprint for
reform promoting moderation and modernization in the
Muslim world. It calls for strengthening OIC activities
in conflict prevention, confidence-building,
peacekeeping, conflict resolution and post-conflict
rehabilitation in cooperation with international and
regional organizations.

Many of the issues on the Security Council
agenda relate to the Islamic world, and the OIC is
naturally seized of them. This fact demonstrates the
importance of having strong links of cooperation and
coordination between the Security Council and the OIC
in order to benefit from both global and local
approaches of addressing these issues. This is all the
more important when we consider the fact that some of
the top contributors to United Nations peacekeeping
operations are OIC member States. This experience is
an asset from which the OIC could benefit in
appropriate situations in the future.

While the OIC, with its 57 member countries and
five observer States, is so far not into peacekeeping
operations as such, a resolution adopted at its most
recent ministerial meeting, held in May 2009, opens
the door for possible activities in a number of related
areas. That resolution called for an intergovernmental
expert group to study a concept paper prepared by the
OIC secretariat on the future role of the OIC in the
maintenance of peace and security, peacekeeping and
conflict resolution.

The start of the ministerial and expert-level
debate on capacity-building for peace and security
aspects within the OIC has certainly enriched the new
OIC reform agenda, which already includes important
steps, such as the establishment of an independent
human rights commission and an international
cooperation and humanitarian affairs department.
These steps also indicate our understanding of the
importance of socio-economic development, human
rights and humanitarian assistance in promoting peace
and security.

The OIC has recently played an important role in
Iraq and succeeded in putting an end to the sectarian
strife between the Sunni and Shiite factions of Iraqi
society in 2006. This intervention has proven to be
instrumental in reducing the wave of killings that took
the lives of thousands of Iraqi people. Its success can
be measured by the fact that OIC intervention has
helped eliminate the religious factor from the conflict
in Iraq. Through our office in Baghdad, we intend to
follow up on our initiative.

From the point of view of a new vision and sense
of responsibility that require the OIC to assume wider
and more proactive roles in dealing with challenges
and crises affecting the Muslim world, we are in the
midst of devising similar approaches for Somalia and
Afghanistan, which would take into account the
potential, comparative advantages and cultural affinity
of the OIC. As a matter of fact, in the 1980s, the OIC
was called upon to address the crisis of civil war in
Afghanistan in the aftermath of the withdrawal of the
Soviet troops. Then, the OIC managed to mediate
among the warring Afghan factions and succeeded in
restoring peace and security there.

In Somalia, a founding member of the OIC, we
actively participated and contributed to the negotiation
process that led to the signing of the Djibouti
Agreement and formation of the Transitional
Government. I believe that the hosting of the most
recent meeting of the International Contact Group on
Somalia in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, at OIC headquarters
was quite significant in terms of exhibiting our sense
of responsibility in assuming a wider role in ensuring
peace and security in Somalia. Very soon, we will be
opening a humanitarian mission in Mogadishu, which
will in time be transformed into a full-fledged office.

Over the past decade, the OIC has focused its
activities on eradicating the root causes of the
terrorism that had plagued some areas of the Muslim
world. We had to use local methods to destroy the
doctrinal infrastructure of terrorism that was based on a
totally erroneous and falsely manipulated interpretation
of the teaching of Islam. The OIC Academy of
Jurisprudence has managed to expose this malignant
scheme and to reveal its deceitful purposes. This effort
has helped in alerting young people to the fallacy of
the claims of the extremists and has consequently dealt
a hard blow to their activities and greatly reduced their
heinous crimes.

This method of dealing with such a scourge has
proven that a global problem can be solved by local
remedies combined with coordination with the Security
Council. Past experience has shown that combating
terrorism through military means alone has not yielded
convincing results. Resorting to military measures
means attacking the symptom rather than curing the
disease. In retrospect, we should analyse in all
frankness what has been achieved by the war on terror
in recent years to see whether we made any progress in
curing the disease or if we caused a kind of
transformation and further spread of the Virus.

In this context, I would like to emphasize that the
best way to tackle the terrorism phenomenon lies with
efforts to eliminate the root causes of terrorism. This
approach means starting with establishing channels of
communication with the influential and patriotic
representatives of a given society plagued by terrorism
with a view to gaining them to our side by offering
them appropriate incentives and to convincing them to
try to move from the extreme and periphery to the
middle ground. At the same time, the most radical and
hard core extremist elements, should be marginalized
and isolated. When this is achieved it will be easier to
gradually move to create new facts conducive to
bringing about lasting and durable peace and security.
This approach might prove particularly pertinent in the
parts of the Muslim world where radicalism is
considered to be on the rise.

Similarly, the OIC believes that tackling conflicts
solely from the angle of security cannot lead to lasting
and comprehensive solutions. Short-term solutions
must give way to mid- and long-term approaches
requiring a proper understanding of the root causes of
the conflicts, which often lie in political grievances,
backwardness, underdevelopment, a lack of good
governance and human rights, and concerns related to
the preservation of national, ethnic, cultural and
religious identities.

As a mark of its commitment to addressing
socio-economic problems that often serve as the root
causes of conflicts, the OIC has established a special
fund of $10 billion for poverty alleviation in member
States and a special programme for the development of
Africa. The forthcoming OIC donors conference on the
reconstruction and development of the Darfur region,
to be held in March, is a clear case in point.

To conclude, let me reiterate that the OIC will
continue to contribute to the maintenance of
international peace and security in every way possible,
in cooperation with the United Nations and with other
regional and subregional organizations.

