Mr. Adada (Congo) (spoke in French): First of
all, Madam President, I would like to say how proud
we are to see the United Republic of Tanzania
presiding over the Security Council in January 2006,
when a number of particularly sensitive African issues
are receiving priority. Today's meeting gives us another
opportunity to express our appreciation for Tanzania's
role in building an Africa that is free and united,
peaceful, prosperous and confident in its future.

It is no coincidence that, for many years, the
Organization for African Unity (OAU) Liberation
Committee had its headquarters in Dar es-Salaam,
which caused the Ugandan head of State, His
Excellency Mr. Yoweri Museveni, to say at the first
Summit of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region, held in Dar es-Salaam, that Tanzania
was the Mecca of freedom fighters in Africa.

My delegation therefore welcomes today's debate
on a question that encompasses the full scope of issues
on the future of our continent in the areas of peace,
security, democracy, good governance, good-
neighbourliness, development, regional integration and
international cooperation.

During last September's world summit, the head
of the Congolese State, His Excellency Mr. Denis
Sassou Nguesso, recalled the importance and the
relevance of the appeal contained in the Dar es-Salaam
Declaration on the Great Lakes region, which must be
recognized as a special area of development and
reconstruction. Like any other integration project, it is
a vast construction site and a long and complex process
that must be conducted in stages.

Looking at the ongoing developments, we can say
today that significant progress on peace and security is
being made in our region. In Burundi, the transition has
led to the organization of democratic, free and
transparent elections, after which new institutions were
established. The security situation has improved
considerably, and the process of national reconciliation
is continuing.

The political transition in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo brought about by the Pretoria
Agreement is moving along favourably following the
organization of the constitutional referendum. We
encourage all parties in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to work tirelessly in the context of this peaceful,
inclusive transition, so that after 30 June 2006, the
country will rediscover peace and stability. But we
must first do everything we can to prevent the armed
groups that are operating in the eastern part of the
country from jeopardizing the ongoing process. We
must also encourage the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda and Uganda to use all existing
mechanisms of tripartite cooperation and verification
to pursue their efforts to ease tension and to establish
relations of trust in the region. That would undoubtedly
contribute to resolve such problems as the illicit
circulation of small arms and light weapons; refugees
and displaced persons; the presence of armed groups
on the territory of neighbouring States; and the illegal
exploitation of natural resources.

It is in this spirit of mutual trust that, in
cooperation with the authorities of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR),
my Government has undertaken the voluntary
repatriation of Rwandan refugees and elements of the
former armed forces of Zaire to their countries of
origin. But, as the High Commissioner for Refugees
observed during the Council's debate on 24 January
2006 (see S/PV.5353), the return of refugees and
displaced persons is closely linked to support from the
international community for economic recovery and
peacebuilding in the countries concerned.

A similarly positive development took place in
the Central African Republic after the elections that led
to the establishment of new democratic institutions. We
need to confront the insecurity and consolidate the
social process, a task to which the international
community, beginning with the neighbouring countries,
members of the Central African Economic and
Monetary Community, is working relentlessly.

In the light of these favourable developments, I
reaffirm today the commitment of our countries to
promote regional integration, based on a common
vision of our interests in the areas of peace, security,
the rule of law, democracy, good governance and
human rights. Increasingly, those concerns and those
values are finding their place in the policies of our
States. The missions that the Security Council
regularly dispatches to the region have taken note of
this progress. So, I would like to say to Council
members and to the entire international community that
there should be no mistaking the degree of our
commitment to building an integrated political and
economic space in the Great Lakes region.

The postponement of the second Summit, which
was caused solely by timetable constraints in a number
of countries, does not signal any slackening or lack of
interest. On the contrary, the postponement has allowed
us to better prepare ourselves to address, with greater
objectivity and determination, the issues on the second
Summit agenda. The common thinking among our
countries, with the participation of all segments of
societies - the non-governmental organizations, civil
society, women, young people and others - with a
view to the speedy adoption of the proposed regional
Security, Stability and Development Pact, is an
encouraging sign, which clearly indicates where we
wish to go and where we wish to extend our efforts.

We want to gain peace and development through
a comprehensive and integrated approach. That lies at
the heart of the second Summit of the International
Conference. The adoption of the proposed Security,
Stability and Development Pact would enable us to
give real content to our common vision; to promote,
consolidate and implement our cooperation; to provide
a formal framework for our political consultations,
which will become regular; and to create the
momentum necessary for the harmonious development
of our countries.

Madam President, I would like once again to
thank you for having given us an opportunity to tell our
partners that the flame lit in Dar es-Salaam in
November 2004 continues to illuminate our path and
will not be extinguished on such a worthy path. The
old images of people fleeing Rwanda or Burundi on
foot to take refuge in Brazzaville, Gabon or Cameroon
are enough to remind us of the horror of armed
conflict. They also remind us that our geographic and
human space is one. It is up to us to transform it into
an integrated political and economic space.

This is what is at stake, and I have come here to
reaffirm that we are working on a daily basis for the
stabilization of the situation in our region and that we
continue to count on our partners to continue this battle.
We need to consolidate our gains to avoid backsliding.
In that respect, the Peacebuilding Commission recently
established by the United Nations may find a vast
proving ground in our region, particularly in Burundi
and later on in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Finally, at a time of active preparation for the
second summit of the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region, I welcome the Security Council's
initiatives for peace and stability in our region,
encourage our partners not to lose patience and to
continue to provide their crucial assistance throughout
the process, and openly profess our full commitment.
With the individual and collective concerted efforts of
the countries concerned, from the African Union, the
United Nations, the development partners and the
entire international community, we will succeed in
building a zone of peace and prosperity in the heart of
Africa, commensurate with our immense human and
natural potential.

